



Download Request: All Documents: 1-322
Time Of Request: Thursday, November 23, 2017  12:05:01 EST
Send To:

MEGADEAL, ACADEMIC UNIVERSE
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
LIBRARY
CHICAGO, IL


Terms: ((Vietnam OR Viet Nam) and Date(geq(01/01/1990) and leq(03/31/1990)))


Source: The New York Times
Project ID:



                               1 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

GALLERY VIEW;
THE VIETNAM WAR RICOCHETS INTO THE GALLERIES

BYLINE: By Roberta Smith

SECTION: Section 2; Page 31, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2276 words


In many ways the war in Vietnam was the most relentlessy visual war America has
known. While it was going on, it was brught home to countless television sets by
the newly available portable TV cameras. Since its close, and especially since
the release of ''Apocalypse Now'' in 1979, it has been a regular presence in
America movies, where it has been variously dramatized, scrutinized, criticized
or, in cases like the Rambo series, wildly romanticized.

During the late 1960's and early 70's, certain visual artists used their art to
express their opposition to the war, most prominently Leon Golub, Nancy Spero
and Peter Saul, while many others openly opposed the war through protests,
newspaper advertisments and demonstrations. Yet surprisingly little art inspired
by the war - whether made by veterans or nonveterans - has been visible, despite
the growing number of artists making art from such real-life issues as sexism,
racism and AIDS. It may be tht few artists went to Vietnam, a war largely fought
by the poor and undereducated. More likely, art about the American conflict in
Vietnam has, like the nation's coming to terms with the complex implicaitions of
the war itself, taken a long time to evolve.

Asked about the apparent scarcity of art by Vietnam veterans, when media like
film and literature have treated the subject extensively, the critic Lucy R.
Lippard, who has helped organize two exhibitions on the subject, says that ''art
is always a more specialized vocation,'' practiced by fewer people and reaching
a smaller audience than movies or books.

''As with people who have been raped,'' says Ms. Lippard, who has a longstanding
interest in political art, ''the experience tends to come out later. If you
really look, there are lots and lots of vets making art out there. I know
artists who don't want to be known as vets but who know the experience is in
their work. Some of them had a lot of problems after they came out; they didn't
exactly go sailing into the art world.''

Still, art about the Vietnam War exists. It may be uneven in quality, but it is
increasingly visible, both at the center and at the margins of the art world.
One of the best shows in SoHo this month is that of Kim Jones, a former Marine
whose Vietnam experiences inform all his art to one degree or another.

The first major survey of work inspired by the war in Vietnam was ''War and
Memory: In the Aftermath of Vietnam,'' a three-month program of art, film,
theater and lectures organized in 1987 by the Washington Project for the Arts.
Next month an exhibition titled ''A Different War: Vietnam in Art'' will open at
DeCordova museum and Sculpture Park in Lincoln, Mass., the second stop on a
two-year national tour that began last summer at the Whatcom Museum of History
and Art in Bellingham, Wash.

Organized by Ms. Lippard, the exhibition contains works by 55 artists and is
divided into three categories. ''The World'' contains art critical of and
contemporaneous with the war, including the 1967 ''Collage of Indignation, '' a
communal work of protest whose creators included Roberto Matta, Irving Petlin
and James Rosenquist, and the often scathing figurative paintings of Robert
Colescott, Golub, Spero and Saul. The show's ''In Country'' section, devoted to
art by veterans of the war, ranges from the realism of Cleveland R. Wright's
''We Regret to Inform You,'' an image of a grieving black woman slumped in a
kitchen chair, to the intentionally crude imagery of ''Solitary Confinement:
Insects Witness My Agony,'' a painting by Theodore Gostas, a former P.O.W. ''In
Retrospect'' features works made in the 1980's by nonveterans and includes Roger
Brown's somberly respectful ''Vietnam Commemorative''and Wendy Watriss's
photographs of Agent Orange victims.

In May an unusual exhibition titled ''As Scene by Both Sides,'' which surveys
art by both American and Vietnamese veterans, will open at the Arvada Center for
the Arts and Humanities, in Arvada, Colo., a suburb of Denver. The show will
then travel for two years in the United States and two years in Vietnam. Perhaps
the most extended effort has been made by the Vietnam Veterans Arts Group in
Chicago, which has over the last decade amassed a collection of 400 works by
artists of all nationalities who fought in the war. The collection, which
travels around the country, is now being restored at the Columbia Museum of Art
in Columbia, S.C., and will next be seen at the Louisville Art Center in
Louisville, Ky., begining March 18.

How the War Came to SoHo

In SoHo this season the Veitnam veteran - as artist or subject - has had a
growing presence. October brought the impressive debut of David Smith at P.P.O.W
(the gallery's name comes from the initials of its owners, Penny Pillington and
Wendy Osloff). A Marine who served in Vietnam in 1969, Smith remains obsessed by
the randomness of war, and this obsession infuses his paintings. ''Chance was
horribly and palpably real in Vietnam,'' the 39-year-old artist has written.
''Why wasn't I killed?''

Smith, adept at math and science, uses a computer to determine the placement of
the tiny forms that pattern his seemingly abstract paintings. He says he wants
his compositions to remain true to the G.I.'s standard reaction to just about
any event - victory, defeat, dying, not dying - ''It don't mean nothin'.'' But
up close Smith's miniature imgaes present carefully rendered schemes of deadly
chaos: silhouettes of falling helicopters, camouflage patterns and numbers
suggesting geographical co-ordinates. Other paintings, such as ''Little Hero of
War,'' juxtapose these motifs with vertically striped horizontal elements based
on military ribbons. In all, these are chilling distillations of war, in which
the decorative and the real hold equal ground.

In December the John Weber Gallery exhibited the work of Terry Allen, an artist
who didn't fight in the war but whose art has, for nearly seven years, treated
its aftermath in often monumental terms. In 1983 Allen visited Southeast Asia
seeking out American G.I.'s who stayed on after the war. The experience
propelled him into his ''Youth in Asia'' project, a series of drawings,
multimedia installations, music and a film dealing with the war's impact on
individual soldiers and on the United States as a whole.

The Weber exhibition included ''Big Witness,'' an installation in which a
fragmented, geometric, but recognizably human figure made of lead-covered wood
lies on the floor of a wire cage that is itself contained within a second
house-shaped (and nearly house-sized) wire cage. Excerpts from self-improvement
tapes - the verbal equivalent of a Band-Aid on a gaping wound - provide the
soundtrack. Gradually it becomes clear that the interior cage has the form of a
large couch. The dark, inert figure is entombed within a monument to
complacency, conviviality and life as usual.

An Ex-Marine Armed With a Brush

At the moment, there is the unusually powerful exhibiton of work by Kim Jones, a
45-year-old artist who interrupted art school to serve two years in the Marines.
Jone's exhibition, at the Lorence-Monk Gallery (578 Broadway at Prince Street)
through Saturday, is a show of many parts, cooperating in what he hopes is a
total artwork. It opens with snapshots of Jones's 1967-68 tour of duty in
Vietnam, displayed on a table protectively surrounded by the bristling,
low-lying sculptures that the artist calls stars.

The show also includes fields of these stars, made of sticks bound together,
laid out on newspapers like creatures culled from the sea, a series of
extraordinary lyrical bird's-eye-view drawings of battles tacked casually to the
walls, and occasional performances by the artist himself in the guise of what he
calls Mudman.

The primitive Mudman - covered with mud and burdened by an enormous sculpture
made of sticks, tape and foam - is a kind of man of sorrows for all cultures, a
persona that Jones has portrayed in galleries, performance spaces and on the
street since the mid 1970's. (I first encountered Mudman as he stood quietly on
West Broadway outside the Mary Boone Gallery one Saturday afternoon several
years ago - a startling contrast to the plesantries of SoHo gallery-hopping.)
Mudman has been at Lorence-Monk each Saturday of the exhibition, looking
formidable but engaging visitors in conversation. During the week his stick
apparatus and the rest of his costume, including a bucket of mud, are on display
with the accouterments of other performances - a single glove that is sprouting
twigs and a second, even heavier-looking, amalgam of sticks.

The means deployed are alternately refined and crude, naive and theatrical; the
effects are rich. Conflicts both natural and man-made, Darwinian and
technological are evoked. We see war as a figment of exuberant childhood fantasy
and as the most devasting of man's diseases, all within a peculiarly pastoral
framework.

Jones's stars, made of sticks, and twigs projecting outward from a central bulb
of mud and tape, are embryonic versions of his towering stick apparatus. They
resemble grisly Chritmas tree ornaments or some particularly virulent strain of
tumbelweed or jellyfish. But they also suggest bombs or land mines. When Jones
marshals them onto the large fields of newspaper on the floor, they form a
makeshift Vietnamese-style maginot line.

The best of them work as individual sculptures. With their centers painted with
tiney grids and cell-like patterns, they can evoke intergalactic worlds or, just
as easily, primitive life forms. Steven Spielberg's ''Critters'' sometimes comes
to mind, and, as if toe underscore this point, Jones has arranged a group of
these things so that they seem to invade the galklery from a mud-covered window
sill.

'Mudman,' symbol of a Troubled Time

As may be evident, there's a sliding scale of meaning in Jones's art, a
neutrality in which different notions of war and peace, or East and West, cancel
each other out, leaving viewers to their own devices. Mudman in particular
refuses to take sides, vacillating between the military, the agrarian and the
just plain crazed.

Outfitted with his foam, his fungus-like helment and his burden of sticks, the
artist resembles a soldier at once ingeniously camouflaged (like the Vietcong)
and fantastically overequipped (like the Americans). While he looks threatening,
he is effectively cripled by the apparatus, moving slowly and with difficulty,
like a religious penitent or an exhausted peasant carrying a day's harvest on
his back.

But Mudman also communicates an element of irrationality and outsized anger that
pushes beyond these more normal resemblances toward outsider art. Some observers
have compared Jone's Mudman to a tree, others to a homeless person, and the
latter connection makes sense, since so many homeless men are Vietnam veterans.

Mudman may personify Jones's own feeling of confusion upon his retrun to the
States. ''I came out kind of neutral,'' the artist said in a recent interview.
''I felt anger at the Vietnamese, but it seemed that President Johnson and
President Nixon weren't exactly thinking about my life.''

Sometimes Jones is more oblique about his Vietnam connection, more universal in
his portrayal of war. The highlight of the exhibition at Lorence-Monk is a
series of large pencil drawings, never before exhibited, that he has worked on
intermittently since 1978. Exhaustively detailed yet schematic, they depict
battles between minute, teeming forces of O's and X's. Look closely and you see
forts, battlefields, rivers and confusing labyrinths as well as delicate
thatches of crisscrossing lines that signify weapon fire. An even closer look
reveals conference rooms, prisons, interrogation chambers, tanks and supertanks.


Drawings of a World at War

Pinned to the walls like battle plans, these drawings present a bird's-eye view
of a world given over completely to war: as Jones puts it, ''two different
people who are always fighting each other - which is a very universal thing.''
Yet this view is suffused with a distanced, even classical beauty that makes
manifest war's remoteness without quite masking its awful voraciousness. (its
classcism may remind lovers of old maps of Jacops de' Barbari's astoundingly
accurate ''Bird's-Eye View of Venice,'' published in 1500.) Intriguingly, these
drawings are almost identical to smaller ones the artist made as a 13-year old
growing up in California, several of which are included in this show. In effect,
they brings Jones full circle, back to the childhood war games through which
young boys in particular learn to love war before they experience the real thing
- games that, incidentally, provide the opening moments of ''Born on the Fourth
of July.'' Even more intriguing, the recent battle drawings are works in flux,
being continually reworked by the artist. In this they form a kind of hand-made
video game, with Jones constantly adding or erasing soldiers and weapons
according to who he thinks is winning or losing. (While this batch is for sale,
Jones says he will just keep working on them if they don't sell.) There is a
restlessness to these drawings that melds with the Mudman performances and with
the improvisational quality of Jones's sculpture, but their open-mindedness also
suggests a therapeutic function. Jones's incessant reworking of these drawings
must also be seen as providing an outlet for the incessantly recurring memories
of war itself. Perhaps this is true of all art made by Vietnam veterans, but it
is an idea that finds special clarity in the shifting forms and spaces of Kim
Jones's battle drawings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Kim Jones as Mudman at the Lorence-Monk Gallery - evoking
conflicts both natural and man-made, Darwinian and technological (Cori Wells
Braun) (pg. 31); David Smith's ''Little Hero of War'' (1989) - The artist wants
his compositions to remain true to the G.I.'s standard reacton to just about any
event - victory, defeat, dying, not dying - ''It don't mean nothin'.'' (pg. 34)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST;
Hanoi Remains True to Communism, But Party Is Making More Changes

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1239 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Feb. 10


Moscow may have embraced the changes sweeping Eastern Europe, but Vietnam's
leaders are mostly sticking to the old-time religion, at least for now.

There is no question that the Soviet party's decision to abandon its absolute
political dominance, at least in principle, has come as a shock to Vietnam's
leaders, Eastern European diplomats and some Vietnamese officials say.

''They didn't expect it,'' an Eastern European diplomat said of the Vietnamese.
''In fact, I think they thought it was impossible. They must respond. But for
now, I don't think it will do more than accelerate the changes already under
way.''

The Politburo and high-ranking party and Government officials, including senior
editors, have gathered this week in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, to hammer
out plans for a meeting, now postponed until March. They will also discuss an
important party congress, likely to be held toward the end of this year, that
will set out the first new party program since 1960 and endorse a new party
leader to replace General Secretary Nguyen Van Linh, 74 years old and in
uncertain health, who has decided to retire.

Official press organizations here reported the Soviet decision simply and
without delay. But there have been no official reactions, comments or
editorials, and officials and newspaper editors interviewed have responded with
caution.

In a typical comment, Bui Tin, deputy editor of the party newspaper, People's
Daily, stressed the right of each Communist country to make its own decisions
based on its own realities and stage of development.

''I think the situation can be changed here in the longer-term future,'' Mr. Tin
said. ''but not now.''

When pressed about the possibility of a multiparty system, Nguyen Van Dang,
deputy editor of The Communist Review, the party's theoretical journal, finally
said: ''It's very difficult to give an answer. The party leaders are meeting
now.''

'Don't Be Surprised'

A younger editor, taking notes in the interview, at one point asked to say
something. ''Don't be surprised if we change our policy,'' he said passionately.
''The only people who continue with the same policy forever are either stupid or
dead.''

While there are strong opinions about the pace and substance of changes within
the party, it has historically maintained a collective front and discouraged
factionalism. But it was not slow to begin its own renewal.

Mr. Linh, a pragmatist with political roots in southern Vietnam, came to office
at the last party congress in December 1986 with a program of ''doi moi,'' or
renovation, which in many ways resembled the program of political and economic
restructuring that the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, calls
perestroika.

Urging party self-criticism and apologizing for some disastrous errors of
ideology-driven policy that have marred Vietnam's recovery from nearly a
half-century of warfare, Mr. Linh sanctioned private enterprise and market
prices to try to revive an isolated, declining economy.

Collectivization was largely dismantled, state subsidies to state-owned
enterprises have disappeared, the inflation rate has been cut to 25 or 30
percent, down from 600 to nearly 1,000 percent in 1988, and there has been an
explosion of private shops, restaurants and new houses.

Attacks on Bureaucracy

He has also moved to dilute the Stalinist nature of the party, attacking
bureaucracy and favoritism, purging corrupt and lazy officials, loosening
controls on the press and cultural life and preaching more democracy in the
party and equality under the law.

There are also moves under way to strengthen the role and authority of the
national assembly and separate the party from the day-to-day running of the
state.

But these themes have become much more pronounced since the collapse of
Communist government after Communist government in Eastern Europe, Even the
party leadership, which lived comparatively simply, is giving up most of its
resort villas and special privileges, including the party shops.

In August, Mr. Linh assailed the new Solidarity-led Government in Poland, saying
it had resulted from capitalist subversion, and People's Daily called for an
uprising against an ''reactionary coup d'etat.'' But by autumn the tone had
changed.

Mr. Tin, deputy editor of People's Daily, said a new assessment of Eastern
European upheaval emerged from a sharp debate within the Politburo; it held that
the crisis stemmed from internal causes, in particular from the deformation and
corruption of the various Communist parties. People's Daily apologized to the
Poles.

Leading Role of the Party

But Mr. Linh, who has a powerful conservative wing to mollify, has been explicit
about maintaining the leading role of the Communist Party and excluding any idea
of multiparty democracy in Vietnam.

As recently as Feb. 2, in a major speech commemorating the 60th anniversary of
the founding of the Vietnamese party, he said the party had been selected to
lead the nation by the people and as a result of Vietnam's difficult history.

''Apart from the Communist Party, in Vietnam there is no other party of any
class and section of the population capable of shouldering that role,'' he said.
''It was so in the past, it is so now and it will be so in the future.''

Senior diplomats here, whether from Western countries or Eastern ones, believe
that his comments will prove to be right for some years to come.

''Further change is not only inevitable but acknowledged,'' a Western diplomat
said. ''But change will continue to come through the party, and in all
likelihood it will continue to come, as the Vietnamese say, 'cautiously and step
by step.' ''

Vietnam's leadership seems to think it can balance economic and political
development, another diplomat said. ''Thus far, they've pulled it off, which has
been a pretty neat trick.''

So far, there have been few signs of domestic pressure for the party to change.
Vietnam not only lacks severe ethnic and nationalist pressures like the ones
Moscow faces, but despite large unemployment, ordinary life for most people in
Vietnam has become noticeably better as a result of Mr. Linh's policy of
renovation, not worse as they are perceived to have become in the Soviet Union.

Few Vietnamese are likely to think that instability will do anything more than
undermine whatever economic progress is already under way.

Even in southern Vietnam, an economic and trading boom has reduced potential
political discontent, somewhat diffused in any event by Mr. Linh's relaxation of
central economic controls. The party has also moved to resolve land disputes
deriving from a more liberal agricultural policy that brought some farmers to
demonstrate in Ho Chi Minh City last year.

Other Political Strengths

The party also has other, considerable political and historical strengths,
diplomats say. It is identified with decolonization, liberation and unification
in a country with no real prior experience with functioning parliamentary
democracy, even in the south.

Perhaps most important, after such a long period of deprivation in Vietnam's
many wars, the populace sees some real improvements coming from the leadership
of a self-critical and renovating party, even if the pace of change is
disappointing to some.

''The party is changing,'' a Western diplomat said. ''and I think people are now
beginning to believe that it means to do what it says.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 9, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Phnom Penh Journal;
G.I.'s Were Here. Gods, Too. A Journey in Time.

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 967 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


The road from Ho Chi Minh City to Phnom Penh leads backward in time, from a
primitive rural 20th-century society to a still more primitive 19th-century
society.

The road out of Ho Chi Minh City, the old Saigon, is thronged with traffic:
bicycles, motor scooters, pedicabs and oxcarts carrying women in conical hats to
market with their produce. Auto traffic slows to the pace of bicycles, which
dominate the road.

Along the road are reminders of the Vietnam War. On one side, behind a wall
topped with barbed wire, are the barracks and other buildings once used by
American soldiers. Nearby are the prisons and re-education camps where Hanoi has
punished the Vietnamese who cooperated with the United States.

The road leads past the War Museum. Displayed there, around a quiet garden, are
an American tank equipped with a flame-thrower ''used in burning villages of
South Vietnam''; a 28-ton howitzer used by American forces in ''numerous
criminal acts'' against Vietnam; a helicopter gunship used by ''U.S.
imperialists'' and dozens of American bombs, grenades and machine guns.

Exporting Rice Again

Outside Ho Chi Minh City are vast fields of rice, being harvested by men and
women of all ages. Vietnamese say their economy is now as healthy as at any time
since the war, and they report that Vietnam exported rice in 1989 for the first
time in years.

The drive from Ho Chi Minh City to the border with Cambodia represents nearly
half of the six-hour drive to Phnom Penh, even though it covers only one-third
of the distance. Travel through Vietnam is slower because traffic is heavier and
there are more settlements than in Cambodia, which is more sparsely populated.

At the border are two soaring arches - one labeled Vietnam, the other Kampuchea
- separated by a no man's land. This is the route on which Vietnamese troops
withdrew recently after occupying Cambodia for more than 10 years.

Customs inspectors on both sides of the border carefully search Western visitors
riding in trucks and cars. Local smugglers and peasants using more primitive
means of transportation pass through the gates much more easily.

A Smugglers' Market

A few hundred yards from the official border crossing point is a path where
thousands of Vietnamese and Cambodians pass back and forth every day without
receiving so much as a glance from the immigration and customs inspectors.

In an open field there, they have set up a smugglers' market for buying and
selling bicycles, motorcycles, blue jeans, cigarettes and other goods from
Thailand, Singapore and even Japan. Both Vietnam and Cambodia allow such
transactions as a way to satisfy their people's appetite for consumer goods.

Differences between the two countries become evident immediately after crossing
the border. The vegetation is lusher in Cambodia. Scores of palm trees mark the
Cambodian side of the border. For some reason, there are none to be seen on the
Vietnamese side.

The conical hats favored by Vietnamese women give way to multicolored check
scarves, elaborately tied on the heads of Cambodian women.

There is much less traffic on the French-built road in Cambodia. A car can speed
along at 35 miles an hour, compared with an average of only 25 miles an hour in
Vietnam. Pedestrians and all manner of vehicles immediately give way in response
to a long, loud blast of the horn in Cambodia. Such tactics are ineffective in
cutting through the traffic snarls in Vietnam.

Many Cambodian houses are built on stilts, near the rice paddies that line the
road. Little boys ride water buffalo through the paddies. Oxen and cattle sleep
under the houses at night. The houses and straw huts have no source of electric
power.

Not far from the border is a site where local residents report that hundreds of
Vietnamese soldiers were killed by the Khmer Rouge, Cambodia's fanatical
Communists, in the late 1970's. (Vietnam, for its part, says its invasion in
December 1978 was justified as a response to numerous raids into its territory
by Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge forces.) Cambodian village militiamen armed with
assault rifles are stationed at checkpoints along the road to Phnom Penh. They
rarely stop traffic, and when they do, they quickly allow free passage in return
for a package of cigarettes or a small amount of money.

But motorists are delayed for half an hour by Cambodian road workers making
routine repairs on a small bridge. Among those who must mark time are two
Cambodian teen-agers, a brother and sister, who explain that they are students
of banking at a college in Ho Chi Minh City. They say they are returning to
their home in Phnom Penh because their mother has just been shot to death,
apparently by Khmer Rouge guerrillas, in Battambang Province near the border
with Thailand.

Across the Mekong River

In another half-hour, the traveler reaches the Mekong River, which is crossed by
a ferry jammed with Cambodians. On either side of the river there is the
helter-skelter bustle of money-changers, beggars and vendors selling sugar cane
and rice cakes. But farther on, a roadside restaurant offers more delicacies.
The unwritten menu includes coconut milk, turtle eggs, squab, doves and snakes,
kept in cages with their mouths sewn shut so as not to alarm squeamish
customers.

The road then follows the river into Phnom Penh, which seems eerily quiet as
there is not enough traffic to fill the broad colonial streets and boulevards.

Visitors know they have arrived at their destination when they see a landmark
like none other on the journey from Ho Chi Minh City: Cambodia's royal palace
compound, where Norodom Sihanouk and other god-kings once ruled. The buildings
have slender white columns, graceful spires and multilayered golden roofs that
end in ornamental squiggles curling toward the sky.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: In Ho Chi Minh City, bicycles still outnumber cars on most
streets,but on the road to Phnom Penh, the views get more primitive still.
(NYT/Robert Pear)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Would -Be Refugee Describes His Vietnamese Round Trip

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1339 words

DATELINE: HAIPHONG, Vietnam, Feb. 12


Le Van Kim, once a fisherman, sat in the house of a charitable friend and
bemoaned his fate.

He was back in Vietnam, more than a year and a half after escaping by boat to
Hong Kong. Instead of achieving a permanent haven, he was part of a planeload of
refugees forced by the British authorities two months ago to return to Vietnam.

He has not been arrested, as some feared. But from what he says his life is
fairly bleak. For the moment he is surviving on what amounts to charity, with
little immediate hope of finding a new house or getting a new fishing boat.

Initial Trip Is Smooth

As he tells it, his misadventure began five years ago, when he lost half his
right arm and a few fingers of his left hand while fishing with dynamite. He
continued to ply his family's traditional trade, but the fish did not run well
for two seasons, and like so many Vietnamese before him he decided to leave by
boat for Hong Kong.

With his wife, seven children and his mother, Mr. Kim, 37 years old, set sail
the 500 miles east in his boat on June 10, 1988. It was an uneventful voyage,
and he arrived on June 20, four days after a cutoff imposed by the British
authorities in Hong Kong. He and his family became victims of a policy that made
them part of the only group of Vietnamese forced to return.

For Mr. Kim life seems hopeless and dreary, and he is deeply ashamed of living
on charity. ''Now we have no house and no means of living,'' he said. '' Before,
we had a boat - it was all we had - but the Hong Kong Government destroyed it.''
His only hope, he said, is that the British will buy him another because the
Vietnamese equivalent of $10,000 required for a new one is far beyond his means.


Happiness on Arrival

Before June 16, 1988, any Vietnamese arriving by boat in Hong Kong was
automatically granted refugee status and eventual resettlement in a third
country. After that date, all new arrivals were screened to see if they were
fleeing political, racial or religious persecution and qualify as refugees.

If not, and they are judged economic migrants merely seeking a better life for
themselves and their families, they are refused resettlement and pressed to
return to Vietnam.

''When we arrived in Hong Kong, at the first moment, we were very, very happy,
'' Mr. Kim said. ''We thought we had made it, through all the storms, the
pirates and the dangers on the sea.''

He grew silent, and then finally said, ''But that was the only pleasant
moment.''

The British administrators of Hong Kong insist on the right to send people like
Mr. Kim home involuntarily. The United States argues that forcible repatriation
to Vietnam, unlike to Mexico or Haiti, is intolerable, at least until more
efforts are made to get economic migrants to agree to return. About 1,000
volunteers have already done so under the auspices of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

Precedent Backfires

To set a precedent and in agreement with Vietnam, the British forced one
planeload of boat people to return on Dec. 21, 1989. Mr. Kim and his family were
among them.

But the publicity was sufficiently bad that Vietnam is hesitating to allow a
second flight, which the British authorities want to arrange soon, before the
good sailing weather comes again and more Vietnamese take to the sea in search
of a haven. A British official, Francis Maude, arrives in Hanoi on Sunday to
pursue such discussions with the Vietnamese Government, which says that it will
accept people who do not volunteer to return but do not object to it, either.

''Forcible repatriation,'' Vietnamese officials say, is intolerable, a bit of
semantics important for a country that badly desires better relations with the
West and does not want to be accused of human rights violations.

The planeload that included Mr. Kim, said Vu Khoan, a Deputy Foreign Minister,
was accepted on the principle that while the Vietnamese did not agree to return,
they did not object to it, so no force was required to get them onto the plane.

A Nighttime Journey

Mr. Kim said British authorities woke them in the middle of the night and told
them to board a bus for the airport, where a representative of Vietnam and of
the United Nations High Commissioner would be waiting.

''But no one was there, and we were lied to,'' Mr. Kim said, an assertion that
the British deny. Still, no one protested, he said, and everyone was silent on
the plane because every Vietnamese was sandwiched between two Hong Kong
policemen.

Since then, he said, the Vietnamese authorities have kept their promise and
treated them with respect, with no punishment for having broken the law against
illegal emigration.

Hoang Ngoc Tri, a Haiphong official in charge of caring for the returned boat
people, said that, of course, Vietnam would keep its word. ''If they are treated
badly by the people or the Government, they would leave again. So what would be
the point of going through all this trouble to try to restabilize their lives?''


Intentions Seem Serious

The Vietnamese have a saying, ''we beat the ones who leave us but embrace the
ones who return to us,'' Mr. Tri said, in a bit of approved homespun wisdom
echoed by nearly every Vietnamese official interviewed.

But Hanoi seems to mean it, and with limited resources - per-capita income is a
little over $200 - is trying to cope. The United Nations High Commissioner's
office provides about $1,000, including airfare, for each volunteer, and the
British provide airfare and $620 for each person who does not volunteer.

The Vietnamese have agreed to provide the equivalent of $30 a month in cash to
each volunteer for a year, and $25 a month to each nonvolunteer, with the
remaining money after welcoming and transit expenses, about $100 per person,
being spent on special needs like medical care or housing. And in Haiphong, they
are doing so, even though Mr. Tri complains that the port city has not yet
received all the money due it from the national Government.

Haiphong, he says, with 640 boat people returning, is trying to deal with the
extra burden and spending more than Vietnam gets from the United Nations or the
British. But he is concerned about the future, because at least 5,000 more
people from Haiphong are now in Hong Kong alone.

Budget Problems

Of the city's yearly budget of $14.4 million, 30 percent goes to the national
Government in tax payments, Mr. Tri said. And the city is in ''a sharp
discussion'' with the Hanoi authorities, trying to get that percentage reduced
in order to cope with the returning boat people.

''Many of these people sold everything and must begin again,'' he said. And as
for the city itself, it is ''almost true'' that it is out of fishing boats, and
there are no used ones for sale. In the meantime, state enterprises must replace
skilled workers. And yet given the enormous unemployment in Vietnam, when boat
people return, ''we have to try to solve the problem of finding them jobs all
over again.''

Mr. Tri's hope is that with the improvement in the economy since the Communist
Party allowed private enterprise, Vietnamese will chose to stay home. The
British hope so, too, but fear that the extra money in people's pockets will
mean that more can afford the $250 to $350 required to buy an illegal passage to
Hong Kong.

A Mother's Sadness

For his wife, Le Thai The, holding her 2-year-old, there are simply tears. ''I
feel so sorry for myself and for my family,'' she said. ''My children are small;
we don't have a house.

''I spent the three days of Tet crying,'' she said, referring to the lunar new
year. ''We were in someone else's house, and we had nothing of our own.

''The children kept asking me, 'Mother, why don't we have a house? Why don't we
have an altar?' I don't dare to even speak of the future.''

A Haiphong official, originally reluctant to allow an interview with the family,
said later that the city was sincerely trying its best. ''But don't forget,''
she said, ''these people have done this to themselves.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Le Van Kim and his wife, Le Thai The, at the home of a friend
they are staying with in Haiphong, Vietnam. They are among the vietnamese
refugees who were forcibly repatriated by Hong Kong. (NYT/Steve Erlanger); Map
of vietnam showing location of Hiaphong.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 30, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Asia's Latest Economic Miracle Is Vietnam

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 689 words


To the Editor:

The Jan. 8 front-page ''Cambodia Emerges'' report, while excellent in projecting
rapid change, does not mention that much of that change was initiated long
before the Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia and mirrors changes within
Vietnam.

Your assessment that 70 percent of Cambodia's economy is now in private hands
parallels an economic revamping inside Vietnam, which has placed much of its
economy in private hands. As recently as December 1986, when the Vietnamese
Constitution was amended to guarantee the rights of private property, the public
sector still dominated the economy. The rapid change that swept Vietnam in the
ensuing three years was described by The Wall Street Journal last May as
''almost revolutionary, particularly in the way they have opened the country to
the outside world.''

The newly liberated private sector in Ho Chi Minh City was characterized as
''booming, reaching an almost frenzied state.'' Stating that by midyear 1989,
''conditions in the city have reverted to just about what they were before
1975,'' the article comported with my own impression in two recent visits.

More consumer goods were readily available in the three blocks of stalls and
stores surrounding my hotel than could be found in all of Moscow. Indeed, Soviet
workers scramble for the opportunity to serve in Vietnam so they can pick up
televisions, radios and Western goods unavailable in their own country.

As in Cambodia, major problems abound for the economy, which is recovering from
more than three decades of war and postwar mismanagement. However, signs of
rapid recovery are everywhere. For the first time in five decades, Vietnam, in
1989, became a rice-exporting country, having harvested a record 21 million
tons. Seafood exports rose from $20 million in 1980 to nearly $200 million in
1989, according to the Far Eastern Economic Review of last Dec. 28.

In the countryside, where 80 percent of the Vietnamese population lives, there
has been a mini-boom in residential construction, a result of new favorable
agricultural policies. The currency has stabilized after a precipitous decline
and, as a result of stringent economic measures, which included ending
widespread subsidies and reducing the military budget, Vietnam enters the 1990's
with one of the lowest rates of inflation in the third world.

Like Cambodia, Vietnam willingly draws on the expertise of Western-trained
technocrats. Nguyen Xuan Oanh, a graduate of Harvard Business School, and former
head of the Bank of Saigon under the Thieu regime, is an adviser to the prime
minister. Madame Ngo Ba Thanh, a graduate of Columbia Law School, heads the
influential law commission of the National Assembly and recently drew on the
talents of leading American lawyers in drafting and passing one of the most
liberal foreign investment acts in Asia.

Writings of leading United States economists, such as Milton Friedman and Paul
Kennedy are circulated for study at the highest levels of government. In 1986,
the Vietnamese deleted the seven references to United States imperialism in
their Constitution. Some Vietnamese even claim partial credit for Mikhail S.
Gorbachev's policies of restructuring because he attended the Vietnamese fifth
Communist Party congress in 1982 as the Soviet agricultural minister and
listened attentively while the Vietnamese debated their new economic policy of
''doi moi,'' or renovation.

While the United States continues its trade boycott and, with Japan, vetoes
World Bank and International Monetary Fund assistance, France, Britain, Sweden
and India have leased large tracts for oil exploration off Vietnam's coast.
Likewise, entrepreneurs from Japan, Thailand and Singapore have established
profitable trade relations and investments.

The Vietnamese have an old country proverb: ''The last buffalo gets to drink the
dirty water.'' Vietnam has greater natural resources and a population larger
than Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Rumania combined. It's time the United States
recognizes the changes occurring in Vietnam as well as those in Cambodia.

LEONARD I. WEINGLASS
New York, Jan. 9, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Spying For Hanoi

BYLINE: By Morley Safer; Morley Safer is a co-editor of the CBS television
program ''60 Minutes.'' This article is excerpted from ''Flashbacks: On
Returning to Vietnam,'' which will be published by Random House next month.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3871 words


It is early morning, Jan. 25, 1989, and the caravan - my ''60 Minutes'' camera
crew and assorted hangers-on - is waiting at the Majestic Hotel in Ho Chi Minh
City. Huang Mai Huong, my guide-interpreter, is looking very smug. ''Miss Mai,''
as I call her, has been wedding shopping in Ho Chi Minh City, which to someone
from Hanoi is the equivalent of Hong Kong or Bangkok. She is due to be married
in a few weeks to a young Hanoi diplomat. Although she is pleased at what she
has found - raw silk for a wedding dress, boxes of sweets, and small gifts for
relatives - I am not so sure she is so sure about the groom. When he receives
his first diplomatic posting, she will not be allowed to travel with him.
Without a great deal of confidence, she has already told me, ''The reason for
this is that we are a poor country, and we cannot afford to send a whole family
overseas.''

I suspect there are other reasons, other concerns. The success of overseas
Vietnamese is known to everyone here. Hanoi will not allow its most talented
young people to witness the prosperity of their cousins and perhaps be tempted
away from duty to the motherland.

We are due to leave for Cu Chi to interview a North Vietnamese veteran, as part
of a ''60 Minutes'' report called ''The Enemy.'' The taping has brought me back
to Vietnam, which I covered for CBS News in the 1960's and 70's, after an
absence of 17 years. In the hotel lobby, I tell Miss Mai I have a favor to ask.
''What is it?'' ''I have an old friend in Ho Chi Minh City whom I have not seen
for almost 20 years. Could you arrange for me to meet him tonight?''

I write the name Pham Xuan An on a piece of paper. It means nothing to her. She
summons an assistant minder, a young, well-meaning but barely competent boy
named Tuan. He looks at the name and goes ice cold.

''I will make inquiries,'' he says. ''I will let you know this evening.''

Pham Xuan An was a correspondent for Time magazine in Saigon. His beat was
Vietnamese politics and military affairs. He was among the best-connected
journalists in the country. At Time, he was considered a sage. It was always An
who would brief new correspondents; it was An whom even the competition sought
when trying to unravel the hopelessly complicated threads of Vietnamese
political loyalties.

An was an open and engaging man with a wonderful sense of humor, always welcome
at American and Vietnamese military and diplomatic occasions, one of the few
Vietnamese reporters admitted to off-the-record briefings by the American
mission. It was rumored that he worked for the Central Intelligence Agency.

It is known that during the last days of Saigon, An had persuaded American
officials to take a number of Vietnamese friends out of the country - people who
would certainly have been on the Communists' list of public enemies. He had
managed to get his wife and four young children onto a plane. He, too, was
cleared to leave, but he missed the flight.

There were rumors that he was dead . . . that he had been arrested and was still
rotting in a re-education camp . . . that he was a full colonel in the People's
Army . . . that during the war he had been spying for the North.

Young Tuan leaves with my piece of paper, but I have little hope that anything
will come of this request.

At 6 p.m., we return to the Majestic Hotel. This is my last night in Vietnam,
and although it is the custom at the end of a long television expedition for all
to join in a festive dinner, I am trying hard to avoid it. A television crew is,
for a week or so, an extended family, and this family with its minders has
become an extended colony. I am determined to be alone, make notes, finish a
paperback novel that I have been dawdling over for days. It is Julian Barnes's
''Flaubert's Parrot,'' and it has been providing great late-night pleasure - a
20-minute antidote, a lights-out escape from the memories and realities of
Vietnam. Room service is on my mind.

The problem of dinner is solved by Tuan. He approaches me with a piece of paper.

''Mr. Pham Xuan An will see you tonight at 7,'' he says. ''Here is his
address.''

I am stunned by this turn of events. I try to fathom who made this decision, how
it was made. I stare at the offered address. It is in the northern part of the
city, near the highway to Bien Hoa.

I thank Tuan for his efforts, feeling slightly sheepish at some of my muttered
asides about his competence.

''One other thing, I would like to see Pham Xuan An alone. I do not need any
translation.'' Miss Mai leaves the decision to Tuan. ''No problem, no problem,''
he says. ''There will be a driver to take you to his house.''

Tuan seems extremely relieved to be excluded from a conversation that could
possibly damage a promising career.

I ask Patti Hassler, a ''60 Minutes'' producer, to join me. I do not want to
take notes when I meet with An. There is something unnerving about having
someone scribble while you talk. A tape recorder is even more intimidating. But
I want an observant witness to this reunion. I want every detail remembered.

We drive through the Phu Nhuan District of Ho Chi Minh City. It is, as it was, a
mixture of grand and not-so-grand villas separated by more modest houses. The
main thoroughfare, the old highway to Bien Hoa, has been renamed Avenue Dien
Bien Phu. We turn onto a street of small villas, the kind occupied by
middle-level United States Embassy personnel during the war. Each is protected
by a concrete wall, with iron gates across the entrance. We creep along the curb
looking for No. 214.

Pham Xuan An is standing at the open iron gates, a pair of German shepherds
flanking him. An and his beloved dogs. He would take them everywhere. He used to
have his morning coffee at the Continental Palace, and always the big black
snout of a German shepherd poked out from under his table.

He walks toward me, arms outstretched and, uncharacteristically for a
Vietnamese, he embraces me.

An has changed very little. He is 61, but he looked that old 20 years ago. Then
he might have been described as wiry; now he is emaciated, almost cadaverous. He
is wearing a white shirt, dark trousers and enormous heavy horn-rimmed glasses
that make him look like a certified intellectual of the kind you see hanging out
in cafes on the fringes of the Sorbonne. He takes them off when he talks and
slips them on when he listens.

We are seated in the living room, which also serves as An's study. On a table in
a corner is an old Olivetti portable typewriter. There are floor-to-ceiling
glass-covered bookcases filled to overflowing with English, French and
Vietnamese titles. There is a neat disorder to the room: piles of newspapers,
books lying open on the shelves, the disorder that would indicate a preoccupied
mind, not a sloppy one. There is a nice musty smell, the smell of paper quietly
disintegrating in the Asian dampness.

On a low table separating a sofa and two easy chairs, An has set out glasses, a
bowl of ice and a bottle of White Horse whisky.

''You know, you are still a mystery,'' I say. ''People are still unsure about
who you were working for. What's the truth?''

He laughs. ''The truth? Which truth? One truth is that for 10 years I was a
staff correspondent for Time magazine, and before that Reuters. The other truth
is that I joined the movement in 1944 and in one way or another have been part
of it ever since. Two truths . . . both truths are true.''

I read somewhere that the North, the Vietcong, had 200,000 agents active in the
South during the war. I ask An how he managed to keep his identities separate.

''The identities weren't the problem. The identities were very easy. Loyalty was
the problem. I learned about loyalty at university in the United States. To me,
in a certain way, loyalty is a totally American idea.''

An had been given a State Department scholarship to the United States in the
late 1950's. After his university studies he traveled across the country,
staying in private homes, ending his time abroad in Orange County, Calif.,
working for a local newspaper. He now jokes: ''I was the only Vietnamese in
Orange County. I understand 300,000 have now taken my place.''

The conversation rambles. An is anxious to know about old friends. Especially
Frank McCulloch, who was Time's bureau chief in Saigon, and Richard M. Clurman,
who during An's years at Time was Time-Life's chief of correspondents, based in
New York.

''McCulloch taught me everything about honest journalism. He taught me about
'getting it right.' That was his main concern. Tell him whatever I did, I did
not let him down on that. I never planted a story; I was not part of any
disinformation campaign. The best friends I had were at Time. David Greenway and
other reporters taught me about friendship. Clurman demonstrated what loyalty
is. Everyone in the bureau was frightened of Clurman, but when there were
problems, they turned to him for help. He never let anyone down. When we lost
people, when someone was killed, Clurman didn't send his sympathies; he came
himself.''

Frank McCulloch is now managing editor of The San Francisco Examiner, H.D.S.
(David) Greenway is with The Boston Globe, and Richard Clurman writes books and
serves as chairman of the board of the Columbia University Media in Society
Seminars.

The talk turns to Robert Shaplen, who covered Vietnam for many years for The New
Yorker. He died of cancer eight months ago. Shaplen's Vietnamese reporter,
Nguyen Hung Vuong, and An were inseparable. Vuong was a squat, intense,
sour-looking man. Together they were the Mutt and Jeff of Vietnamese political
minutiae, a two-man repository of all the intrigues, petty bickering,
corruption, gossip, dirt, plotting and grand designs of the little kings we
created, the tin-pots we overthrew, the might-have-beens and never-wuzzes. In
the dim 40-watt glow of An's study, I reflect on all that . . . all that
scholarship of theirs that we called upon all those years ago. So important
then, so useless now. Vuong died of cancer, too, in 1986, in lonely exile in
Virginia. An and I raise a glass in silent toast. How did it start?'' I ask.
''It was the most natural thing. In 1944, the Japanese were still here. I joined
the Vietminh along with most of my classmates. It was not a matter of choice; it
was the only thing to do. We were patriots. Then, when the French came back,
nothing had really changed, just the enemy. I did nothing very brave; I ran a
few errands.

''The real work started in 1960, when I was working for Reuters. I held the rank
of regimental commander. I never wore a uniform, of course . . . I never carried
a weapon. During the years with Time I was made a colonel.'' ''What did they
expect of you?'' ''The same thing Time expected, only in greater detail. I had
access to all the Vietnamese bases and their commanders. My superiors wanted to
know the strengths of various units. They wanted estimates of the capabilities
of commanders - who was corrupt and who was corruptible. They wanted all the
political stuff, the same stuff you guys wanted.'' ''Did they want you to place
stories in Time?''

''No. They were clever enough to know how easy that kind of thing is to spot.
They told me over and over to do nothing that might compromise my job. A couple
of times I had to sit on very good stories because my source would have been too
obvious. The only time I risked doing anything like that was during the Paris
peace talks. We - Time - had a series of great scoops.'' ''How easy was it to
pass on information?'' ''In Saigon we had a liaison system. I would just pass it
on. I tried to avoid putting anything on paper. Then every few months I would
disappear for a couple of days. It wasn't unusual for me to do that for Time. My
commanders preferred the long debriefings. We met in a couple of places, but
mainly in the Ho Bo forest.''

The Ho Bo forest is about 10 miles northwest of Saigon. It was under almost
constant attack by the American 25th Infantry Division.

''One time, it was during a Tet truce, I was on my way back to Saigon, when one
side or the other - I'm not sure which - started shooting, and I got caught in
the middle. I spent two days and two nights in a ditch. I really thought it was
all over for me. I thought, 'What a rotten way to die, the victim of a truce.'
''

As he talks, An leans over, his elbows on his knees, a Lucky Strike dangling
from his bony fingers. He speaks with an easy grace, with the mannerisms of a
donnish poet. ''Were you frightened that you might be discovered?''
''Constantly. I was terrified. You know there were rumors in the 60's that I was
working for the C.I.A. I did my best not to discourage those tales. I thought it
gave me a little more protection. Later, of course, it became a threat. We
worked in very close security. I don't think more than half a dozen people knew
of my activities. In the early 70's, when things started going badly for the
Government, I was worried that when the collapse came there wouldn't be time to
explain to some kid from the countryside with an AK-47 that I was a colonel in
his army. I used to tell people, 'They'll probably kill me and roast my dog.' ''

An's explanations do not clarify; they deepen the mystery of the man. The puzzle
becomes an enigma. Sitting a few feet away in the semigloom, his eyes enlarged
by those ridiculous heavy glasses, he goes out of focus. How many more layers
are there? How much more is there to be told in his friendly confession?

In his book ''The Fall of Saigon,'' David Butler describes An's gallantry in
helping Dr. Tran Kim Tuyen to escape. Tuyen was one of the most highly placed
C.I.A. agents in Vietnam. An incurable plotter who had worked for and against
the Thieu Government, on the last day of Saigon he was still at it, trying to
make a deal with the Buddhist hierarchy to form a new government.

Tuyen would have been a priority target for the Vietcong. He had organized and
presided over Diem's secret police and, with American assistance, had set up
Saigon's first intelligence network aimed at the North. In the confusion
preceding the collapse of the city he had missed two different flights that the
C.I.A. had arranged for him and his family. His wife and children managed to
leave, through friends at the British Embassy, but on the last day of the war he
had no one to turn to but Pham Xuan An. An shoved him in his car and drove
through a collapsing Saigon to an American apartment building . . . bluffed his
way past a guard, forced open the iron gates, and ordered Tuyen to go. There is
a picture from that last day of figures silhouetted on a rooftop stairway that
reaches up to an American helicopter. The figure on the bottom step is Tuyen. An
is not in the picture. He stayed.

The act might signify nothing more than An's unwillingness to permit suffering
when he had the wit and compassion - and the courage -to prevent it. I do not
press him further.

Whatever he was, whatever he did in the past, An is a dignified and decent man,
a believer still in a small, honorable destiny for his country. I do not think
of him as a Communist, though he is still a loyal party member. I can't even
think of him as a nationalist. It is a perverted word that too often masks
grandiose and ugly possibilities. No, An is a genuine patriot, I decide, one of
the few I have known. ''What happened that day, after everyone left?''

''Bob Shaplen gave me the keys to his room at the Continental. So did a couple
of the other correspondents. I went home, picked up my mother and moved into the
hotel. I knew it would be safer there. My mother was also very ill, and I
thought it would be easier to look after her in the hotel. My wife and children
had already left on the flight that Time arranged.'' ''Why did you stay? Did you
want to see it through?'' ''I suppose so. Something like that. I think it is
difficult for an outsider to understand, and just as difficult to explain. Maybe
I don't even understand why. I knew we had to get rid of the foreigners. Even
the foreigners I love so much. Maybe I thought I could help rebuild the country.
Even if I had wanted to go, there was my mother. She was too old and too ill to
travel. So I stayed. At first I thought I would find someone to look after her,
and join my family in France or the States. But they made it clear to me that
they would not let me leave.''

There is a look of great weariness in his face. The spy in winter. The dutiful
elderly son who chose loyalty over freedom. The first year of ''liberation'' was
spent in a camp . . . not a re-education camp, he explains, but a special camp
near Hanoi for ''friends'' who might have been contaminated by too close a
relationship with the Americans.

''It wasn't hard labor; it was lectures: long lectures, mainly dealing with
party theory. People felt I needed a brush up after all those years of working
for the Americans. When I returned to Saigon, my wife and children came back. I
wanted them back, but I left the decision to them.''

All four of An's children are in their 20's now. His oldest son works as a
translator, having studied English and Russian at the Institute for Foreign
Languages in Moscow. Another son is an engineer and still another a
psychologist. An's daughter will soon graduate from medical school. ''Why did
the revolution fail?'' ''There are many reasons. So many mistakes were made out
of sheer ignorance. Like every revolution, we called it a people's revolution,
but of course the people were the first to suffer.''

In the previous week, wandering the streets of Ho Chi Minh City at night, I saw
what seemed to be thousands upon thousands of homeless. When I mention this to
An, he looks embarrassed, as though he has helped bring on their calamity. I
suppose, in a way, he has, but he now has the decency to feel shame. All that
talk of liberation 20, 30, 40 years ago, all the plotting and all the bodies
produced this impoverished, broken-down country: revolution as punishment,
liberation as a grandiose denial of possibilities.

''As long as the people sleep in the street, the revolution was lost,'' An says.
''It is not that the leaders are cruel men, but the effect of paternalism and
discredited economic theory is the same.'' ''Aren't you worried about talking so
bluntly? Isn't it dangerous?'' ''Everyone knows how I feel. I make no secret of
it. I never have. During the Thieu Government everyone knew exactly what I
thought of those thieves. I'm too old to change.'' He laughs. ''I'm too old to
shut up.''

''What about the reforms?'' I ask. In the previous 18 months, the regime has
loosened up significantly, allowing a certain amount of private enterprise. ''I
get the feeling that something is beginning to happen. Am I wrong?''

''No, not wrong, just too optimistic. I wish the reforms represented a genuine
re-evaluation, a genuine perestroika. Maybe I am too pessimistic. That's a
disease that is easy to catch in this country.''

''But the way people, especially in the South, responded to the reforms. Surely
the leadership is smart enough to get the message.''

''The way people responded. That's what breaks my heart. To see that spirit
going crazy with delight over a few economic reforms. It gives a hint of what
the possibilities are for this damn country if we could have not just peace, but
freedom.'' ''Do they watch you?'' ''Yes, just like in the days of Thieu. They
watch me out of habit now, not because they expect to learn anything. They know
everything there is to know about me.'' ''Will they let you leave?'' ''I don't
know. I'm not sure I want to. At the very least, I would like my children to go
to the States to study.''

The bottle of White Horse is almost empty. The three of us have been sipping
steadily through the evening. Patti sits at her end of the sofa, being the
perfect fly on the wall. I ask An: ''Do you regret what you did, now that you've
seen the results?''

''I hate that question. I have asked it of myself a thousand times. But I hate
the answer more. No. No regrets. I had to do it. This peace that I fought for
may be crippling this country, but the war was killing it. As much as I love the
United States, it had no right here. The Americans had to be driven out of
Vietnam one way or another. We must sort this place out ourselves.''

Poor An. He occupies that no man's land called the middle ground or, depending
on the generation, the third force. No place for a sensitive soul. Historically,
of course, it has been occupied only by sensitive souls. If Graham Greene had
looked at Vietnam in another way, he might have written ''The Quiet
Vietnamese,'' with Pham Xuan An as his model.

An is neither apologetic about the cause he served, nor does he rail against it.
His is not a case of a god that failed. Unlike Arthur Koestler and other
reformed addicts of Marxism, I doubt that An ever was a believer. A god did not
fail him. Men did.

I suspect he did what was for him the natural thing, not especially courageous.
There is a distinction between a spy and a traitor. For him to have served
Nguyen Van Thieu would have been an act of betrayal. As for Americans, he was
capable of separating his feelings for the Americans he worked with from the
cause the American Government was pursuing. In fact, what he wanted for his
country, I believe, were the things Americans already had. My suspicion is that
he made no definite decision about himself, his politics or his country. I think
that he, like most men, kept taking what seemed to be the logical next step.
Unlike most men, there was a minimum of self-interest involved.  It is past 9
o'clock - time to go. An walks us out to the car, the two dogs at his feet.
''You've led a couple of interesting lives,'' I tell him. ''Why don't you write
it all down? It would be a fascinating book. An important one, too.''

He slips off the glasses and looks up at the night sky. I can barely see his
face in the dark, but I hear a short trill of sad laughter. ''All the years that
I was a reporter,'' he says, ''all those years, no one told me what to write; no
one censored me at Time or Reuters. I am too old to learn some new rules about
what can be said and what cannot. I am afraid my reporting days are over.'' He
embraces me, shakes my hand. ''Please tell all my friends you saw me,'' he says.
''Tell Clurman and McCulloch and Charlie Mohr, especially. Tell them I am doing
well. Well enough.'' Charlie Mohr, first for Time, then The New York Times, was
one of the first American reporters to cover Vietnam's agonies in the early
60's, and among the most perceptive. I promise to make the calls. (Upon
returning to the United States, I reach Clurman and McCulloch, both of whom are
extremely touched that An remembered them so fondly. I never reached Charlie
Mohr, who died on his 60th birthday, in June 1989.) ''I really want to come
back,'' I say, ''and find another story here.''

''That would be nice, Morley. That would be very nice. But I think the next one
of the guys that I see will probably be Shaplen or Vuong.''

I can't see An's face, only his silhouette against the light of the living-room
window. The long bony arm waves a farewell, and the dogs bark us out of the
driveway.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos: Pham Xuan An, above, at work in his Time office in 1972; and,
left, Jan. 25, 1989, as he was visited at his home in Ho Chi Minh City by the
author. (Patti Hassler)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Goldberg, Hoping to End Vietnam War, Was In on Its Escalation

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 433 words


To the Editor:

Arthur J. Goldberg's obituary (Jan. 20) notes that he stepped down from the
Supreme Court to become United States representative to the United Nations with
great reluctance, doing so because he hoped to play a major role in ending the
Vietnam War. The irony is not only that Mr. Goldberg was unable to end the war.
He also became part of its escalation.

President Lyndon B. Johnson appointed Goldberg to succeed Adlai E. Stevenson at
the United Nations on July 20, 1965. The year had seen American troops in
Vietnam increase from 23,000 in January to 75,000 in July and their mission
change from advising the South Vietnamese to direct combat. Despite the United
States military effort, a Communist victory was imminent.

At the time of Mr. Goldberg's appointment, the United States field commander in
Vietnam, Gen. William C. Westmoreland, was seeking a major troop increase. His
request was not made public, but the Administration did announce that it was
consideraing a major expansion of United States forces in Vietnam, accompanied
by increased defense spending and a call-up of civilian reservists. Press
reports suggested that President Johnson might raise the number of American
troops in Vietnam to as many as 200,000.

After a week in which it was known that the President and his associates were
deliberating over grave options, Johnson made a twin announcement of a troop
increment and peace effort. He declared that he was increasing the number of
Americans in Vietnam to 125,000. After careful consideration, he continued, he
had concluded that a reserve call-up was not needed. (He made no reference to
increasing spending.) Accompanying the troop commitment, the President declared,
would be a diplomatic campaign spearheaded by Mr. Goldberg, with the objective
of arriving at a peaceful settlement in Vietnam.

President Johnson's decision was greeted as an exercise of statesmanlike
restraint, in part because it fell far short of expectations and in part because
of the mission of Arthur Goldberg, a famed negotiator.

Nothing came of Mr. Goldberg's efforts. The President was so far from being
willing to enter negotiations at the time that he had already issued secret
orders to expand forces in Vietnam to 200,000. In a seeming act of moderation,
the United States had embarked on an open-ended military commitment 20,000 miles
from Washington.

FRED I. GREENSTEIN
  Princeton, N.J., Jan. 23, 1990

The writer, professor of politics at Princeton University, is co-author of ''How
Presidents Test Reality: Decisions on Vietnam, 1954 and 1965.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 15, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Graham Martin, 77, Dies; Envoy at Saigon's Fall

BYLINE: By ALFONSO A. NARVAEZ

SECTION: Section B; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 739 words


Graham A. Martin, a career diplomat who was the last United States Ambassador to
South Vietnam, died of a heart ailment on Tuesday at Forsythe Hospital in
Winston-Salem, N.C. He was 77 years old and lived in Winston-Salem.

Tall, slender and courtly, Mr. Martin served in Saigon from 1973 until the end
of April 1975, when thousands of American troops, Vietnamese officials and
United States Embassy personnel were evacuated in the final chaotic hours of the
Vietnam War.

Mr. Martin was sharply criticized for his handling of the evacuation, in which
thousands of Vietnamese who worked for the United States and hundreds of
classified documents were left behind. Some officials charged that he had
aggravated the situation by not ordering American troops out of Saigon, now Ho
Chi Minh City, earlier.

Mr. Martin defended his role, calling the evacuation ''a hell of a good job.''

Evacuation Role Described

In 1976 he told a House Foreign Affairs subcommittee that the accusations were
''gross distortions'' and that his final 10 days in Saigon ''required a most
careful walking of the tightrope of judgment of just how the situation was
developing.''

The final hours of the American presence in Vietnam were detailed in ''Decent
Interval,'' a 1977 book by Frank Snepp, a senior Central Intelligence Agency
analyst in Vietnam from 1972 to 1975. Mr. Snepp charged that embassy officials
had failed to plan adequately for the evacuation and that Mr. Martin had
attempted to negotiate a peaceful end to the war while ignoring intelligence
reports that North Vietnam wanted total victory.

Mr. Martin was familiar with controversy. In a previous assignment, as
Ambassador to Italy from 1969 to 1973, he helped funnel millions of dollars in
covert aid to the Christian Democrats and other Italian parties opposed to the
Communists.

In 1972, over the objections of the Central Intelligence Agency, he won approval
of a payment of about $800,000 to Gen. Vito Miceli, an Italian neo-fascist, with
no restrictions on how the money would be spent. General Miceli was later
accused of right-wing plots to overthrow the Italian Government.

Battles With McNamara

Earlier, as Ambassador to Thailand in the Johnson Administration, Mr. Martin
battled with Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara over the level of aid to
the Thai Government. He argued successfully against a Pentagon proposal to
divert aid from Thailand to Vietnam.

After serving in Vietnam he became a special assistant to Secretary of State
Henry A. Kissinger. He retired in 1977.

Graham Anderson Martin was born on Sept. 22, 1912, in Mars Hill, N.C., and
graduated from Wake Forest College in 1932. He worked briefly as a Washington
correspondent for several southern newspapers and in 1933 joined the National
Recovery Administration, where he served as an aide to W. Averell Harriman, then
the deputy administrator.

In 1936, he joined the Social Security Board and a year later opened the first
field office for the agency in Asheville, N.C. He returned to Washington in
1941, joined the Army Air Corps as a lieutenant and rose to colonel.

Assistant to Douglas Dillon

In 1947 he joined the Foreign Service and was posted to Paris for eight years.
He earned high ratings from a succession of ambassadors, among them C. Douglas
Dillon, who later became Under Secretary of State. In 1959 Mr. Dillon appointed
Mr. Martin as his special assistant.

Three years later, after serving as the deputy United States coordinator for the
Alliance for Progress, Mr. Martin was named United States representative to the
United Nations and other international organizations in Geneva.

He served there until May 1963 and was then named Ambassador to Thailand, where
he negotiated for the use of secret airfields by American warplanes.

In addition to serving as Ambassador to Thailand until 1967, he was the United
States representative to the Council of the South East Asia Treaty Organization.
From 1967 to 1969, he was a special assistant to the Secretary of State for
refugee and migration affairs and in 1969 was named Ambassador to Italy. In
1973, he was named to head the United States Embassy in Saigon.

In 1967 he was given the State Department's Distinguished Honor award.

He is survived by his wife, the former Dorothy Wallace; two daughters, Janet
Martin Tantensapya and Nancy Lane, and a son, Michael, all of Winston-Salem; and
four grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Graham A. Martin (The New York Times, 1985)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
A Vietnam Medic Heals His Own Hidden Wounds

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 905 words


Veteran's Day
By Rod Kane
314 pages. Orion Books/Crown. $18.95.

Rod Kane's memoir of the Vietnam War and its aftermath takes the reader on a
journey through the inferno of combat and the purgatory of one veteran's
redemption, without finally reaching Dante's earthly paradise. The author found
himself in the dark wood, first in the napalmed forests and then in the tangled
underbrush of his own mind. He could not shake the war and its memory for half
of his young life until a series of events - including writing down the midnight
thoughts that are at the heart of this book - brought him home to himself and
America.

''Veteran's Day'' is a powerful addition to the literature of that bitter war in
the jungles of Southeast Asia and in the streets of the United States. It
breathes front-line authenticity on every page. It is the ground-level view of a
former combat medic with the airborne infantry in 1965-66. To the wounded and
dying on the battlefield, 19-year-old Rod Kane became ''Doc.''

He called himself a baby boomer. His father had served in World War II and his
favorite uncle was a paratrooper in the Korean war. So at the age of 18, a
dropout from high school in an unnamed town near Syracuse, he listened to the
recruiting sergeant who quoted President John F. Kennedy to him: ''Ask not what
your country can do for you. Ask what you can do for your country.'' He wanted
to be a hero, too.

One year later, after parachute and medical training, he landed in South Vietnam
with the First Brigade (Airborne), First Cavalry Division. His unit quickly was
cut down by ambushes and booby traps and firefights in places called Happy
Valley and Bong Song, Ia Drang Valley and An Khe, long-forgotten real estate
halfway around the world from home. Survival became all; idealism turned to
cynicism.

The Vietcong often used primitive means against the Americans' helicopters and
automatic rifles. Along jungle trails, bamboo sticks impaled patrolling
soldiers; swarms of bees tied into booby traps caused some men to die of stings.
Children tossed grenades and were killed in return. Incessant small-arms fire
came from a rarely seen enemy and men cracked up under pressure. From the field
Mr. Kane wrote an angry letter directly to the American commander, who had
reprimanded a soldier for breaking down under fire:

''General Westmoreland:

''Sir. First let me express my concern for your health. The last time I saw you,
your arm was in a sling. I presume you were shot, though word out here has it
you broke it playing tennis in Saigon. . . .''

The author keeps applying tourniquets to the wounded; those too far gone receive
only his prayers. Finally, Mr. Kane reaches the end of his tour of almost daily
combat - 1 of only 2 survivors out of 24 from his original close-knit unit. In
California, there are no banners greeting him, no ecstatic women to embrace the
hero come home. At customs, this exchange takes place:

''You have anything to declare?'' ''My life. I'd like it back.'' The second part
of ''Veteran's Day'' is even more revealing about Mr. Kane's state of mind and
what he encountered back home. His family's life is fragile and there isn't much
to return to. His father, an alcoholic, has disappeared, leaving his mother
floundering. One by one, his brothers sign up for the same unending war. In
upstate New York, people ask him: ''Did you kill any babies?''

Mr. Kane joins Vietnam Veterans Against the War. During an antiwar demonstration
in Washington one Memorial Day, he and his friends throw their medals into a
handmade coffin, with one friend saying, ''I would like President Nixon and
President Johnson really, because he sent me over there, I'd like them to have
these medals back.''

The years pass, and the author finds himself in his 30's, still unable to
adjust, unable to sleep because he still hears the cries of the wounded. He gets
involved with women and then always breaks off the relationships. He follows his
father's taste for alcohol; cigarettes are alternated with marijuana, the great
Vietnam pacifier. He writes to his friends who had served with him; he seems
able to connect only with them. Jobs come and go. But he finds himself writing
down his thoughts: a catharsis for bad dreams.

Recognizing his problems, he joins a group therapy session at a Veterans
Administration hospital. So begins his road to recovery - even though, at the
hospital, he learns that the itching on parts of his body has been caused by
Agent Orange. The Vietnam Veterans Memorial on the Mall in Washington, although
too austere for him, at least becomes a symbol of recognition for the dead he
once nursed in wartime. And then, on Veterans Day in 1982, there is a
welcome-home parade for Vietnam veterans that finally punctuates the end of the
war. Standing at the Vietnam Memorial, the author muses:

''Reach out and grieve. Pass your hands across the names of loved ones. Be
thankful you weren't the 19-year-old who has to live with the experience of
choosing who should live and who should die.''

''Veteran's Day'' joins such classics as Michael Herr's ''Dispatches,'' Daniel
Lang's ''Casualties of War'' and Ron Kovic's ''Born on the Fourth of July'' as
an indictment of how the war scarred so many lives. The hope here is that Rod
Kane can direct the same white-hot passion he displays in this moving book at
new fields of concern about the men and women of his generation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rod Kane (Elizabeth Kielpinski)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 23, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAMESE FORCE HELPING CAMBODIA, DIPLOMATS ASSERT

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1537 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Feb. 22


Several thousand Vietnamese troops and military advisers returned to Cambodia
last fall after a much-publicized withdrawal and are helping the Cambodian
Government to defend two strategic cities from guerrilla attack, two senior
Eastern European diplomats say.

The diplomats said the Government invited Vietnamese forces back in October, a
month after it announced their departure. The report indicates the precarious
position of Cambodia's Vietnamese-installed Government, which is under attack
from the guerrillas of the Khmer Rouge and other Cambodian forces opposed to the
Vietnamese influence.

Cambodian and Vietnamese officials deny that there are Vietnamese troops in
Cambodia or that any returned after their withdrawal. China, the Khmer Rouge and
the two non-Communist Cambodian factions allied to the Khmer Rouge have asserted
that thousands of Vienamese troops never left.

Defensive Lines in Northwest

But the Vietnamese Ambassador here, Ngo Dien, said in an interview that
Vietnamese military advisers, whose numbers he did not disclose, had returned to
Cambodia at Phnom Penh's request to help design strategic defensive lines in the
northwest, fix tanks, trucks and armored cars and train officers and recruits in
tactics and artillery.

If Phnom Penh risked its international credibility by secretly inviting
Vietnamese forces back, it clearly felt that the loss of additional territory to
the Cambodian insurgents would create unacceptable morale and political
problems.

''On secret military matters, if the Cambodians need some people to advise or do
something on a technical matter, we don't say no,'' Mr. Dien said.

Start of Rainy Season

The two Eastern European diplomats said all Vietnamese troops left Cambodia at
the end of September, as Hanoi promised. But in response to an urgent request
from Prime Minister Hun Sen after opposition advances and the fall of the
gem-mining town of Pailin on Oct. 24, they said, Vietnam agreed to send a
special force as large as 3,000 to help defend the perimeter of Battambang,
Cambodia's second-largest city. The Vietnamese began to arrive by helicopter on
Oct. 29, one of the diplomats said.

At least 5,000 Vietnamese troops are encamped around Battambang and Sisophon to
insure that these provincial capitals do not fall to the Khmer Rouge and its
allied non-Communist factions, the two Eastern European diplomats said.

One diplomat said Mr. Hun Sen was told by Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach of
Vietnam at the end of December that Vietnamese troops would be withdrawn
irrevocably at the start of the rainy season, around the end of April.

A third senior Eastern European diplomat said he had been told that at least
1,000 members of Vietnamese special forces entered Cambodia at the end of
October, but he said he did not know if they were still here. ''I know Vietnam
wanted to be clean before Jakarta,'' he said, referring to the conference in
Indonesia that is scheduled to begin later this month to discuss the future of
Cambodia. ''By now they might be gone.''

Little Fighting Believed

He said that to his knowledge they had done little fighting. ''But the important
thing is that the Khmer Rouge knew that between them and Battambang, there were
Vietnamese,'' he said.

The diplomat said it was difficult ''to draw a frontier between military
advisers and soldiers,'' but added that now ''the presence of every Vietnamese
adviser, specialist or even combatant is paid for by Cambodia.''

Asked why he would disclose such sensitive and embarrassing information, a
senior Eastern European diplomat with long experience here said, ''I believe in
the truth, and with changes at home, it is easier to tell it.''

Another Eastern European diplomat said Chinese, American and Southeast Asian aid
was continuing to go to the opposition, ''and it is no shame for Vietnam to
respond to a request for help.''

Denies Troop Involvement

Dith Munty, Cambodia's First Deputy Foreign Minister, said in an interview that
there were no Vietnamese troops or military advisers here. Advised of Mr. Dien's
comments, he then said that ''as far as I know, there are Vietnamese military
attaches and aides working in Cambodia,'' but no troops.

He said statements that Vietnamese troops came to help in Battambang were not
true and ''a fabrication.'' He said Cambodia welcomed international verification
to prove that no Vietnamese troops remained.

Chum Bun Rong, a Cambodian Foreign Ministry spokesman, also said there were no
Vietnamese troops here. ''If we had them, the Khmer Rouge could not seize a part
of the country,'' he said. ''We welcome verification by an international team
even before a peace settlement. We don't want to be hostage to accusations that
poison the soil.''

Diplomats and aid workers say the Khmer Rouge control large areas of the
countryside in a part circle beginning about 30 miles from the two city centers,
where the three lines of defensive perimeters end. The Khmer Rouge have cut the
Phnom Penh-Battambang rail line north of Pursat by blowing up two bridges,
though Cambodian officials say they are under repair. #12,000 Living on Streets
While the Khmer Rouge maintained they began a frontal attack on Battambang on
Jan. 5 and set the city alight, in fact the attacks were mostly made with
rockets. Troops did not penetrate the city's suburbs.

Foreign journalists were not allowed to visit Battambang until Jan. 23 and found
the city quiet. But they flew into the city on a special flight and were not
allowed to travel around the city, except to drive north to Sisophon and Poipet,
within the defensive perimeters.

Aid workers and diplomats say that about 12,000 Cambodians displaced by the
fighting are now living on the streets of Battambang and that 30 people a day
reach the city hospital with gunshot wounds.

The Vietnamese withdrawal last September followed a nearly 11-year occupation
that began with their expulsion in January 1979 of the Khmer Rouge Government,
under which more than a million Cambodians died. Before the withdrawal in
September, Vietnamese generals said they feared that Sisophon and Battambang
might fall.

On Right to Seek Assistance

If those cities are taken, Cambodian officials privately say they fear a
collapse of already low army morale and a panic in Phnom Penh.

Early last April, when Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos jointly announced that
Vietnamese troops would leave Cambodia at the end of September, the declaration
included a clause reserving to Cambodia the right to call on assistance again if
needed.

Vietnamese officials said in September that should such a request come, it would
be judged at the time. They said Hanoi had no interest in returning troops to
Cambodia but wished to concentrate on building relations with the West, the
United States in particular, which had made Vietnam's withdrawal a condition of
diplomatic and commercial relations.

But the United States said that the unilateral Vietnamese withdrawal was not
sufficient, and that normalization could only come after a comprehensive
settlement in Cambodia. An American embargo on aid and trade to Vietnam
continues, and Washington has blocked loans to Vietnam from the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund and the Asian Development Bank.

Shocked by Pailin's Fall

The Eastern European diplomats said Mr. Hun Sen's Government had been shocked by
the fall of Pailin. In Hanoi, Maj. Gen. Tran Cong Man confirmed in an interview
that Cambodian forces abandoned Pailin ''with no real reason'' when they thought
Khmer Rouge forces were about to surround them.

''If a Vietnamese general had behaved like that, he would have been sentenced to
death,'' General Man said. He also confirmed that Cambodian soldiers left the
town of Svay Chek in northwest Cambodia to the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front, after successfully defending it for weeks, when a shell
happened to hit their commander's tent. When the Cambodian soldiers saw their
commander being evacuated on a stretcher, they followed his litter out of town,
General Man said.

A Khmer Rouge attack on Battambang at the end of September had worried ''the
military lobby'' in the Phnom Penh Politburo, one Eastern European diplomat
said. In early October two members, Deputy Defense Minister Pol Saroeun and the
former Defense Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, Phou Thang, asked Mr. Hun Sen
to invite some Vietnamese troops back. He refused several times. But on Oct. 26,
after the panicky retreat from Pailin two days earlier, the diplomat said, Mr.
Hun Sen spoke with Defense Minister Le Duc Anh and asked for the return of
several thousand troops.

Mr. Anh was furious, the diplomat said.

But after two days of consultations in Hanoi, the diplomat said, Mr. Anh told
Mr. Hun Sen that the Vietnamese would send 3,000 special forces, elite career
soldiers who had not served in Cambodia, to help protect Battambang, but that
they would be placed far from the city center. They were said to have begun
arriving the next day, Oct. 29.

In Hanoi, General Man also denied that Vietnamese fighting troops were in
Cambodia, but said that the Cambodian Army suffered from poor morale and weak
leadership.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia (The New York Times) (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TOO EMBARRASSED NOT TO KILL

BYLINE: By ROBERT R. HARRIS; Robert R. Harris is an editor of The Book Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1393 words



THE THINGS THEY CARRIED
By Tim O'Brien.
273 pp. Boston:
Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.

Only a handful of novels and short stories have managed to clarify, in any
lasting way, the meaning of the war in Vietnam for America and for the soldiers
who served there. With ''The Things They Carried,'' Tim O'Brien adds his second
title to the short list of essential fiction about Vietnam. As he did in his
novel ''Going After Cacciato'' (1978), which won a National Book Award, he
captures the war's pulsating rhythms and nerve-racking dangers. But he goes much
further. By moving beyond the horror of the fighting to examine with sensitivity
and insight the nature of courage and fear, by questioning the role that
imagination plays in helping to form our memories and our own versions of truth,
he places ''The Things They Carried'' high up on the list of best fiction about
any war.

''The Things They Carried'' is a collection of interrelated stories. A few are
unremittingly brutal; a couple are flawed two-page sketches. The publisher calls
the book ''a work of fiction,'' but in no real sense can it be considered a
novel. No matter. The stories cohere. All deal with a single platoon, one of
whose members is a character named Tim O'Brien. Some stories are about the
wartime experiences of this small group of grunts. Others are about a
43-year-old writer - again, the fictional character Tim O'Brien - remembering
his platoon's experiences and writing war stories (and remembering writing
stories) about them. This is the kind of writing about writing that makes Tom
Wolfe grumble. It should not stop you from savoring a stunning performance. The
overall effect of these original tales is devastating.

As might be expected, there is a lot of gore in ''The Things They Carried'' -
like the account of the soldier who ties a friend's puppy to a Claymore
antipersonnel mine and squeezes the firing device. And much of the powerful
language cannot be quoted in a family newspaper. But let Mr. O'Brien explain why
he could not spare squeamish sensibilities: ''If you don't care for obscenity,
you don't care for the truth; if you don't care for the truth, watch how you
vote. Send guys to war, they come home talking dirty.''

In the title story, Mr. O'Brien juxtaposes the mundane and the deadly items that
soldiers carry into battle. Can openers, pocketknives, wristwatches, mosquito
repellent, chewing gum, candy, cigarettes, salt tablets, packets of Kool-Aid,
matches, sewing kits, C rations are ''humped'' by the G.I.'s along with M-16
assault rifles, M-60 machine guns, M-79 grenade launchers. But the story is
really about the other things the soldiers ''carry'': ''grief, terror, love,
longing . . . shameful memories'' and, what unifies all the stories, ''the
common secret of cowardice.'' These young men, Mr. O'Brien tells us, ''carried
the soldier's greatest fear, which was the fear of blushing. Men killed, and
died, because they were embarrassed not to.''

Embarrassment, the author reveals in ''On the Rainy River,'' is why he, or
rather the fictional version of himself, went to Vietnam. He almost went to
Canada instead. What stopped him, ironically, was fear. ''All those eyes on
me,'' he writes, ''and I couldn't risk the embarrassment. . . . I couldn't
endure the mockery, or the disgrace, or the patriotic ridicule. . . . I was a
coward. I went to the war.''

So just what is courage? What is cowardice? Mr. O'Brien spends much of the book
carefully dissecting every nuance of the two qualities. In several stories, he
writes movingly of the death of Kiowa, the best-loved member of the platoon. In
''Speaking of Courage,'' Mr. O'Brien tells us about Norman Bowker, the platoon
member who blames his own failure of nerve for Kiowa's death. Bowker ''had been
braver than he ever thought possible, but . . . he had not been so brave as he
wanted to be.'' In the following story, ''Notes'' (literally notes on the
writing of ''Speaking of Courage''), Mr. O'Brien's fictional alter ego informs
the reader that Bowker committed suicide after coming home from the war. This
author also admits that he made up the part about the failure of nerve that
haunted Bowker. But it's all made up, of course. And in ''The Man I Killed,''
Mr. O'Brien imagines the life of an enemy soldier at whom the character Tim
O'Brien tossed a grenade, only to confess later that it wasn't ''Tim O'Brien''
who killed the Vietnamese.

Are these simply tricks in the service of making good stories? Hardly. Mr.
O'Brien strives to get beyond literal descriptions of what these men went
through and what they felt. He makes sense of the unreality of the war - makes
sense of why he has distorted that unreality even further in his fiction - by
turning back to explore the workings of the imagination, by probing his memory
of the terror and fearlessly confronting the way he has dealt with it as both
soldier and fiction writer. In doing all this, he not only crystallizes the
Vietnam experience for us, he exposes the nature of all war stories.

The character Tim O'Brien's daughter asks him why he continues to be obsessed by
the Vietnam War and with writing about it. ''By telling stories,'' he says,
''you objectify your own experience. You separate it from yourself. You pin down
certain truths.'' In ''Good Form,'' he writes: ''I can look at things I never
looked at. I can attach faces to grief and love and pity and God. I can be
brave. I can make myself feel again.'' You come away from this book
understanding why there have been so many novels about the Vietnam War, why so
many of Mr. O'Brien's fellow soldiers have turned to narrative - real and
imagined - to purge their memories, to appease the ghosts.

Is it fair to readers for Mr. O'Brien to have blurred his own identity as
storyteller-soldier in these stories? ''A true war story is never moral,'' he
writes in ''How to Tell a True War Story.'' ''It does not instruct, nor
encourage virtue, nor suggest models of proper human behavior, nor restrain men
from doing the things men have always done. If a story seems moral, do not
believe it. If at the end of a war story you feel uplifted, or if you feel that
some small bit of rectitude has been salvaged from the larger waste, then you
have been made the victim of a very old and terrible lie. There is no rectitude
whatsoever. There is no virtue. As a first rule of thumb, therefore, you can
tell a true war story by its absolute and uncompromising allegiance to obscenity
and evil.'' Mr. O'Brien cuts to the heart of writing about war. And by
subjecting his memory and imagination to such harsh scrutiny, he seems to have
reached a reconciliation, to have made his peace - or to have made up his peace.


FLASHES FROM THE FOLIAGE

Almost all the dramatic furnishings of ''The Things They Carried'' - characters,
scenery, incidents - are embedded in the Vietnam War. But the book is not about
Vietnam and not about war, Tim O'Brien said in a telephone interview from his
home in Boxford, Mass. There are almost no Vietnamese in the book, none with
names anyway, a reflection of ignorance among the soldiers, the 43-year-old
writer said. Mr. O'Brien draws on his year in Vietnam, but the character named
Tim O'Brien is ''just a 21-year-old kid at war. I did not know the culture or
the language. I was afraid of dealing with stereotypes. I did try once, with the
Tim character, to imagine the life of the man I killed, and that was the nearest
I could come.''

Nor is there much war in ''The Things They Carried,'' and that too was typical.
''It was like trying to pin the tail on the Asian donkey,'' Mr. O'Brien said,
''but there was no tail and no donkey. In a year I only saw the living enemy
once. All I saw were flashes from the foliage and the results, the bodies. In
books or films it is desirable to have a climactic battle scene, but the world
does not operate in those gross dramatic terms. In Vietnam there was a general
aimlessness, not just in the physical sense, but beyond that in the moral and
ethical sense.''

So what's the book about? ''It is a writer's book on the effects of time on the
imagination. It is definitely an antiwar book; I hated the war from the
beginning. [The book] is meant to be about man's yearning for peace. At least I
hope it is taken that way.''

BARTH HEALEY

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 30, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

On Ho Chi Minh Trail, New Villages and Old Bombs

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1506 words

DATELINE: TCHEPONE, Laos


This paltry cluster of small houses on stilts, a shabby clinic, a modest
Government office and a new covered market was once the strategic center of the
Ho Chi Minh trail - or so American and South Vietnamese military briefers used
to recite during the war that ended in 1975.

Tchepone was said to be the distribution hub for the vast network of mountain
and jungle trails by which North Vietnam tried to hide the fact that it was
making war in South Vietnam. Violating the neutrality of Laos and Cambodia,
North Vietnam channeled a stream of war materiel across its border into Laos,
and from this village to anti-Government fighters South Vietnam, Cambodia and
Laos.

In turn, the United States, also violating Laotian neutrality, rained on
Tchepone, at the foothills of the Annamite range about 30 miles west of the
border of the northernmost region of South Vietnam, more bombs than it did on
any major German industrial city in World War II. Over all, more than two
million tons, more than the total the United States dropped on Germany, were
dropped on Laos, on whose territory most of the Ho Chin Minh trail ran.

Tchepone became to many American and South Vietnamese military leaders what Moby
Dick was to Captain Ahab - the object of an obsessive, destructive quest.

New Villages Built

Today, new villages have been built by the mountain tribesmen ofthe region of
the legendary trail, and the old French colonial dirt-and-gravel highway that
runs eastward from the Mekong River town of Savannakhet to the Vietnamese
coastal road has been modernized and paved with asphalt by the Soviet Union and
Vietnam.

Bomb craters along the roadside have largely silted over and are covered by the
rich growth of the tropical flatlands. Only faint traces of war remain visible
from the rapidly deteriorating new road. Most noticeable is the progressive
vanishing of trees, a result of the bombing, as one nears Tchepone from the
Mekong, about 100 miles west, until between Tchepone and the Vietnamese border
almost none of the sparse regrowth stands much taller than a man.

But leaving the road southward and uphill, on a branch of the trail that Laos
has slightly widened and grandiosely renamed National Route 28, one enters a
landscape that appears scarred beyond nature's capacity to heal for many decades
to come. B-52 ''carpet'' bombing to destroy not only what moved along the trail
but also the paths themselves and the vegetation that veiled aerial visibility,
has left a checkerboard pattern of huge craters, which even 17 years after the
last bombs fell seem to gape accusingly at the sky.

Ban Saloy is a new village of 176 souls, mainly children, whose houses hover on
the brinks of craters. Perfectly intact, the village looks - and probably always
will look - as if stricken by a plague of pox.

'No Land Without Craters'

''We have to put the villagers near sources of water,'' explained Khamhoung
Sipaseuth, a senior planner and organizer of new settlements in a program to
diminish the semi-nomadic tribes' destructive slash-and-burn agriculture, which
progressively denudes the mountainsides, and settle them at lower altitudes.
''And anyway,'' he added, ''there is no land in this region without craters.

Nhim Bounlao, a 45-year-old village headman of the Mangkong tribe, did not
complain about the desolate site. He was intimidated, perhaps, by the presence
of two officials of the Government that persuaded the villagers to move. They do
not mind living at a lower altitude, he said, but miss their accustomed fruit
trees.

Around him, swarms of young children were playing, ducking in and out of craters
and avoiding the one visible, half-buried unexploded bomb. Most were poorly
clothed, many not at all. Pigs grunted from below the stilted houses. Tobacco
and rattan were drying on the ground, against the sides of craters, but not in
commercial quantity. The village, Mr. Nhim Bounlao said, has only one cash crop,
the same that they gathered at the old site until they moved last year.

The product, he said, is scrap metal, largely bomb fragments, but also parts of
American planes and South Vietnamese helicopters and vehicles. The tribesmen
sell the scrap to merchants who come periodically from Savannakhet and resell
their gleanings across the Mekong to Thailand.

Cluster Bombs Still Kill

Mr. Nhim Bounlao proudly showed the village's monument to its source of
earnings. Piled near the roadside were some of the remains of an American
fighter-bomber, ferociously guarded by a female dog that had sought shelter
under the scrap for her new litter. Their covering was a flattened, olive-drab
cannister marked ''Dispenser and Bomb, Aircraft, CBU.'' The initials stand for
the ''cluster bombs,'' which to this day, Prime Minister Kaysone Phomvihane said
in an interview, take a toll of victims. On impact, the bombs spread many small
land mines, which explode when tread upon.

Dr. Sipsalao Phasaisi of Tchepone District Clinic, a diffident 34-year-old man
who learned all his medicine through interpreters from Soviet and French
teachers in Vientiane, the capital, said the latest mine deaths occurred last
year, when a farmer struck a missile with his shovel. He would not have died, he
said, except that it took two days to bring him here because of the shortage of
roads and transport.

The clinic's pharmacist, Khampa Saisourinthone, showed two cartons of medical
supplies that were presented recently by an American military team excavating
two crash sites nearby in the continuing search for servicemen missing in
action. Because the staff speaks only Lao, they could only hope that they could
make appropriate use of the medicines. The pharmacy contained few other
supplies.

In sad contrast to America's continuing search for its war dead was the amulet
around the neck of a small boy in Ban Saloy, the only thing he wore. On the
string were suspended the dog tags of three South Vietnamese soldiers killed in
Operation Lam Son II, the only major ground campaign fought in this area, and
for whom no Government is searching.

Early in 1971, Tchepone - or the bombed-out ground on which the village had
stood - was the main objective of a calamitous South Vietnamese offensive to cut
the Ho Chi Minh trail. The operation was intended to prove the success of
President Nixon's policy of ''Vietnamization'' of the war before American troops
withdrew.

Morale Was Destroyed

Instead, this region became a graveyard of South Vietnamese soldiers, who did
not get within range of Tchepone. They left behind a great wreckage of their
American-supplied arsenal, and the army's morale never recovered.

For two more years afterward, B-52's based in Guam and lighter bombers from
South Vienamese and Thai bases stepped up the tonnage of bombs, rockets, napalm
and white phosperous dropped ''to interdict the Ho Chi Minh trail.'' Then the
war ended for the United States.

Because most of the trail was on Laotian soil, this region was a major
battleground of a shadowy war between the United States Air Force and the North
Vietnamese Army. ''What happens there escapes our knowledge,'' was the ritual
phrase by which the Prime Minister, the late Prince Souvanna Phouma, tried to
preserve the image of the Laotian neutrality The original village of Ban Saloy,
often moved, was everywhere bombed day and night, even when the villagers fled
deep into the wooded mountains, Mr. Nhim Bounlao said. Twenty-seven of them were
killed, he recounted.

The headman said the mountains along the trail were always full of tribesmen
looking for sanctuary. This confirmed, many years later, accounts by American
pilots who flew bombing missions over the trail. They said in interviews that
many small fires they saw dotting the mountains they bombed made them doubt
official assertions that their mission was to attack unhabitated areas.

Fear of Both Armies

Mr. Nhim Bounlao said the villagers observed the Vietnamese soldiers tramp down
the trail but stayed at a distance for fear of becoming American targets.
Another fear, not mentioned by Mr. Nhim Bounlao, was of being pressed into
onerous and dangerous porterage service by the foreign soldiers. ''We didn't
help them,'' he said, but many of them joined the Pathet Lao, this country's
Communist army.

Beyond Tchepone, the roadsides become marketplaces where Vietnamese traders come
to buy Thai consumer goods from Laotian middlemen. In the no man's land between
the border village of Lao Bao, obliterated by American bombing, and Vietnam, on
the far bank of the Tchepone River, the flow broadens into a stream.

Historical memories do not seem to burden either Laotian guards or Vietnamese
traders. Learning that a visitor was American, not Soviet, seemed to give
pleasure to both.

Standing at a key bridge of the Ho Chi Minh trail, the constant target of the
United States Air Force, a young Vietnamese posed proudly for a photo wearing a
Thai-made jacket with the chevrons of the American Army and a badge that said,
''U.S. Army.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The scars of 2 million tons of bombs have been covered over in
the bigger towns along the Ho Chi Minh trail, but in villages like San Baloy,
Laos, houses sit alongside the craters left by B-52 carpet-bombing. (NYT/Henry
Kamm); map of Laos showing location of Tchepone (NYT)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 31, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Officials Tour Vietnam War Memorial

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: For the first time, a group of Vietnamese officials toured the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial yesterday in Washington. The group is in the United
States to discuss the needs of children in Vietnam. Among the members of the
delegation were Vu Khac Nhu, center with umbrella, of the Foreign Affairs
Ministry in Hanoi and behind him, Nguyen Van Chi, the Director of Social Welfare
in Ho Chi Minh City. (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Allows More Prisoners to Leave for U.S.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 271 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 6


More former inmates of re-education camps and their relatives arrived here today
from Vietnam en route to new lives in the United States.

It was the second day of the first major resettlement of people who were
imprisoned because they served the United States-backed South Vietnamese
Government, which Communist forces toppled in April 1975.

A total of 151 former inmates and their families arrived in Bangkok today on
charter flights from Ho Chi Minh City, said Komol Srinakul of the International
Organization for Migration. The agency handles medical processing and
transportation of the refugees. On Friday 156 arrived. To Join Relatives in U.S.
The Vietnamese will join relatives in the United States after a few days at a
Thai immigration center.

A State Department spokesman, Richard Boucher, said on Friday that the Bush
Administration hoped that at least 7,000 former detainees and their relatives
would be resettled by Sept. 30.

Those who arrived in Bangkok on Friday expressed joy at finally leaving Vietnam
after many years of internment and waiting. Some described conditions in the
Vietnamese camps as bad, and one claimed to have seen guards shoot 25 prisoners
who had tried to flee.

Hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese were subjected for years to a spartan
regimen of manual labor and political study after the fall of the South
Vietnamese Government.

'The Last Big Wound'

The agreement on resettling former inmates was reached between Hanoi and
Washington in July. The American negotiator, Robert L. Funseth, said at the time
it would help heal ''the last big wound remaining from the war.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Drillmasters' Seminar: The Art of War

BYLINE: By MICAHEL NORMAN; Michael Norman is the author of ''These Good Men:
Friendship Forged From War,'' published last month by Crown.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2153 words


The purveyors of blood and guts are working again - these days in the service of
art.

''I had technical advisers on the set all the time,'' says Brian DePalma,
director of ''Casualties of War,'' the dark story of rape and murder set in
Vietnam. ''I wanted the actors to learn how to use their weapons, know how to
march around in the bush correctly and to experience the heat of the jungle -
you know, all the stuff you have to know when you're over there.''

In Hollywood's old days, technical advisers were usually retired military
officers recommended by the Department of Defense, some of whom were tumescent
hacks. Butthe business of portraying war has changed.

Most advisers still are veterans, but now they come equipped with research
files, technical manuals, and a boot-camplike training program designed to turn
actors into credible warriors.

After war games in the jungles of Thailand, the smooth-faced and normally
ingenuous Michael J. Fox suddenly became a Sergeant Rock.

''For two weeks the advisers tried to make our lives miserable,'' says Mr. Fox.
''They trained us so we'd have something approximating the thousand-yard stare.
It got you used to the vernacular and the physical realities of being in a very
strange situation.''

Fox and company ''humped'' the hills, patroled the rivers, fieldstripped their
weapons and stood formations. ''It wasn't the real thing, but when you're bitten
on the privates by a red ant, you never forget the feeling,'' he says. ''Sean
Penn was feeling his way through some bush and he reached out and thought he was
grabbing a vine and got a bamboo viper instead. In training, there are no stars
in the bush; you're just like soldiers. It teaches you to be on your own. Your
agent's not there; no one to tell you how important you are. It's 110 degrees
and everybody's got the runs.''

Among the military experts who worked with Mr. DePalma and Mr. Fox was the dean
of today's movie technical advisers, Dale Adam Dye 2d, a 44-year-old former
Marine Corps captain and Bronze Star winner in Vietnam. Mr. Dye made his
reputation on the 1986 film ''Platoon,'' which critics now call the
''breakthrough'' Vietnam movie - and Oliver Stone, who wrote and directed the
film, credits him with helping give the picture its authentic, gritty texture.
Mr. Stone also turned to Mr. Dye when he made ''Born on the Fourth of July.''

The success of ''Platoon'' brought Mr. Dye more offers than he could handle
alone, so he formed his own company, Warriors Inc., and drafted a half-dozen
other veterans, a few of them his comrades from Vietnam, to work with him. Along
the way he wrote two books and several screenplays. And these days, the lean,
handsome ex-officer is often drafted onto the screen. In ''Casualties of War,''
he plays Mr. Fox's company commander, Captain Hill. ''He was mind-boggling,''
Mr. DePalma says. ''You could feel and experience his passion in every word of
what he had to say to Erickson [Mr. Fox's character]. It just burns the screen
with such a conviction and belief.''

But it is his role as an adviser, working with young actors like Mr. Fox, that
Mr. Dye seems most to enjoy. In the movies waris fun.

''Hell, it's so much fun, we'd almost do it for nothing,'' he says. ''We get to
go back and do it our way, do it right: we get to win. It is the ultimate
little-boy thing. All the dreams and schemes and fancies that we were never in a
position to pull off when it was for real, we get to do on movie sets. Any
weapon you want, no problem, help yourself. People would say, 'You're one sick
puppy.' But those are our toys, and the movies give all of us the opportunity to
play with them.''

Warriors Inc. is really a circle of insurgents who have infiltrated the sets and
studios in the land of the orange sun to spread a certain doctrine and message.

''No matter what the war, I believe that warriors are noble human beings, among
the most self-sacrificing and benevolent people on earth,'' says Mr. Dye. ''Now,
it's unfortunate they are necessary and it's terrible what they have to endure.
So I don't celebrate war, but what I try to do is get in there on a set and
force into the equation the nobility of the warrior so there is the essence of
him doing what he thinks is true and good. And that nobility is not locked up
with the politics of the thing, but with a certain spirit of sacrifice, which is
the epitome of the warrior's path. It's the business of not confusing the
warriors with a bad war.''

Mr. Dye is on his way by car from his home in Northridge in the San Fernando
Valley to downtown Hollywood and an appointment with a doctor who is conducting
checkups on the cast of a film in which Mr. Dye is about to take a modest part.

As he pauses at the light at Highland Avenue and Hollywood Boulevard, he looks
west down the ''Walk of Fame'' at the bronze and coral terrazzo memorial stars
embedded in that fabled sidewalk. ''Do you think I'll ever have one of those?''
he asks his passenger. ''Do you want one?''

''I don't know,'' he says, his head still turned out the window, his eyes fixed
on the sidewalk. ''Maybe mine should be the logo of a camera with the legend, 'A
Vet Who Made It.' ''

There is a bit of the theatrical in Mr. Dye. He is, by his own reckoning, much
like his father, ''a hopeless romantic,'' a submariner in World War II who
survived the sinking of his boat off Vella Lavella in the Solomons. ''The war
was a high for my dad. He came home to a humdrum, mundane existence. He used to
sit around with some of his war buddies reliving those glory days. I would be on
his knee. Later, I remember thinking: How do you get into that fraternity of
warriors?''

In 1957, when Mr. Dye was 12, his father shot himself. He refuses to discuss the
suicide, other than to say, ''I grew up fatherless and rebellious.'' At 14,
''hearing those distant trumpets and the rattle of musketry,'' he begged his
mother to send him to military school. At graduation, he tried for an
appointment to one of the service academies. Rejected, he drifted, working as a
truck mechanic and field hand. Then, just after New Year's Day 1964, he decided
to join the United States Marine Corps. ''I wanted,'' he said, ''to be larger
than life.''

In recent years, war movies have made him bristle; everything about them was
wrong - the costumes, equipment, action. What unsettled him most was the way the
actors were portraying military people. - ''They were fostering a myth.'' The
men he had fought beside were not the hapless drunks, crazed addicts and
blood-thirsty executioners who often marched across America's movie screens.
Sure, he'd met his share of thugs in the service, but the Marines he remembered
best had been willing to spend their lives for their comrades. And the struggle
in which they'd taken part - murderous, mismanaged butchery, to reapply
Hemingway's words - was much more complex than the two-dimensional shoot-'em-ups
and operatic melodramas often served up by Hollywood.

Mr. Dye began to make the rounds, trying to discover how technical advisers were
selected. Some, it turned out, had no combat experience at all. Others were
''shady characters'' and ''guys who had done six months in the California
National Guard.''

''A light went on,'' he said. ''I thought why not create a professional,
organized consultancy.'' He knew his business well, everything from knife
fighting to the deployment of Russian tanks. And he had a sense of the
theatrical; what was a uniform, he asked himself, if not a costume, a parade if
not a performance. At 6 feet 1 inch and 168 pounds, with gray hair, steel-blue
eyes and a deep, even tan, he looked as if he'd leaped off a recruiting poster.
And he had as much ambition and brass as any wide-eyed recruit who ever knocked
on a studio door. ''So I thought, well, hell, why not?''

Late in 1985 he spotted a notice in the trade papers: A director named Oliver
Stone had just secured financing to make a movie about Vietnam. ''I wanted to
get to Stone, but I didn't want to go through an agent. I had to figure
something out. I was a nobody. So I spread a lot of money around town, taking
people out to lunch. I was trying to do a flanking movement to get to Oliver.
Finally I found someone who knew him and had his home number: 'Hello Oliver, I'm
Dale Dye, a retired Marine, Vietnam vet. If you're going to do the definitive
Vietnam movie, you need me.' ''

Mr. Stone was interested. ''He came to my cutting room,'' the director says.
''He seemed to be the real thing. He shared the same deep passion for detail I
had. We both wanted to reflect the actuality of combat.''

''Well, after I sold Stone my bill of goods,'' Mr. Dye says, ''I thought, how am
I going to do this, get the actors ready to play combat infantrymen, make them
believable. I thought, 'Stick to what you know.' So I came up with a two-week
Marine Corps training schedule and put the actors through it.''

06:30, jungle orientation hike, introduction to close-order drill. . . . 07:30,
intro to rappeling, ropes, gloves, snap links required at site. . . . 08:30, the
jungle environment, classes in the field. . . . 12:00, ambush and
counter-ambush, blank ammo required. . . . intro to medic activities, recovering
WIAs/KIAs. . . . 21:00, taps, deploy night activities, 1st squad on perimeter
security.

Thus it was that Tom Berenger, Willem Dafoe and the other actors of ''Platoon''
spent two weeks isolated with Mr. Dye in the Philippine bush climbing hills,
standing formations, running night patrols and ambushes. He made them tired and
dirty and thirsty. It was boot camp and infantry training and guerrilla warfare
school rolled into 14 torrid days - and they loved it.

''The best part of the film was the training period before shooting,'' says Mr.
Berenger. ''It was like being part of a team, the male camaraderie thing. I
think Dale gave us a sense of everything except death and the absolute fear
aspect of it all. And, of course, there was only one way to get that. But we
learned the boredom, the tiredness, the lack of sleep, the lack of food. We were
all pretty cranky and strung out when we were finished with the training cycle.
But we were so tight as a group that when we got to the set for the first shoot,
it took us days to warm up to the crew because they were like civilians; we
didn't really feel they were part of the team.''

Since then, the cast of ''Platoon,'' in the way of aging veterans, has had
several ''war reunions,'' including one at Mr. Berenger's wedding, which Mr. Dye
attended. And Warriors Inc. has become well known for its method of ''performer
training,'' its way of turning Southern California's pampered golden boys into
what often on screen passes for first-class fighting men.

Mr. Dye's partner in Warriors Inc. is Russ Thurman, a rail of a man, 5 feet 11
inches tall, 150 pounds, with an angular face framed by prominent ears. He may
not have Mr. Dye's style or grace, but he has more fire than his friend.

Not long ago in the dry hills of Valencia, north of Los Angeles, Mr. Thurman was
assigned to prepare a repertory company of six actors to assume roles as
soldiers in Patrick Duncan's critically acclaimed war film ''84 Charlie Mopic.''

Mr. Thurman arrived around 5:30 A.M., dressed in green fatigues and jungle
boots. His sleeves were rolled neatly to the elbows; his uniform was crisp; his
hat sat squarely on his head. He greeted the actors quietly. He seemed pleasant
enough, businesslike. ''We're going on a little hike,'' he said.

About a quarter of a mile from camp, when he was sure he was well out of earshot
of the director and crew and had the actors to himself, he halted the column,
asked them to face him, and delivered what has become his legendary salutatory.

''I'm the gunny [gunnery sergeant] and I spent 21 years in the Marine Corps. I
don't particularly care for actors, especially those like you who think that
they have the right to portray Marines, sailors or soldiers. You think that just
because you look good, smell good and talk good to impress a director that you
can come out here and play one of my brothers in combat? No way. For one thing,
you're going to represent 58,000 guys on The Wall in Washington D.C. Now that we
got some reference points, gentlemen, we're going to go on a little wimp walk,
maybe 10 miles.'' The thespians were dumbstruck.  The effect Mr. Thurman The
list of loyal initiates grows with every film.''In Thailand, we were bitching
and whining about this and that and the other thing,'' says Mr. Fox. ''One guy
was sick, one was grumping, everybody was missing their home, girlfriends, wives
and kids. But we were just making a movie; nobody was getting killed or shot at.
Even at our small level of discomfort, with a minimum risk of injury, it was not
fun. So it gave us a real respect for these poor kids who went to fight and what
they risked, what was lost. It really hit home.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dale Dye, left, a former Marine captain, helped give a gritty
look to two war movies directed by Oliver Stone, right.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Have Bicycle, Will Charm the Vietnamese

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 680 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


Virginia Gift, who had become fascinated by Vietnam, decided she was going to do
her bit for better relations and teach English in Hanoi, and no one was going to
stop her.

After struggling for nearly a year with Vietnamese skepticism, she became the
first unaffiliated American since the war to be allowed to live and work in
Vietnam.

For Ms. Gift, who is about to end her Vietnamese adventure after 17 months to
return to her job as a teacher at the American School in Paris, the experience
has been moving and instructive.

''Ordinary Vietnamese were overwhelmingly excited to have me here,'' she said.
''They'd touch my arms and smiles would break out. As an American, coming here
after the war, I was embarrassed. It's so hard, given what we've done, to
understand. But the Vietnamese admire America - the people, the pragmatism, the
friendliness, especially in contrast with the Russians. They despise the
Russians.''

At first she was embraced by the Government as a symbol of American-Vietnamese
reconciliation. The Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, called her ''my English
teacher on a bicycle'' and told her to remain as long as she liked. But with the
passage of time and her active curiosity, the warmth gave way to skepticism and
wariness.

After the first year, her original visa was not renewed, but she secured another
by taking a part-time job with a United Nations agency.

She said one Vietnamese official told her: ''There are some people who are not
able to accept that you are here only to help. It has been difficult for some to
accept you at face value.''

Still, she said, the authorities never stopped her from going anywhere, even
without a police permit, or from seeing anyone. ''I lived where I wanted and
went where I wanted, and when I marched into offices, people would see me and
act as though I was the visiting Queen of England,'' Ms. Gift said.

She found it difficult to maintain relationships, given Vietnamese concerns
about seeming too close to a Westerner or having a foreigner in their homes, a
possibility only legalized last year.

''There were a lot of surreptitious friendships,'' she said, adding that as she
is leaving a lot of Vietnamese who had kept some distance are approaching her
for long conversations.

As a social studies teacher at the American School in Paris in the 1960's, Ms.
Gift said, involvement in Vietnam seemed a remote issue. But after the war was
over, when the school asked her to teach a course on it, ''I became rather
obsessed and read everything.'' She started working on a textbook that turned
into an analysis of the war, and the course, begun in 1979, became the most
popular one at the school.

In 1987, she decided to visit Vietnam as a tourist. She found that while she did
not qualify for specialist aid work here for international organizations, ''they
did need English teachers, so I volunteered for a year.''

Granted Room and Board

The aid workers told her the Government would not allow nondiplomatic Westerners
to live here, but she persisted. In the spring of 1988, the Government agreed
and said it would pay her room and board for teaching English to Foreign
Ministry officials.

The Government offer never came through, she said. Vietnam finally gave her a
visa, but no remuneration. She came anyway in September 1988 and lived on
savings until she got grants from the Quakers and the Christopher Reynolds
Foundation in New York.

She became involved in many activities, not only teaching English to Foreign
Ministry staff members and to Vietnamese tourism guides, but also to English
teachers at a high school and to doctors at the Hospital for Women and Children.

She also helped some Vietnamese set up the first private charity here, called
Hearts of Gold, to work with the poor, the handicapped and the elderly. The
charity is now starting an auto-mechanics course to help Vietnamese get the
second jobs they desperately need.

''The Vietnamese treat me like a symbol of friendship, of course,'' Ms. Gift
said. ''But what I've done is just a drop in the wretched bucket.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Aid Hanoi on Boat People, U.N. Official Urges

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 380 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, March 13


Faced with continuing United States opposition to the forced repatriation of
boat people from Hong Kong to Vietnam, a leading United Nations official
appealed today for a sharp increase in international aid to Vietnam. The aim of
the aid would be to stop the boat people from fleeing Vietnam in the first
place.

But the official, Thorvald Stoltenberg, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, told a meeting of representatives from about 25 countries here today
that he expected the impasse on the issue of the boat people to continue.

Last January, an international meeting here came close to an agreement to start
forcibly repatriating boat people in Southeast Asia determined to be economic
migrants, next July. But the agreement fell through when the United States said
it would not accept any forced returns until the beginning of next year.

The meeting asked the High Commissioner to mediate, but today her reported that
the United States had not shown any willingness to compromise on the length of
the moratorium before deportations could begin.

In response, Mr. Stoltenberg ''made a plea for more economic assistance for
Vietnam to deal with those pockets of poverty where many boat people come from''
said a spokesman of the agency, Raymond Hall.

Most Are Fleeing Poverty

The agency is so eager to attack the root causes contributing to the outflow
that it is prepared to play the unusual role of ''catalyst and coordinator'' of
aid to Vietnam, Mr. Hall said.

Mr. Stoltenberg, a former Norwegian Foreign Minister who took over the United
Nations job in January, told the meeting that 50 percent of the boat people come
from four impoverished coastal districts of Quang Ninh province in the north,
near Haiphong.

Since the Communist victory there in 1975, the United States has been at the
forefront of efforts to stop foreign aid from reaching that country.

A Western diplomat at today's meeting said ''it's definitely true.''

''If you want to lure people back you have to offer them something,'' the
diplomat said.

But donor countries have so far pledged only $18 million of the $108 million
that the High Commissioner's office has appealed for this year to care for the
boat people and help voluntary returnees readapt to Vietnamese life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

STILL COMING HOME FROM VIETNAM

BYLINE: By JOE MCGINNISS; Joe McGinniss, the author of ''Blind Faith,'' is
currently at work on a book about Edward M. Kennedy.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1290 words



THESE GOOD MEN
Friendships Forged From War.
By Michael Norman.
Illustrated. 310 pp. New York:
Crown Publishers. $19.95.

On a hot day in the late spring of 1967, Michael Norman, an only child with two
stepfathers and too many years spent at boarding schools, was riding a bus down
Broad Street in Philadelphia. He was doing poorly in college and bearing a heavy
measure of guilt about a romantic involvement turned sour. Two marines boarded
the bus: ''ramrods in tan and green, clear-eyed and clean shaven.'' When they
got off, Mr. Norman twisted in his seat, gazing wistfully at the imposing
figures until they disappeared from view. A week later, in the basement of a
post office in Bloomfield, N.J., he enlisted in the Marine Corps. Out of such
angst and rashness were many lives lost in the late 1960's in Vietnam.

Mr. Norman's impulse had a happier resolution - though it was a long and winding
road that led there. After 20 years of emotional turmoil, he has written a book
that just may be the finest, most eloquent statement yet made about the brave
and bewildered men who survived Vietnam, and about what has happened to them in
the two decades since they came home.

Mr. Norman was a radio operator assigned to a Marine company that during one
bloody weekend in April 1968 saw half of its 110 men killed or badly wounded in
a futile battle for a meaningless bridge along a road that went nowhere. On the
day before the battle, Mr. Norman was pulled into the command group to work for
his platoon commander. The replacement, whom Mr. Norman recommended, entered the
line of march two hours before the battle began. He was among the first to die,
calling by radio as he did: ''NO! . . . NO! . . . NO! . . . Norman . . . help me
. . . I'm hit. . . .''

''Sometimes,'' Mr. Norman writes in a brilliant prologue to ''These Good Men,''
''I still hear his call. It does not come in a dream - I do not dream anymore.
The guns are silent, the fields covered in green. Instead, it must be memory I
hear, an old cry for help, echoing unanswered across all these years. . . . He
may have died for his country or for his god or for nothing at all. For a long
time, I thought he died for me.''

Mr. Norman's torment lasted even after the war stopped; even after he'd begun a
normal life as husband, father, journalist (for a time he wrote about suburban
life for The New York Times). ''I was restless,'' he says, ''filled with an
inexplicable choler. Unsettled and irritable, I behaved badly. I sought
solitude, then slandered friends for keeping away. At work I agitated for a
change of assignment, then did nothing but complain when it came through. I
barked at a son who revered me and bickered with my best ally, my wife. . . .
She wanted another child; I wanted to leave.''

And so it was in large part for personal rather than journalistic reasons that
in 1984 Mr. Norman set out in search of those who had fought beside him on
Bridge 28 and had survived. His quest lasted a year and a half, took him from
London to Seattle and led eventually to a reunion at his New Jersey home with 11
of the men with whom he'd served. It is their dignity and courage, their utter
absence of bitterness or self-pity, their acceptance of what should be so
unacceptable that provide the heart of this work.

For each of them, as for Mr. Norman, as for almost any man who's ever been in
heavy combat, the war was the most traumatic - and dramatic - episode of their
otherwise largely unremarkable lives. It changed them all in ways that even Mr.
Norman, notwithstanding the precision of his language and the acuteness of his
perceptions, can scarcely comprehend or express.

Still, despite 20 years of scorn and indifference from a nation that felt, as
even some of these marines did, that the Vietnam adventure was pointless at best
and quite likely immoral, not one of them uses it as a crutch. ''Only the most
insensate of men,'' Mr. Norman states, ''emerge from such a violent sojourn
unmarked. But none of my comrades used their trouble to excuse the shortcomings
they brought to war or the failures they suffered after it. They asked for
nothing from the society they had served - demanded no debt, claimed no arrears,
wished for no reward.'' It is this acceptance, as much as their bravery under
fire in a war they didn't understand, that bestows upon Mr. Norman's comrades
their nobility.

Superficially, the passage of time would appear to have rendered the men of Golf
Company, Second Battalion, Ninth Marine Division, a statistically ordinary
sample. One is a stockbroker, another an insurance salesman; one a union shop
steward, another still a marine. One is now openly gay. One is recovering from a
nervous breakdown; another is a recovered alcoholic. But it is as if Norman
Mailer or Irwin Shaw or James Jones had done for the characters in his World War
II fiction what John Updike did with the characters from ''Rabbit, Run'':
revisited them a generation later.

Mr. Norman's book also possesses a deeper, more personal dimension. He grew up
not quite an orphan but an only child, whose thrice-married mother, pursuing a
career as a model, appeared to view him primarily as an impediment to her
freedom. In many ways, the Marine Corps, for all its mindless, macho brutality,
was the first family of which he'd ever felt a part, his partners in combat the
only brothers he'd ever known.

''I did not pick these men,'' he says. ''They were delivered by fate and the
U.S. Marine Corps. But I know them in a way I know no other men. I have never
since given anyone such trust. They were willing to guard something more
precious than my life. They would have carried my reputation, the memory of me.
It was part of the bargain we all made, the reason we were so willing to die for
one another.''

The trust these men placed in Mr. Norman through their openness and candor,
after so many years apart and so much distress, has been richly rewarded by the
grace with which he has told their stories, and his own. ''Those who survive
such a long and lethal assault,'' he writes, ''emerge with at least a small
piece of truth, some little lesson, a sliver of light.'' Michael Norman has
emerged with much more: a book that stands with the very best, fiction or fact,
ever written about the war in Vietnam.

A STRONG SENSE OF CLAN

The Corps was a family, its bloodline as old and honorable as the Republic
itself. Its ancestors were its heroes, and recruits were told that to wear the
uniform of Marines was to inherit this brave patrimony. . . . If a man did not
come into the Corps with a strong sense of clan, he almost always left with one.

To be sure, there were cowards and braggarts and criminals in the ranks, but
they were not suffered lightly, not, at any rate, during the summer of 1967,
when the training centers at Parris Island and San Diego ran full throttle to
service the war.

The emphasis was on survival. When the drill instructors had us alone, away from
the watchful eyes of officers, they cut through the myths. Under fire, they
said, men are not moved by the call of country or the rhetoric of a cause. They
fight to survive; they fight for their comrades. This, they said, was the real
lesson of Tripoli and Chapultepec and Iwo Jima's bloody slopes. And war proved
them right. . . .

Wounded or dead, comrades were never left behind. . . . Payne, Gonzales,
Belknap, Hefright, and half a dozen others were hit as they moved to pull just
one body off Bridge 28. And they marched out into that killing zone not because
they were ordered to do so; they went instead because each believed that if his
had been the body on that bridge, other Marines would have come for him.

From ''These Good Men.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Michael Norman in South Vietnam, 1968. (From ''These Good Men'')

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 16, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong and Britain Faulted on Boat People

BYLINE: By SHEILA RULE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1156 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Jan. 15


Amnesty International sharply criticized Hong Kong and Britain today for what it
said were policies that put Vietnamese boat people who deserved to be treated as
political refugees at risk of being returned to Vietnam to face persecution.

The rights organization also said in a report that it had evidence that prison
and police officers assaulted Vietnamese seeking asylum, including some of the
51 who were forcibly returned to Vietnam last month in an operation that was
strongly condemned abroad.

A spokesman for the Foreign Office said that the office was studying the Amnesty
report but that the Government ''remains committed to the policy of mandatory
repatriation.''

The report, prepared after a visit to Hong Kong by an Amnesty International
delegation last November and December, said the screening process that the Hong
Kong government used to distinguish genuine refugees fleeing persecution from
what it called economic migrants had ''critical shortcomings'' and could not
properly identify those who deserved refugee status.

No Legal Advice or Aid

The rights group said that asylum seekers received no individual legal advice or
assistance and that some immigration officers tried to thwart the boat people's
efforts to gain refugee status while others appeared to know little about
refugee law or the political and human rights situation in Vietnam.

The report cited the example of a young Vietnamese Protestant who was refused
refugee status despite the fact that he was facing a five-year prison sentence
in Vietnam because of his political views. The man had studied in
Czechoslovakia, where he had been briefly jailed because of his involvement in
the human rights movement and then deported back to Vietnam.

On arrival, he was arrested, mistreated and tried for ''crimes against the
state,'' the report said. He escaped to Hong Kong before his prison sentence
could be imposed and it was only through the emergency intervention of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees that he was granted asylum, the
organization said.

''If such a clear case can meet failure in the screening process,'' the report
said, ''very serious concern indeed must be expressed with respect to the more
typical refugee who will have a story which is less dramatic and less capable of
proof, but who nonetheless may be at risk if returned to the country from which
he or she has fled.''

Emptying Detention Centers

The report included a copy of a letter from the Hong Kong government in which
the authorities defended the screening policy and argued that the ultimate
safeguard for asylum seekers was the fact that the office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees had access to them and could declare a person a
refugee at any stage. The letter said the authorities determined that an
independent inquiry into recent accusations of ill treatment was ''not
justified.''

Amnesty International requested the inquiry. The human rights organization said
the United Nations' role could not compensate for defects in the current
screening process. The British colonial government of Hong Kong has said it
hopes that the repatriation program will empty the crowded detention centers
that now house the 44,000 boat people who have arrived since June 1988, when the
colony began its tough screening process, treating all arriving Vietnamese as
illegal immigrants.

Of the 57,000 Vietnamese in Hong Kong, only 13,000 are classified as refugees
and are awaiting resettlement. Britain and Hong Kong began the repatriations
despite objections from the United States and the condemnation of rights and
refugee groups.

Flight From Poverty

Relief workers have said that most of those who arrived in Hong Kong in the last
18 months were fishermen and farmers from the north fleeing the repression and
poverty of Vietnam. Nearly 1,000 Vietnamese have returned home under a voluntary
repatriation program begun last March.

Amnesty International was highly critical of what it said was a pattern of
assaults on asylum seekers and subsequent intimidation of victims and witnesses
in detention centers administered by the police. It cited testimony that showed
that many of the 51 boat people who were forcibly repatriated were ''brutally
treated'' earlier in the year when they were removed by force from a detention
center.

''The victims and witnesses told Amnesty International that a large contingent
of officers in riot gear had used partial strangulation, kicks and beatings to
force them out of their huts and Chi Ma Wan camp in a dawn raid on 31 October,''
the organization said. ''Some people said they had been rendered unconscious by
martial arts 'pressure-point control techniques.' ''

'Face the Risk'

Independent examinations of five of the victims showed injuries consistent with
the assertions, the report said.

Among its recommendations, Amnesty International called for a halt to forcible
repatriation, saying ''until the shortcomings in the screening process are
remedied, people at risk of becoming victims of human rights violations in
Vietnam face the risk of being sent back there against their will.''

It said that under international law, governments are responsible for ensuring
proper procedures to determine refugee status and protecting those seeking
asylum from ill treatment.

''It is these international responsibilities which both the Hong Kong and
British Governments have failed to meet,'' the organization said. ''The
practical and administrative problems do not change the obligations.''

Copies of the report can be obtained from Amnesty International, 322 Eighth
Avenue, New York City, 10001.

U.N. Talks Postponed

UNITED NATIONS, Jan. 15 (Special to The New York Times) - A United Nations
conference called for this week to discuss Britain's forced repatriation of
Vietnamese boat people from Hong Kong has been put off for a second time to
allow the Bush Administration time to reconsider its opposition to the action,
diplomats say.

The officials say the United States has asked that further repatriations be
delayed for up to a year. It has also called for fairer screening of the
Vietnamese now in Hong Kong camps to determine which are genuine refugees
entitled to asylum as well as for closer monitoring of those sent home.

But Britain, which forcibly repatriated a first group of 51 Vietnamese last
month, rejected the idea of a year's moratorium on involuntary repatriations as
too long. It has support from Asian countries like Thailand and Malaysia, which
are also host to large numbers of Vietnamese boat people.

The United States then asked for a short postponement of the meeting, organized
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which was to take place in
Geneva on Thursday and Friday, to allow all sides more time for negotiations and
reflection. The talks are now expected to be held in Geneva on Jan. 23 and 24.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Campus Life: U.C., Santa Barbara;
In Popular Class, Lessons Concern The Vietnam War

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 43, Column 3; Style Desk

LENGTH: 507 words

DATELINE: SANTA BARBARA, Calif.


The Vietnam War is the drawing card for the most popular course at the
University of California at Santa Barbara. Hundreds of students are vying for
the chance to learn about a conflict that was fought when they were babies.

''Religion and the Impact of the Vietnam War'' does not debate whether the war
should have been fought, but explores its effect on the American psyche, said
the teacher, Walter Capps, a professor of religious studies.

The class relies on ''the wisdom of ordinary people,'' Professor Capps said.
Each class is dedicated to testimonials from veterans, anti-war protesters,
Vietnamese survivors or families of veterans.

During a lecture last Tuesday a California State Senator, Gary K. Hart, Democrat
of Santa Barbara, told the capacity audience of 850 how he coped with changing
from an all-American boy to a protesting ''subversive against my own
Government.''

'Not Afraid of the Emotions'

A week earlier the class had ended with a local woman, Diane White, singing a
spiritual about forgiveness. ''That's unheard of in state education, but it
seems to fit here,'' Professor Capps said.

''We're not afraid of the emotions in learning,'' he added. ''This is not set up
as a therapy session, but if people cry, it's O.K.''

Sometimes the speakers or the students do cry. ''It's kind of an overwhelming
experience,'' said Lisa Frankenburg, a senior sociology major from Champaign,
Ill. ''I don't know how to describe it, unless you're sitting there. It's an
emotional release. You can just feel it.''

Ms. Frankenburg said she enrolled in the class because she knew ''nothing about
the Vietnam War,'' and because ''it's kind of like a pop icon at U.C.S.B.''

Moral and Ethical Choices

Laura Pitter, a senior English major from Laguna Beach, Calif., said, ''Every
time I walk out of there, I want to work harder to prevent a war from ever
happening again.''

Ms. Pitter said she had only one complaint about the course. ''It seems that in
some ways the cause -which is the Vietnam veterans' feelings as well as
America's - is being exploited,'' she said.

The course is offered through the religion department, Professor Capps said,
because the class deals with ''moral choices and ethical decisions.'' When he
began the course in 1979, he said, it was the first of its kind. Now, he said,
there are 300 to 400 similar classes across the nation.

Because the class is so popular, overcrowding prompted the fire marshal in
January to lock out students who were enrolled, but whose seats were filled by
people from the community. After the lockout, students were required to show
proof of registration to be admitted. The twice-weekly 75-minute lectures are
now taped and broadcast on a local cable station.

Professor Capps said the class is popular partly because ''it's part of the
nation's healing; it's part of how the healing takes place in an educational
context.''

''I am not trying to promote some ideological stance,'' he added. ''You don't
have to do it. The students get the point anyway.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gary K. Hart, a California State Senator, giving a lecture on
the Vietnam War to students at the University of California at Santa Barbara.

The course, the most popular at the school, has an enrollment of 850 students.
It is held twice weekly and is shown on local television. (The New York
Times/George Brich)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 13, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Michael Stewart Is Dead at 83; British Foreign Secretary in 60's

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section B; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 446 words


Michael Stewart, who as British Foreign Secretary in the late 1960's became
involved in efforts to end the Vietnam War, died on Saturday in London. He was
83 years old.

Baron Stewart of Fulham, as he became known after being made a life peer in
1979, lived in London and died in Charing Cross Hospital after a brief illness,
a spokesman for the hospital said.

A longtime Labor member of Parliament, he was Foreign Secretary under Prime
Minister Harold Wilson in 1965-66 and again from 1968 to 1970.

Late in 1965, Mr. Stewart went to Moscow on a widely heralded but fruitless
effort to ending the Vietnam War. A quiet man known for lucid argument, he spoke
to the Soviet people over the heads of their leaders on Soviet television,
urging ''arrangements whereby both North and South Vietnam could be left in
peace, assured they would not be attacked by each other or anyone else.''

Complex View of U.S. Role

Mr. Stewart pursued a controversial twofold policy on the war in Vietnam. He
supported the American involvement there, and was attacked by Labor Party
leftists who called the Wilson Government too favorably disposed toward the
United States.

But Mr. Stewart and the Government also withstood pressure, from Conservatives
in Britain and from Americans, to commit military units to support United States
troops in Vietnam.

Britain and the Soviet Union had a special standing on Vietnam matters, having
been co-chairmen of the Geneva Conference in 1954 that ended the French
Indochina war and set up the separate nations of North and South Vietnam.

Mr. Stewart's long career in public service also included stints as Education
Minister in 1964 and 1965 and Economics Minister in 1966 and 1967. He was a
Labor member of Parliament for 34 years representing the Fulham area of London.
He then became a life peer and moved to the House of Lords.

Oxford, the Army, Parliament

Robert Michael Maitland Stewart was born on Nov. 6, 1906 in London. He joined
the Labor Party as a teen-ager and studied at Oxford, where he received an
honors degree in philosophy, politics and economics.

After teaching school and rising to captain in the British Army Educational
Corps in World War II, he was elected to Parliament in 1945, and in the next 20
years came to be considered one of the best debaters on the Labor Party benches
in the House of Commons.

In 1941, Mr. Stewart married Mary Elizabeth Henderson Birkinshaw, who was long
active in the Fabian Society, a Socialist group, and as a hospital governor and
a magistrate. She was made a life peer in her own right, as Baroness Stewart of
Alvechurch, in 1974, and died in 1984.

The Stewarts had no children.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Michael Stewart (Camera Press, 1979)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Allows Hundreds to Go

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 71 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 5


Hundreds of Vietnamese who helped the Americans during the Vietnam War and who
were punished for it after the Communist victory are on their way to the United
States. Three jets brought the first 156 former re-education camp inmates and
their families today to Bangkok from Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, and 151
more are expected on Saturday. Nearly 2,000 Vietnamese are scheduled to leave
their homeland by March.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 19, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Soviets Said to Withdraw Fighters and Bombers From Vietnam Base

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 851 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 18


The Soviet Union has withdrawn all of its MIG-23 fighter planes and about half
of its TU-16 bombers from its base at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam, Pentagon
officials said today, in a move the officials said would reduce Soviet military
abilities in Southeast Asia.

But Pentagon officials added that there were no indications that the Soviet
Union planned to shut down the base, which is used to refuel Soviet ships on
their way to the Indian Ocean.

Cam Ranh Bay, which was built by the United States in the Vietnam War, is the
largest Soviet naval base outside of the Soviet Union. For years, the Pentagon
has described the base as a threat to the United States and Southeast Asian
nations.

Cam Ranh Bay ''extends the Soviet wartime reach over East Asia's sea lines of
communication in the South China Sea and poses a challenge as well to the U.S.
military presence in the Philippines,'' the Pentagon said in its 1988 Soviet
military power report.

Squadron of Fighters

The 1988 report said that the Soviet Union maintained a squadron of 14 MIG-23
fighters at the base to defend the installation from attack and to escort other
planes. It added that Moscow had 16 Badger bombers, 10 of which were capable of
carrying anti-ship cruise missiles.

While the Pentagon said in its 1988 report that Soviet planes and ships at Cam
Ranh Bay could be destroyed in a global war with ''relative ease,'' it said that
such an action would divert American forces from other missions.

But today a Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman, Vadim Perfilyev, said that the
Soviet Union had withdrawn MIG-23 fighters and TU-16 bombers from the base. Mr.
Perfilyev said 6 to 10 Soviet aircraft remained, but he gave no details. The
withdrawal of the planes was disclosed this week in a report by The
International Herald Tribune.

Pentagon officials familar with intelligence reports offered their elaborations
today on the withdrawal of the aircraft.

They said the only squadron of Soviet MIG-23 fighters at Cam Ranh Bay, about 12
planes, had been taken apart and shipped back to the Soviet Union.

Described as 'Junkers'

About half of the Soviet Union's force of TU-16 bombers had flown back to the
Soviet Union, Pentagon officials added. The remaining half a dozen or so bombers
were described as ''junkers'' by one Pentagon official. ''They are the sort of
planes that nobody ever expects will fly again,'' the official said.

While the withdrawal significantly reduces the Soviet Union's capability to
attack ships in the area, the Russians still have TU-95 Bear long-range
reconnaissance planes at Cam Ranh Bay. A Pentagon official said that about four
of these planes were based there.

The number of Soviet ships stationed at the base has declined since 1988, when
the Pentagon said the Soviet naval presence at Cam Ranh Bay included about 25
ships, including 2 to 4 submarines.

Pentagon officials said today that Moscow now had fewer than 20 ships at Cam
Ranh Bay, including one submarine. The ships there are small fighting and
support ships.

Soviet Cut in Spending

Pentagon officials said that the declining Soviet military presence at Cam Ranh
Bay is part of the larger Soviet effort to cut military spending.

Some Western and Asian diplomats in Southeast Asia have suggested that the move
is also designed to improve relations with China and to increase pressure on the
United States to reduce its military presence in Asia and the western Pacific,
in particular at its bases in the Philippines.

But Pentagon officials asserted that there were no indications that Moscow
intended to abandon the Cam Ranh Bay base.

''The ships have not left,'' said one Pentagon official, who did not wish to be
identified. ''The people have not left. Strategically, it is still pretty
important to their deployments in the Indian Ocean. There is no sign that they
intend to leave.'' The official said that while the withdrawal of the Soviet
planes was welcome, the United States would not have had much difficulty
''neutralizing'' the aircraft in a war.

'Purely Defensive Structure'

Mr. Perfilyev, the Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman, said the withdrawal of the
planes was part of a move to a ''purely defensive structure in the Asia-Pacific
region'' and was being carried out in consultation with the Vietnamese.

He added that ''the Soviet side hopes that these actions will help to defuse
military-political tension'' in the region.

In 1988, the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, offered to abandon Cam Ranh
Bay if the United States did the same with its six military bases in the
Philippines. American officials dismissed the offer, saying that the United
States needed to maintain naval bases in the Pacific to support its worldwide
operations.

The State Department said it welcomed reports that Soviet planes had been
withdrawn from Cam Ranh Bay. ''We anticipate that less Soviet military
involvement in southeast Asia would contribute to regional stability and to
efforts to achieve a comprehensive political settlement in the Cambodia
conflict,'' a State Department spokesman said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Vietnam

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 16, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Keyes Beech, 76, Correspondent In Asia for Five Decades, Is Dead

BYLINE: By JOHN T. McQUISTON

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 546 words


Keyes Beech, who for many years was a foreign correspondent in Asia and won a
Pulitzer Prize in 1951 for his reporting on the Korean War, died yesterday of
emphysema at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington. He was 76 years old and
lived in Bethesda, Md.

Mr. Beech (whose first name rhymed with size) covered Asia for five decades,
first as a combat correspondent after joining the Marine Corps in 1942. His last
post was in Bangkok, where he served as a correspondent for The Los Angeles
Times until his retirement seven years ago.

During World War II, he was with the Second Marine Division when that outfit
landed at Tarawa, a coral atoll in the western Pacific. He also was the first
correspondent to climb to the top of Mount Suribachi on Iwo Jima.

He was often at the front line during the fighting in Korea and was at his best
describing the adventures of the Marines in the cold of North Korea and of the
American prisoners of war who had been brainwashed by the Chinese.

Years in Vietnam

After the Korean War, he was assigned to Tokyo and reported on all of Indochina.
He was in Saigon during the early involvement of the United States in Vietnam.
In the mid-1960's he moved to Saigon, and he maintained a residence there until
the American departure.

He covered the Vietnam War from the beginning to the end. During the Tet
offensive in 1968, he was among the first Americans to see that the offensive
was a military victory for the United States and the South Vietnamese, but a
political defeat in the United States because of the doubts it raised about
American involvement in Vietnam.

James Wallace, a correspondent who covered the war alongside Mr. Beech and who
is now senior editor for international news for U.S. News & World Report,
praised Mr. Beech as ''highly competitive and extremely professional.''

''He prided himself on being a battlefield correspondent,'' Mr. Wallace said.
''He believed the real story was out where the troops were and not in the
briefing room.

''And yet he was always one of the people who in Saigon would help the new kid
on the block - a new correspondent just getting started there. Keyes was always
very generous when it came to helping others.''

Born in Tennessee

Mr. Beech was born in Pulaski, Tenn., in 1913 and started his newspaper career
in St. Petersburg, Fla., as a copy boy. He worked as a feature writer on The
Akron (Ohio) Beacon Journal from 1937 until he joined the Marines.

When World War II ended, he became Washington correspondent for The Honolulu
Star-Bulletin and later switched to The Chicago Daily News, for which he was the
Far East correspondent from 1947 to 1977, covering Japan, China, Korea and
Southeast Asia.

His first assignment with The Chicago Daily News was in an area he knew well,
Hawaii. He went on to Tokyo, where his political and military analyses drew wide
attention.

In 1957, he was among the first group of American correspondents to enter
mainland China under Communist rule.

As a result of his colorful experiences he wrote several books, including ''The
U.S. Marines on Iwo Jima,'' ''Uncommon Valor'' and ''Tokyo and Points East.''

He is survived by his wife, Yuko; a daughter, Hannah, and two sons, Walter, of
Los Angeles, and Barnaby, of Honolulu.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Keyes Beech (1951)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

War Stress Of Vietnam Compared In Twins

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 380 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, March 5


A study of twins who served in the military in the Vietnam era offers new
evidence that post-traumatic stress disorder is more a product of combat than of
any inborn susceptibility to stress.

The findings indicate that the disorder - marked by painful memories, flashbacks
and nightmares - is three times as common among veterans who served in Southeast
Asia as among their identical twins who served elsewhere.

The 179 twins who saw heavy combat in Vietnam were found to suffer nine times as
often from the problem as their identical twins. ''Identical twins are more
similar than any two individuals,'' said the chief researcher, Jack Goldberg, an
assistant professor of epidemiology at the University of Illinois at Chicago.
''And so you have two guys with 100 percent of the same genes, who grew up
together, and one guy goes to war and one doesn't. And 15 years later, one has
post-traumatic stress disorder and one doesn't. That sort of debunks the idea of
predisposition.''

The study, published in the current Journal of the American Medical Association,
was developed from a specially designed registry of 2,092 male twins in military
service from 1965 to 1975.

Genes and Environment

He said the registry was established to further scientists' understanding of
health problems believed to be partly due to genetic traits and partly to
environment, including alcoholism, drug abuse and heart disease.

When the survey was conducted in 1987, 16.8 percent of the twins who served in
Southeast Asia in the Vietnam era had symptoms of post-traumatic stress
disorder. Just 5 percent of their identical twin brothers who did not serve in
Southeast Asia had the symptoms.

Terence M. Keane, chief of psychology at the Boston Veterans Administration
Medical Center, said the study ''represents a major advance in our understanding
of post-traumatic stress disorder.''

The findings closely match those of a Congressional study that estimated that 15
percent of Vietnam veterans suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder, Dr.
Goldberg said. That means 450,000 veterans are afflicted with it, he said.
''They're not psychotic,'' he said. ''They're not crazy. They have nightmares.
They have problems. But our sense is that a lot of these guys function very
well.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Pressed to Pay for Boat People in Hong Kong

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 646 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, March 10


Britain is pressing the Bush Administration to pay most of the cost of caring
for the tens of thousands of Vietnamese boat people now being housed in its
colony of Hong Kong, as well as for building a new refugee camp, possibly on
Guam, diplomats and United Nations officials here say.

The British request for up to $80 million in American aid for the Hong Kong boat
people, who now number about 55,000, reflects London's concern that the
international community is not paying its share of the cost and irritation with
the United States for opposing the forcible return of boat people to Vietnam.

The new United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Thorvald Stoltenberg, a
former Foreign Minister of Norway, has also written to President Bush
underscoring the seriousness of the crisis Hong Kong faces and urging him to
change America's position and agree to the compulsory repatriation of those boat
people judged economic migrants rather than refugees from persecution, those
officials say.

Last year the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, who has
traditionally reimbursed Hong Kong for caring for the boat people, paid only
about $8 million of the $20 million cost. This year the cost of all the boat
people seeking asylum throughout Southeast Asia is supposed to be met by the 29
member governments of the Comprehensive Plan of Action on Indochinese Refugees,
adopted at a United Nations-sponsored conference in Geneva last June.

U.S. and Hanoi Block Accord

Although those countries promised to contribute a total of $108 million on a
voluntary basis, they have only paid about $15 million so far, with the United
States giving $11 million. As a result, Britain fears Hong Kong will again be
left to pay most of its bill itself.

Last January the member governments of the Comprehensive Plan of Action came
close to approving a British proposal to return those Vietnamese who do not
qualify as refugees under international law. But the United States and Vietnam
blocked the accord by insisting on at least a year's delay before mandatory
repatriation could begin, while Britain refused to wait beyond June.

As a result, diplomats say, Britain feels the United States should be held
responsible for the extra bills it faces for looking after the Hong Kong boat
people as well as for the cost of building the new camp that would be necessary
to house any new influx that arrives this year. To underscore its irritation,
Britain has even suggested that the United States build such a camp on its own
territory, the island of Guam, or in the Philippines.

The Bush Administration's refusal to sanction the boat people's forced
repatriation is criticized by many diplomats from recipient countries as being
essentially a domestic political gesture that reflects its reluctance to be seen
endorsing the return of refugees to the Hanoi Government.

Of the 55,000 boat people in Hong Kong, about 44,000 are eligible for screening
by the British authorities to determine whether they are political refugees and
may thus face possible return to Vietnam. About 8,000 have been screened so far,
with only about 12 percent of those gaining refugee status.

Although Britain wanted international endorsement for its plan to start
returning boat people by force, it has said it will go ahead without that once
it has completed arrangements with Vietnam, including permission for
international agencies to monitor the treatment the returning boat people
receive.

Refugee officials say the number of new arrivals in Hong Kong and elsewhere in
Southeast Asia so far this year is well below last year's levels. They say that
is one of several indications they have received that Northern Vietnamese, who
make up most of the boat people, are becoming more aware of the overcrowded
conditions awaiting them in refugee camps and the danger of forced repatriation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CHIEF IS TO RESIGN, HANOI PARTY SAYS

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 372 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Jan. 3


The Vietnamese Communist Party Secretary General, Nguyen Van Linh, will resign
at a coming party meeting, Vietnamese officials said today.

They said Mr. Linh, who is 74 years old and has been ill since late October,
would step down from the party's top post for health reasons at a Central
Committee session.

The officials said the meeting would be held within two months.

''He is too old,'' said Bui Tin, deputy chief editor of the Communist Party
daily Nhan Dan, adding that a Central Committee session is to be held after Tet,
the Vietnamese lunar new year. He said Mr. Linh's successor would be chosen
then.

'They Need Another Leader'

The three-day Tet holiday starts Jan. 27.

One Eastern European diplomat said: ''He has to step down because of his health.
If they want to make the Communist Party stronger, they need another leader.''

Vietnamese officials in Hanoi said Mr. Linh has been ill since catching a severe
cold during a visit to East Germany in October. He was called a reformer in the
mold of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union when he was elected
party Secretary General in late 1986, Officials said any decision on his
successor would have to be approved at a full congress of party members, which
they said would not be held until next year.

Hanoi's Hard Line on Dissent

''There will be a swapping of posts by the top three or four at this party
plenum or the congress,'' a diplomat said. ''But apart from Linh it will be the
same old boys at the top.''

Vietnam, disturbed by the crumbling of Communist rule among its Eastern European
allies, has cracked down on internal dissent and confirmed its commitment to
building a one-party Socialist state.

Vietnamese officials declined to speculate on who would replace Mr. Linh, but
diplomats said the most likely candidate was Prime Minister Do Muoi, who last
month was elected deputy chairman of the National Defense Council.

Officials said Mr. Linh, a northerner, was living in the southern city of Ho Chi
Minh, formerly Saigon, where he was being treated for a problem with a facial
nerve.

State-run radio said Monday that he was visiting troops in the South, one of the
few public appearances he has made since October.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 19, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Peace Effort: A Bit More Realism

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 867 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 18


After an important but limited two-day meeting on Cambodia in Paris this week,
diplomacy on this complicated issue appears to have finally moved off dead
center. But no one is ready to say that the Cambodian conflict is about to be
solved, only that a bit more realism is being applied by the proxy powers.

The meeting on Monday and Tuesday embodied representatives of the five permanent
members of the United Nations Security Council -the United States, the Soviet
Union, China, Britain and France - whose open support is vital if the United
Nations is to perform the extraordinary role of peacekeeping and executive
administration now envisaged for it.

Previous diplomatic efforts have foundered on a few key issues, the most
important of them going to the heart of the conflict: Who would rule and who
would embody Cambodian sovereignty before the elections that are supposed to
provide the Cambodians the nearly forgotten right to choose their leaders?

The four Cambodian factions - the Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen,
originally installed by the Vietnamese, and an awkward opposition coalition
dominated by the Khmer Rouge and including two smaller non-Communist groups -
have regularly proved unable to resolve anything among themselves.

Backing From East and West

Up until now, their spines have been stiffened by their supporters - the Soviet
Union and Vietnam in the case of Mr. Hun Sen, China in the case of the Khmer
Rouge, and China and the West in the case of the non-Communists and their
leader, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the country's former King.

Through the Cambodians and with the support of the West, the Chinese have been
fighting the Soviets and the Vietnamese, trying to deny them a fait accompli in
what had been, in the mid-1970's under the Khmer Rouge, a Chinese sphere of
influence.

The non-Communist nations of Southeast Asia were fighting for their independence
against what appeared to be an imperialist Vietnam; the West, the United States
in particular, was fighting Vietnam and Communism.

But with an altered Soviet Union prompting an exhausted Vietnam, Hanoi pulled
its troops out of Cambodia in September, knocking a crucial prop out from under
Mr. Hun Sen. His army began to lose territory to the opposition, confronting
Western nations with the unpalatable moral consequences of even indirect support
for a resurgent Khmer Rouge, under whose rule more than one million Cambodians
in a population of seven million died in less than four years.

Western discomfort also seems to have increased after the killings of
pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing in June. Suddenly, it seemed, a policy
that could be seen to serve the interests of both China and the Khmer Rouge
would have its ''downside'' with Western public opinion.

Time for Concessions

Even China, which cares more about its image in the world than it sometimes is
willing to admit, apparently decided that the time was ripe for some concessions
on Cambodia. So at long last, the unworkable Chinese formula for a peace
settlement - an interim coalition government made up of all four Cambodian
parties to oversee new elections - appears to have been put to rest, to the
relief of the United States and most members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, which had publicly supported it for years.

In its place is some undecided variant of a simple idea broached by
Represenative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, and carried forward by
the Australians: Let the United Nations do it. Rather than expect the Cambodian
factions to resolve 20 years of mutual hatred and betrayal in the formation of
an interim government, let the United Nations run Cambodia until some form of
elections for a new government can be held.

Such an administration, which would encompass an entirely new role for the
United Nations, could be done with the bureaucratic participation of acceptable
elements of all factions, including the Khmer Rouge, and not necessarily on an
equal basis. But it would also have to include an agreement by all parties on a
cease-fire, a cutoff of foreign military aid to all parties and a considerable
United Nations force to monitor the armies, keep the peace and insure a fair
election.

The acceptance by all parties of some broader executive role by the United
Nations is itself an advance on the international conference in Paris last
August. Then the idea of a formal United Nations role of any sort was
unacceptable to Mr. Hun Sen, since the opposition retains Cambodia's seat. How
Large a Share?  Still, there are enormous problems yet to resolve that
inevitably include variants of the core question: How large a share will any
faction receive, and who decides? Just how much will remain of Mr. Hun Sen's
administration, since he is sure to try to maintain as much as he can?

How many posts and of what kind will the Khmer Rouge and the non-Communists
receive, even under a United Nations executive? Will Mr. Hun Sen accept Khmer
Rouge participation in this fashion?

''Everyone wants Cambodia behind them,'' a senior Western diplomat said. ''The
real importance of Paris is that it keeps the process going. Just imagine if it
had failed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Boat People to Fight Hong Kong in Court

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Feb. 24


A fisherman from the south of Vietnam who said the Communist Government in Hanoi
forced him to clear mine fields and gather grenades by hand gained permission
today to challenge the way this British colony decides the fate of tens of
thousands of boat people.

A High Court justice in Hong Kong granted lawyers for the fisherman, Nguyen Ho,
who has been classified as an illegal immigrant and faces forced repatriation,
permission to present his case challenging the government's refugee screening
process. It is the first legal challenge to that process.

The screening procedures, criticized by human rights groups as deeply flawed,
are supposed to determine which of the Vietnamese who have fled to Hong Kong are
genuine refugees fleeing persecution and which are illegal immigrants seeking to
escape their country's grinding poverty. Those found to be non-refugees are to
be forcibly returned to Vietnam.

Screening Process in Question

Judge Raymond Sears ruled that the plaintiff, who fled to Hong Kong in 1988, may
not be deported until his case is resolved, a process that could end in London's
highest court, the Privy Council.

Arthur C. Helton, director of the refugee project of the New York-based Lawyers
Committee for Human Rights, who helped organize the challenge, said in an
interview from New York that if successful the litigation could force Hong Kong
to expand the resources for screening, from more interpreters to trained legal
counselors for the Vietnamese.

If the process is found to be flawed, he said, the colony could even be forced
to review the 8,000 cases it has already screened, including the 51 boat people
who were the first to be forcibly returned to Vietnam last December. So far, no
further repatriations have been carried out, though Britain has said it hopes to
resume the forcible returns in a few months.

''We hope the Hong Kong government will consider suspending all forced
repatriations until these legal issues are resolved,'' Mr. Helton said,
''because they could affect the 35,000 Vietnamese awaiting screening and the
8,000 already screened.''

No Official Comment

Government officials have said only 10 percent of the 8,000 who have been
screened have been deemed refugees.

A spokesman for the Hong Kong government said today that officials would have no
comment on the fisherman's case. Government officials have defended the
screening process, pointing out that it is monitored by the local office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

But Robert Van Leeuwen, who heads the Commissioner's office here, has said that
the United Nations has so few lawyers to check cases that ''we are not able to
insure with confidence that people who might be mandatorily repatriated in the
future might not be refugees.''

The fisherman, who has said he was subjected to dangerous forced labor because
of his family's political past, is arguing that a deficient screening process
failed to recognize that he was a genuine refugee.

Procedures Under Challenge

The fisherman's lawyers have said they are not challenging Hong Kong's right to
deport those screened out as non-refugees, but say the procedures are deficient.
The lawyers have said the process uses poor interpreters and fails to provide
any legal representation for the Vietnamese. They further charge that the
immigration officers who handle the cases are biased against the boat people.

Moreover, the Vietnamese are not allowed to be present or even represented
during their appeal, and the appeals board, which meets in private and simply
reviews case files, does not have to give reasons for its decisions.

Last Sunday, a 26-year-old Vietnamese man died two days after hanging himself in
the Whitehead Detention Center here. Camp workers said the man hanged himself
one day after being told that his appeal for refugee status had been turned
down.

In recent weeks eight Vietnamese men and a woman have wounded themselves with
knives, and all have said they were protesting the decision not to grant them
refugee status.

Ish Bhagat, Assistant Commissioner for Refugees with the Correctional Services
Department, said there will be more counseling for boat people in an effort to
prevent more suicide attempts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A court in Hong Kong has agreed to hear a Vietnamese refugee's argument
against the screening process that has left him facing forced repatriation.
Detained refugees demonstrated last month in Hong Kong. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 1, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
CNN Lawsuit On Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 35, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 122 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 31


Turner Broadcasting System Inc. is suing the Bush Administration to be allowed
to provide its Cable News Network to Vietnam.

The company wants to provide a satellite receiving station to Vietnam at no
charge and sell it the right to take the CNN signal for 50 Vietnamese dong a
year, or less than a penny, said Bertram Carp, a Turner vice president.

American law prohibits most trade with Vietnam. Turner said in its lawsuit in
Federal District Court in Washington that CNN would qualify under a 1988 measure
that exempts information materials.

Mr. Carp said last week that the suit asked the court to order the Treasury
Department's office of foreign assets control to allow CNN to provide the
receiving station and signal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

TBS Allowed Vietnam Link

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 35, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 180 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 5


Turner Broadcasting System said Thursday that it had won its battle with the
Bush Administration over providing its Cable News Network and a satellite
receiving station to Vietnam.

The Atlanta-based Turner said the Commerce and Treasury Departments, which had
previously refused Turner's request on the ground that the deal would violate a
strict United States trade embargo against Vietnam, agreed to allow the company
to deliver its 24-hour cable TV news channel to Vietnamese television.

Turner had said it would provide the earth receiving station at no charge and
the CNN signal for 50 Vietnamese dong a year - less than a penny.

But in agreeing to the deal, the Administration said Turner would not be allowed
to collect any payment, according to an Administration official who asked not to
be identified.

The official said that in making its decision, the Government considered ''the
importance of having U.S. news programs in Vietnam.'' At the same time, he said,
the Administration stuck to its position of ''strictly prohibiting'' any money
from changing hands.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 8, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Emerges - After the Vietnamese Occupation.;
Phnom Penh, Eye on West, Tries To Shed Image as Hanoi Puppet

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2251 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


Since the announced withdrawal of Vietnamese occupation troops in September, the
Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen has taken a number of steps to establish
Cambodia as a nation reviving politically and economically, ready to change to
get rid of its image as a puppet regime. The goal is to gain increased
international recognition, especially in the West.

In perhaps the most important change, the Government, under attack by United
States-backed rebels, has tried to broaden its base by including many people who
served in the non-Communist Governments of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Lon Nol
in the 1960's and 1970's.

In addition, Phnom Penh is discarding socialist dogma in favor of free-market
economic principles, now on display at hundreds of privately owned shops
throughout the capital.

U.S. Supports Guerrillas

Washington has no diplomatic relations with the Government here, which it
describes as a ''puppet regime'' installed by Vietnamese Army invaders in
January 1979. The United States supports a guerrilla coalition - composed of the
Khmer Rouge, which ruled the country from 1975 to 1978, and two non-Communist
factions - that is trying to unseat Mr. Hun Sen.

Kung Sam Ol, an alumnus of the University of Georgia who now serves as a Deputy
Prime Minister of Cambodia, said the characterization of the Government as a
puppet regime was ''out of date.''

Cambodian officials say Vietnam has withdrawn all its troops.

While expressing gratitude to Hanoi for having rescued them from the Khmer
Rouge, Cambodians say the historic animosity between the two peoples would make
it impossible for the Vietnamese to establish a permanent presence here.

Cambodian officials repeatedly affirmed their intention to hold national
elections in 1990 or early 1991, and they said they would welcome observers from
the United States and other countries.

Chhang Song, a naturalized American citizen who recently concluded a visit here,
has emerged as a pivotal figure in Cambodian politics and as a crucial link to
the West for a nation ostracized by most Western governments.

He urged the Phnom Penh Government to hold elections monitored by Western
observers who could assess their fairness. In discussions with Cambodian
officials, he also encouraged the formation of an opposition party.

Mr. Chhang Song, who served as Cambodia's Information Minister from 1973 to
1975, in the American-backed government of Lon Nol, said the current Government
was receptive to his suggestions.

Dozens of interviews with Cambodian officials, people on the street,
shopkeepers, students, prisoners of war and foreign diplomats here produced
these findings:

* The Government is accepted as legitimate in most of Cambodia. There is no sign
that it will collapse without the support of Vietnamese troops, as some American
officials had predicted. Foreign investors and foreign governments in many
Western countries express a growing desire to do business with Cambodia.
Singapore and Thailand are already actively trading with Cambodia, and
Australians have shown interest in developing economic ties.

* Except in three provinces along the Thai border, where there has been fierce
fighting, security is not a major problem. Cambodians and foreign visitors can
move about freely and talk with anyone they want. The guerrillas say they have
made substantial gains in hit-and-run operations over the last three months.
Cambodian military officials express little concern about the two non-Communist
guerrilla armies supported by the United States - the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front led by former Prime Minister Son Sann and a group loyal to
Prince Sihanouk - but warn that those armies provide cover for the Communist
Khmer Rouge to send infiltrators deep into Cambodia.

* Growing numbers of people who served in the non-Communist Governments of
Prince Sihanouk and Mr. Lon Nol, as well as people who went to school in those
years, now hold positions of power and influence in Cambodia. These men and
women, many of whom were trained in Europe or the United States, suffer no
apparent discrimination because of their background. Mr. Hun Sen estimates that
people who served under Prince Sihanouk and Mr. Lon Nol now account for more
than half of his Cabinet.

* The Government is rapidly reducing state control of the economy and is
permitting private ownership of land and other property. It initially tolerated
the development of private enterprise and open markets and now encourages them
on the ground that they are more efficient than state-owned industries, which
still produce textiles and steel, for example. Cambodian officials and Europeans
who work for humanitarian organizations here estimate that 30 percent of the
economy is controlled by the Government, while 70 percent is privately held.

* Local editors and journalists say Cambodian newspapers now openly criticize
the Government, publishing evidence of official corruption, nepotism, police
brutality and other abuses. In the last year, members of the National Assembly
have also become more independent and assertive in criticizing the Government.

U.S. Policy
Calls for Change Across Spectrum

In the United States Congress, liberal Democrats like Senator Alan Cranston of
California and Representative Chester G. Atkins of Massachusetts have denounced
the Bush Administration for supporting Prince Sihanouk and his demand that the
Khmer Rouge have a role in an interim coalition government. Now some American
conservatives are also calling for a change in policy.

Michael J. Horowitz, a conservative Republican who served in the Reagan
Administration and visited Cambodia with Mr. Chhang Song, said: ''The reality I
see here is profoundly different from the conventional wisdom described to me in
Washington by American officials. I see strong support for private property,
open markets and internationally supervised elections.''

Mr. Horowitz said American policy toward Cambodia, already subject to criticism
by liberals, needed to be scrutinized by American conservatives, particularly in
the light of ''its deference to the demands of China,'' the chief supporter of
the Khmer Rouge.

If the Phnom Penh Government continues to move toward internationally supervised
elections, he said, ''I cannot see any basis for U.S. isolation of Cambodia and
for U.S. support of China and Prince Sihanouk, who has always followed China's
line.''

For more than a decade, some American officials have viewed Cambodia as a
battleground for a proxy war between Moscow and Beijing in which China deserved
American support.

The charge d'affaires at the Indian Embassy here, Rinzing Wangdi, said: ''There
is a widespread perception that, as a result of the Vietnam syndrome, you in the
United States have allowed China to be the steering wheel of American policy in
this region.''

In early 1989, the State Department said there were ''widespread abuses of human
rights in Cambodia'' stemming from its occupation by Vietnamese troops and from
an indigenous Communist ''civil-military control apparatus.''

There is disagreement among Western human rights groups about Phnom Penh's
record, and the Government says it is trying to make arrangements for
human-rights observers to inspect prisons and assess the situation.

Chea Sim, an influential official who serves as chairman of the National
Assembly and chairman of the United Front for the Construction and Defense of
Cambodia, said he was concerned about reports of human-rights abuses in Cambodia
and acknowledged that some had occurred. In an interview, he said such
violations did not represent ''the policy of the regime.''

''We are taking stringent measures to correct the abuses,'' he declared, saying
the Government was training soldiers in the proper treatment of prisoners and
clarifying the penalties for violations.

Pol Pot's Legacy
'We Cannot Forget' The Crimes

Eleven years after Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge were removed from power, their
legacy pervades all aspects of politics and family life in Cambodia.

Nearly everyone has a personal story of suffering and loss, of parents, children
or siblings killed by the Khmer Rouge, who presided over a brutal restructuring
of society in which more than a million people died from April 1975 to January
1979.

The Khmer Rouge is the strongest of the three guerrilla factions. Western
diplomats often discuss its participation in a coalition government as a
theoretical possibility. But most Cambodians do not even entertain the idea.

The national resolve is summarized in an inscription at Choeung Ek, a village on
the outskirts of Phnom Penh, where the Khmer Rouge ran an extermination camp.

''The people of Cambodia always inscribe themselves with this suffering and
wrath against the genocidal and criminal clique of Pol Pot and Ieng Sary,'' says
a sign at a pagoda filled with hundreds of skulls. ''We cannot forget it. We are
absolutely determined not to let this genocidal regime reoccur in Kampuchea.''

Phnom Penh is still an isolated third world capital with few telephones and
inadequate electric power. It is under a 9 P.M. curfew, designed to prevent
infiltration by guerrillas.

But the city, which was reduced to a ghost town by the Khmer Rouge, shows new
signs of vitality.

In the last year, several movie theaters have opened. Seventy-five private
companies now produce and sell videos. The Government has just abolished the
official exchange rate, allowing the private market to decide the proper number
of riels to the dollar.

In addition, the Government has lifted rules that required foreigners to live in
a few designated apartment buildings, and it has eliminated restrictions on
contacts between Cambodians and citizens of other countries.

In the National Assembly, legislators have accused Government officials of
nepotism, graft and corruption.

Kung Sam Ol said the Government was worried about such charges and was trying to
weed out corrupt officials.

Signs of Change
A Looser Hand On the Economy

Dozens of posters have sprouted up in Phnom Penh offering instruction in the
English language, which is more popular than French among students in this
former French colony.

''In the near future, we will have English courses on television,'' Mr. Hun Sen
said.

Cambodian officials boast that they had ''tropical perestroika'' before the
Soviet Union began to restructure its economy. ''If we had wanted to prevent a
free-market economy, it would have been very easy for us to do so,'' Mr. Hun Sen
said in an interview. ''It is now the policy of the Government to encourage
further opening of the market.''

Asked whether such an approach was consistent with Marxism, Nguon Nhel, the
Communist Party chief for the city of Phnom Penh, said, ''If people enjoy
prosperity, I don't think we are deviating from Marxism.''

Cambodian officials said there was much less official control of the economy now
than in the Sihanouk era, when the Government controlled such industries as
rubber, sugar, jute and glass, as well as foreign trade.

Cambodians say they are mystified by American policy toward their country.

''Nobody understands why there has been this vindictivess and punishment toward
Cambodia since Pol Pot was deposed,'' said Long Visalo, a Deputy Minister of
Foreign Affairs.

On one hand, Washington says the Khmer Rouge must never return to power. On the
other hand, Cambodian officials note, the United States supports the two
non-Communist factions loosely aligned with the Khmer Rouge against Phnom Penh.

The nominal leader of the guerrilla coalition, Prince Sihanouk, has argued that
the Khmer Rouge should have a role in any transition government, and the United
States has acquiesced in his demand, saying it ''went along with his judgment.''

''Why does the United States support the Khmer Rouge in this way?'' asks Kung
Sam Ol, the Deputy Prime Minister. ''It is because of your friendship with
China.''

Charting the Future
Plan for Elections And an Old Culture

Representatives of the Cambodian Government and the three rebel factions plan to
meet soon in Jakarta, Indonesia, to see if they can agree on a formula for
elections and a political settlement.

Cambodian officials say they are determined to hold elections even if there is
no agreement on such a formula.

Prince Sihanouk, often described as the father of Cambodia's independence and a
symbol of national unity, has not indicated if he would return to his homeland
to take part in elections.

The Prince, who was overthrown in 1970, is remembered with nostalgia by some
older Cambodians. But they account for a dwindling proportion of the population.

People of all ages said they were dismayed by his continuing association with
the Khmer Rouge.

Prince Sihanouk's cousin, Lyda Sisowath, who supports the current Government,
said, ''The old generation is dying off, and to many young people, Sihanouk is
only history.''

While trying to rebuild their country, Cambodian officials have made assiduous
efforts to rediscover and revive their ancient culture, devastated by the Khmer
Rouge.

No man has done more to salvage the arts than Chheng Phon, the Minister of
Information and Culture. ''Ninety percent of the artists, dancers, and musicians
were destroyed by Pol Pot,'' he said in an interview. ''Everything was uprooted.
Now we must replant.''

He has tried to preserve the stylized classical dance even though it was closely
associated with the royal court.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Chhang Song, a naturalized Amercian citizen who just concluded a
visit to Cambodia, has emerged as a pivotal figure in Cambodian politics and as
a crucial link to the West for a nation ostracized by most Western governments.
He is shown with Prime Minister Hun Sen. (NYT/Robert Pear); map of Cambodia
showing location of Phnom Penh (NYT) (pg. A6)

TYPE: A special report.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 25, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Softens Its Stance on Return Of the Boat People in Hong Kong

BYLINE: By SHEILA RULE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 837 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Jan. 24


The United States has softened its opposition to the forced repatriation of
Vietnamese refugees in Hong Kong by indicating at an international meeting here
that some boat people could be sent back after a one-year moratorium. But the
American insistence on the moratorium effectively prevented any consensus from
being achieved at the meeting.

The closed two-day meeting was of a United Nations committee formed to seek a
new policy for the 44,000 boat people who have streamed into Hong Kong in the
last year and a half.

As the meeting ended today, Robin McLaren, an assistant under secretary in
Britain's Foreign Office and head of its delegation here, said that of the 30
countries represented on the committee, only the United States and Vietnam had
failed to agree to a proposal that mandatory repatriation start on July 1.

'Fully Tested' Repatriation

Mr. McLaren said the United States insisted that the deportations not begin
until Jan. 1, 1991, in order to put in place guarantees on screening methods and
the safety of the Vietnamese once they returned, and that Vietnam proposed Oct.
1 of this year.

The United States Embassy said the United States delegation would not comment
and referred all inquiries to Washington.

The State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, told reporters today in
Washington that the ''United States' position on involuntary repatriation has
not changed'' and that it remained opposed to the practice ''in principle and in
practice.''

Miss Tutwiler said the State Department believed that alternatives to forced
repatriation could be ''fully tested'' during the moratorium and ''found to be
the most effective means for addressing this problem.''

Britain Eager for Agreement

When asked what would happen to people who refused to go voluntarily after the
moratorium ended, Miss Tutwiler said, ''We'll cross that bridge when we get
there.''

The committee has been deadlocked since its establishment in June, largely
because of United States opposition to forced returns. Britain, the colonial
authority in Hong Kong, insists that it has no choice but to carry them out
eventually.

Mr. McLaren said that it was not Britain's view that there was any need for a
moratorium on deportations and that he did not know whether it would forcibly
repatriate boat people before some consensus was reached on the issue.

Britain is eager to get an agreement on the repatriations before seasonal winds
change in March and boat people sail northeast across the South China Sea. After
international protests greeted Britain's repatriation of 51 Vietnamese boat
people in December, Britain announced that it would suspend the repatriation
temporarily. #12-Month Moratorium Proposed Sergio Vieira de Mello, head of the
Asian section of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, said High
Commissioner Thorvald Stoltenberg had been asked by the committee to consult
with ''governments that still have reservations'' about the proposed date on
which forced repatriations could resume. He said the United Nations hoped that
Britain would refrain from further deportations until the effort to reach a
consensus was given a chance to succeed.

Delegates said it appeared for a while that a consensus might be reached after
the United States, which had previously steadfastly opposed any mandatory
repatriation, softened its position to accept forced returns under certain
conditions.

Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Robert Funseth, who led the United States
delegation, reaffirmed the United States' opposition in principle to forced
repatriation. But he proposed the 12-month moratorium on any forced
repatriations, after which mandatory repatriation would be allowed on the
condition that no one be forced to return to Vietnam as long as there were
volunteers waiting to return and that there be full international monitoring of
the process leading to any mandatory return. A copy of the proposal was obtained
by The New York Times.

While welcoming the change in position as the starting point for more
discussions, British officials said the moratorium was too long and should be
reduced.

Vaguely Worded Proposition

At an international conference on Indochinese refugees in June, it was
unanimously agreed that the Vietnamese should be screened and that those
determined to be economic migrants and not legitimate political refugees should
be persuaded to return ''voluntarily.'' But it left in suspension the crucial
question of what to do with the Vietnamese who are likely to be denied refugee
status but refuse to return to Vietnam. Participants could only agree to a
vaguely worded proposition that ''alternative'' solutions should be found if
voluntary repatriation did not work ''after a reasonable period of time.''

Britain hopes to eventually empty the crowded Hong Kong detention centers that
now house the 44,000 boat people who have arrived since June 1988, when the
colony began treating all arriving Vietnamese as illegal immigrants.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Wrightstown Journal;
McGuire Reservists Tell of Their Experiences in Panama

BYLINE: By ALBERT J. PARISI

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 2, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1090 words

DATELINE: WRIGHTSTOWN


MARTIN STEVENS is accustomed to long hours and tedious duties. As a pilot for
United Airlines, he is used to flexible schedules taking him from one part of
the country to another with little notice.

But shortly before Christmas, the 48-year-old Vietnam veteran, a resident of
Englishtown, found himself flying a combat-ready transport aircraft into Howard
Air Base in Panama.

''When we got the call, we weren't surprised,'' said Mr. Stevens, who serves as
a squadron commander with a unit of the 514th Military Airlift Wing of the Air
Force Reserve, based at McGuire Air Force Base here. ''Having been in Vietnam,
all I kept thinking was, 'Good God, here we go again.' ''

Since the start of the military action, in which 23 servicemen were killed and
the Panamian leader, Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, was deposed, regular and
Reserve crew units from this Burlington County airfield have moved troops,
munitions, food and medical supplies directly into the battle zone. They have
also played a major role in transporting the wounded to American hospitals.

For the New Jersey reservists who took part in the action, the experience took
them away from their daily civilian routines and placed them amid the sounds of
helicopter gunships and falling mortar rounds.

Mr. Stevens, who regularly flies an average of 10 days and one weekend a month
as a reservist here, said he was to command a flight into Frankfurt the night
after the start of the Panamanian action, when flight plans were abruptly
changed. ''We went on a volunteer basis and not really knowing what to expect,''
he said. ''And when we got down there, the sights brought back memories that I
thought I'd left behind me in Vietnam.''

Upon landing at Howard Air Base, Mr. Stevens's crew unloaded cargo and took off
again for the Florida coast, but, 90 miles out, ''we were called back again and
told to prepare to evacuate an undetermined number of wounded,'' he said. Upon
landing again, Mr. Stevens - he holds the rank of lieutenant colonel in the
reserves - taxied his aircraft, a four-engine jet transport known as a C-141B
Lockheed Starlifter, onto a runway where a mobile Army surgical hospital had
been hastily established.

''It was astounding to watch those folks work under the circumstances,'' he
said, adding that the scene reminded him of the popular television series
''M*A*S*H,'' ''only without the laughs.''

''All around us, things were getting hot and heavy,'' he said, recalling that at
one point Army helicopters fired upon a position within view of the airfield.
Within moments, other helicopters began landing nearby and depositing the
wounded.

''Some things don't change, and for me the only difference between that night
and Vietnam of 20 years ago was that the faces of the injured appeared to be a
whole lot younger,'' Mr. Stevens said. He counted 13 body bags that night, and
the mood for him and his crew soon turned solemn.

For 38-year-old Debbie Hemmerlein of Browns Mills, a self-described ''Reserve
bum,'' who acted as Mr. Stevens's aircraft load master on the flight, the
experience also brought home the realities of war.

''It's not all what you read about or see in the movies,'' Ms. Hemmerlein said.
''You see the best of mankind and the worst of it, and you come out of the
experience a very different person.

''Most times, reservists like myself have a competition going: who can do their
job the best. But what I saw in Panama went beyond that. People began working
together to get the job done and bring the injured home. We were a team with a
need to help, and when the injured started coming aboard, we felt helpless in a
sense.''

While women in the military are exempt from combat duty, it does not prevent
them from playing a role in noncombat areas. A mother of six -three sons and
three daughters, ranging in age from 9 to 20 - Ms. Hemmerlein said her job
helped to instill a confidence in her daughters that ''women can perform the
same types of jobs or go into the same kind of careers'' traditionally
undertaken by men.

''My girls see what I do,'' she said, ''and I just hope that it makes their own
horizons unlimited when it comes to choosing what they want to do with their
lives.''

She also said she felt that her involvement in Panama helped defend her own
family against the menace of illegal drugs.

''To know that I played a part in bringing down Noriega and the drug chain
coming into America makes me feel good,'' she said.

The aircraft had been made ready to carry home 60 litter-bound patients and 40
ambulatory ones, but in those early hours of action, 21 servicemen were
transported, 19 of them with serious wounds.

''Seeing that brought tears to my eyes,'' said Mr. Stevens, who normally flies a
DC-10. ''I remember thinking, 'At least we're here and the medical teams are
here to help out now,' but that still doesn't take away the feeling that those
kids have been hurt and will carry their scars about for the rest of their
lives.'' He too will carry some sights with him for a long time, he said, like
the air base's bowling alley, silent and dimly lighted, which served as a
morgue.

Of her experience in Panama, Ms. Hemmerlein said, ''I'll never forget the
intense heat, or the medical crews waiting for the wounded to arrive while boom
boxes blared out the top 100.''

Both Ms. Hemmerlein and Mr. Stevens chose not to tell their families about their
involvement in the Panama action until they had returned.

''I told everybody about a week later,'' Ms. Hemmerlein said. ''With the
holidays, I just didn't want anyone to worry and spoil things.''

Mr. Stevens said, ''I didn't tell my family anything, but they found out
anyway.'' He said his wife, Dianne, had received a call from McGuire after his
flight had been delayed. ''She got the call saying that we were running late but
not to worry, that all of us were safe,'' Mr. Stevens said. ''She put two and
two together, and I heard about it when I got home,'' he said. Ms. Hemmerlein
recalled the flight home with the injured servicemen.  ''There was one boy who'd
been hurt pretty bad,'' she said, ''and you could see the fear and anxiety in
his eyes. They were in a place that was strange and the unexpected had happened
to them, and this one was just searching with his eyes for something familiar to
bring him out of it.

''He saw smiling faces, and I guess he realized that he was safe, that he was
out of danger, and his expression changed and the fear washed away and then he
smiled. I'm proud to have been part of that for him.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos; Debbie Hemmerlein with a first-aid kit aboard an aircraft and
positioning a strut to steady a plane during loading (NYT/Robert J. Salgado);
map highlighting the area of Wrightstown

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Laos Are Getting Friendlier

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words

DATELINE: VIENTIANE, Laos


The Communist leaders of Laos want better relations with the United States and
American economic aid, and the United States appears ready to respond.

In separate interviews, Prime Minister Kaysone Phomvihan, who is also the
Communist Party leader, and Acting President Phoumi Vongvichit both asserted
that Laos wanted to turn the page on the past, in which the Laotian Communists
warred against the American-supported royal Government and the United States
heavily bombed this country and organized and sustained a clandestine Laotian
army.

Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan, in his first interview with an American journalist in the
15 years that he has ruled Laos, said, ''Lately relations between the two
countries have made some progress, after some delay.''

The Laotian leader referred to a little-publicized American project agreed to
last Sept. 30. It was the first United States development aid to Vietnam, Laos
or Cambodia since the Communist victories in those countries in 1975.

Anti-Drug Accord

The agreement was signed in this most reclusive of Indochina's capitals and not
announced in Washington. It was followed in January with another first, the
signing of an agreement for American-Laotian cooperation in fighting the
narcotics trade.

The mountainous regions of Laos are prime opium-growing areas, and some is
refined into heroin in illicit Laotian laboratories.

The $8.7 million development project signed last year was linked to the accord
on anti-drug cooperation, since its goal is to persuade nomadic mountain
tribespeople in two remote northeastern districts to substitute other cash crops
for opium, their traditional money-earner.

The districts are part of Houaphan Province, where, during the Vietnam War,
Laotian Communist leaders like Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan and Mr. Phoumi Vongvichit
lived in caves to escape years of heavy American bombing. So intense was the air
war that peasants stayed in their caves by daylight and tilled their fields only
at night. Sam Neua, the provincial capital, was the headquarters of what
Communists called the ''liberated zone.''

The project, which is scheduled to take six years to complete, provides for the
building of roads and irrigation dams, establishing communications links and
extending agricultural, public-health and educational services.

A Western ambassador said the development program had been submitted earlier to
the European Community and Australia, but they declined to undertake it, saying
major gains in the anti-narcotics effort would be too difficult to achieve.

The diplomat added that the United States probably held a similar view, but had
agreed to provide the aid for the political reason of moving toward a resumption
of normal relations with Laos; such a step could presage normalized relations
with Vietnam.

Ties Maintained

The United States has never interrupted diplomatic relations with Laos, as it
has with Vietnam and Cambodia. It maintains an embassy, run by a charge
d'affaires. The small staff rattles about in large buildings where American
officials, in addition to normal diplomatic activities, once oversaw a major war
effort and took part in most of the activities of the Laotian Government.

Acknowledging the development project, Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan, speaking in
French, said, ''I think two districts is not enough, compared with the number of
bombs America poured on our country.''

The subsequent Laotian-American agreement was signed on Jan. 9 in a friendly,
low-key ceremony at the Foreign Ministry. It was toasted with champagne by the
charge d'affaires, Charles B. Salmon Jr., and Deputy Foreign Minister Souban
Sritthirath.

Mr. Salmon called the signing an ''auspicious event'' and said it was
''reflective of the improving relationship.'' Mr. Souban Sritthirath, raising
his glass in response, said he hoped the ''memorandum of understanding'' would
''contribute to understanding and normalization in the relations of our two
countries.''

House Delegation Visits

The agreement commits Laos to a ''maximum effort'' to eliminate the cultivation
of opium and its trafficking. The United States has agreed to help in
development efforts to provide high landers with ''viable economies'' based on
crops other than opium. Laos promised to cooperate with the United States in
curbing drug trafficking and ''make officials and facilities available'' to that
end.

The accord followed President Bush's ''decertification'' of Laos last March for
what Washington called Vientiane's failure to cooperate in narcotics
suppression. Alluding to this, Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan said, ''There are things
that do not exist, but we are blamed.'' Laotian and American officials said they
hoped that the agreement would remove the block on cooperation.

A House delegation led by Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of Manhattan and chairman
of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, spent a day here
recently and, surprisingly, was received by Nouhak Phoumsavanh, president of the
National Assembly and held to be the most anti-Western of the Laotian leaders.
The Americans were the first to meet with Mr. Nouhak Phoumsavanh, who was
reported to have received them in a friendly and relaxed atmosphere.

Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan said Mr. Nouhak Phoumsavanh assured his visitors that Laos
would proceed with severity against narcotics offenses.

Coopoeration on M.I.A.'s

American officials also expressed satisfaction with Laotian cooperation in the
search for the remains of American servicemen missing in action, believed to
have been killed when their planes were shot down over Laos. A 17-member
American military search mission spent several days in southern Laos in January
and recovered remains from two crash sites.

Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan and Mr. Phoumi Vongvichit linked this cooperation directly
with demands for American economic aid. ''We gave you all that you needed,'' the
Acting President said he had told American diplomats. ''But you have given us
nothing directly.''

Both leaders acknowledged that the United States, through international
organizations, had contributed rice during periods of drought. ''We want direct
aid from you to us,'' said the 80-year-old Mr. Phoumi Vongvichit, who for
several years has served as President in place of Prince Souphanouvong, who has
apparently retired.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: A recent agreement to combat the drug trade and an aid package
signed last fall are indications of American willingness to improve ties with
Laos. The leaders of Laos say they want a new chapter in relations with the
United States, which backed the royal Government before the Communist victory of
1975. (NYT/Henry Kamm)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 28, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Sihanouk Sees 'Stumbling Blocks' to a Settlement

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 406 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, March 27


Prince Norodom Sihanouk said today that he was pessimistic about the chances for
a settlement soon in Cambodia, and he accused Vietnam of moving its border to
seize Cambodian territory.

In many of the world's capitals, the last few months have seen a measure of
optimism that two decades of turmoil and conflict in Cambodia might be ended
soon by an arrangement under which the United Nations would administer the
country as a prelude to free elections. But Prince Sihanouk, the most important
figure in the Cambodian opposition movement, pointed to an array of
disagreements on how the United Nations arrangements should be made.

''I am not optimistic as far as negotiations on Cambodia are concerned, because
as you can see there are several differences and stumbling blocks,'' he said at
a news conference in Beijing, where he was visiting his ailing aunt and
mother-in-law. ''So I don't expect in the near future the problem of Cambodia to
be settled.''

The disagreements concern who would serve on an interim supreme national council
to govern Cambodia before elections are held, whether troops should be disarmed
in the transition period, and the extent to which the Government of Prime
Minister Hun Sen needs to be dismantled before elections are held. Prince
Sihanouk also says that some one million Vietnamese have settled in Cambodia and
that they must not be allowed to vote.

During the news conference, Prince Sihanouk and waved maps illustrating his
assertions that Vietnam has illegally seized Cambodian territory.

Speaking in English, and periodically in his more polished French, he said that
Vietnam, which invaded Cambodia 11 years ago and ousted the Khmer Rouge
Government, had recently moved markers along the common border to acquire a
strip of Cambodian territory and had also occupied several islands that belong
to Cambodia.

'Most Serious Threat'

''The most serious threat to the survival of my homeland, of the Cambodian
nation as a state, is the modification with the consent of Hun Sen's regime of
the boundaries of Cambodia by Vietnam,'' Prince Sihanouk said.

Prince Sihanouk also said he had been assured by the Chinese President, Yang
Shangkun, that Beijing would continue to provide weapons and other assistance to
all of the Cambodian resistance factions, including the Khmer Rouge and its
non-Communist allies, the followers of Prince Sihanouk and of a former Prime
Minister, Son Sann.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 5, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Boat People and the Commonwealth

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 334 words


The sad story of Hong Kong's Vietnamese boat people gets sadder by the day. News
that the refugees are now willing to risk violence to avoid repatriation only
increases the urgency for a more humane global response.

Just before Christmas, 51 boat people, mostly women and children, were taken by
the British from camps in Hong Kong and deported to Hanoi. The deed was done
secretly, at 3 A.M., to avoid unpleasant photographs. Now 40,000 more who face
deportation are making homemade weapons and plotting resistance. Guards and
prisoners have already been wounded in clashes; the next attempt at repatriation
could lead to bloodier violence.

No doubt this is deeply troubling to Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and her
flustered civil servants. They wish the boat people would understand that nobody
relishes this dirty business. They patiently explain that boat people fleeing
Vietnam are merely economic migrants, unprotected by refugee law. And yet anyone
with a grain of spirit will rejoice at the refusal of these outcasts to go
gently in the middle of the night.

Unless Mrs. Thatcher wishes to be remembered for dealing abominably with the
helpless, she would be wise to put forced repatriation on indefinite hold. Yet
her critics also need to think again. While Washington condemns forcible
repatriation as ''odious,'' it resists more than token resettlement of boat
people in the U.S. It also vetoes aid to Hanoi, whose problems caused the
migrants to flee in the first place. And as British newspapers have noted,
little help has come from the former British dominions that constitute the
Commonwealth.

Here is a worthy challenge for an international group given to high-minded
lecturing on human rights. The Commonwealth's 49 sovereign members include
Canada, Australia and New Zealand. If these and others opened their wide gates,
the 40,000 boat people could be swiftly distributed.

If the Commonwealth does nothing for the boat people, it will share ignobly in
Britain's shame.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 8, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Two Decades Of Suffering In Cambodia

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 480 words



March 18, 1970: Prince Norodom Sihanouk is ousted by Lon Nol after nearly 30
years as leader of Cambodia. With American backing, Lon Nol fights North
Vietnamese troops and the Cambodian Communist rebels of the Khmer Rouge. From
exile in China, Prince Sihanouk heads the Khmer Rouge liberation front.

April 17, 1975: The Khmer Rouge rebels seize Phnom Penh and send its people to
work in the fields. Under Pol Pot they impose a brutal reorganization of society
in which more than a million people die. Sihanouk, their virtual prisoner, is
named head of state.

April 2, 1976: Prince Sihanouk resigns and Pol Pot of the Khmer Rouge becomes
Prime Minister.

December 1978: Vietnamese troops infiltrate and finally invade Chinese-backed
Cambodia after clashes along the border. They occupy Phnom Penh on Jan. 7, 1979,
and drive the Khmer Rouge to camps on the Thai frontier. The People's Republic
of Cambodia is formed under Heng Samrin.

October 1979: The Khmer Rouge is recognized by the United Nations as a
legitimate Government. The Khmer Rouge and smaller forces loyal to Sihanouk and
former Prime Minister Son Sann fight on.

June 22, 1982: Under pressure from China and other backers, three guerrilla
factions form a coalition government in exile with Sihanouk as president, Khieu
Samphan of the Khmer Rouge as Vice President and Son Sann as Prime Minister.

September 1985: The Khmer Rouge announces the retirement of Pol Pot as military
leader, but Western governments say he is still the real leader.

May 7, 1987: Sihanouk steps down as head of the coalition for a year after Khmer
Rouge attacks on his men and pursues his own peace initiative. Under Chinese
pressure, he returns in February 1988, resigns again in July, and quietly
returns later.

Dec. 2, 1987: Hun Sen, Prime Minister in Phnom Penh, and Sihanouk hold talks in
France. In the 18 months, they hold five inconclusive meetings.

May 1988: Vietnam says it will withdraw 50,000 troops, about half its force, by
the end of the year.

July 25, 1988: The Phnom Penh Government and the rebel coalition meet
face-to-face for the first time at inconclusive peace talks in Bogor, Indonesia.


April 5, 1989: Hanoi and Phnom Penh announce that all Vietnamese troops will
leave Cambodia by the end of September, even if no settlement is found.

April 27: Hun Sen says elections can be held within three months of the
Vietnamese pullout.

May 15: A meeting of Chinese and Soviet leaders, backers of the opposing sides,
concludes with no accord over the future of Cambodia.

July 19: The Phnom Penh Government proclaims neutrality once the last Vietnamese
soldier leaves on Sept. 26.

Sept. 26: Vietnam announces the completion of its withdrawal from Cambodia,
although guerrilla groups say some Vietnamese troops remain in Cambodian units.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 11, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

HONG KONG CAMPS TERMED INHUMAN

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 461 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Jan. 10


An American refugee monitoring group said today that conditions in Hong Kong's
closed detention camps for Vietnamese, where more than 44,000 men, women and
children are imprisoned, were ''inhuman.''

''These people are warehoused, stacked in living quarters that are totally
inhuman,'' said one member of the delegation of the Women's Commission on
Refugee Women and Children, which has visited five centers here that are closed
to the press and most relief agencies, In a statement, the group said people in
the camps were ''packed like sardines in concentration camp-like conditions.''
The group cited a host of problems inside, from sexual harassment of Vietnamese
women by the guards to overflowing sewers and scanty medical care.

Mothers and Babies Separated

Liv Ullman, the actress, who works with Unicef and is a co-chairwoman of the
visiting delegation, said that newborn babies in the camps have been accidently
separated from their mothers and that close relatives have been sent to
different camps.

Patricia Derian, the other co-chairwoman of the group and a former United States
Assistant Secretary of State for Humanitarian Affairs, said the Hong Kong
government should open the camps to the press ''because when you see high barbed
wire fences people need to know what goes on behind them.''

The group also called on Hong Kong to declare a one-year moratorium on the
forcible repatriation of Vietnamese who arrive here, pointing out that more than
1,200 Vietnamese who have volunteered to return home are still waiting in the
camps.

On Wednesday, 123 more volunteers returned to Vietnam, bringing the total of
returning volunteers to 995 since the program began last March. Officials of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said that another group of
volunteers will take off for Hanoi next week and that the voluntary program now
appears to be gaining popularity. #51 Are Flown Home The British colony, which
has been swamped by tens of thousands of Vietnamese asylum-seekers in the last
year and a half, began forcing boat people to return home last month, sending 51
aboard a chartered flight to Hanoi.

Of the more than 56,000 Vietnamese in Hong Kong, only about 12,000 are
considered refugees awaiting resettlement in a third country. Unless the
Vietnamese in the detention centers can prove they are fleeing persecution, Hong
Kong officials have said they will be forcibly returned.

A spokesman for the Hong Kong government, which has often conceded that the
camps are squalid because they are overcrowded, said that while the government
had not yet reviewed the delegation's specific charges, members of the group
have been meeting with key officials ''so we are talking with them and listening
to their comments.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 11, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

LAOS IS COURTING NEW BENEFACTORS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 689 words

DATELINE: VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 10


Laos, one of the world's least-developed countries by the standards of the
United Nations, is seeking several sources of foreign aid to replace assistance
from Communist countries that now have other preoccupations.

''We must know what we can ask of our partners,'' Deputy Foreign Minister Souban
Sritthirath said in an interview today. ''We cannot ask of the Soviet Union
today what we could ask three years ago.''

Mr. Souban noted that late last year Prime Minister Kaysone Phomvihane paid
official visits to Japan, which once occupied this country, and France, which
colonized it. Before those visits, the Prime Minister, who took office after the
Communist victory here in 1975, had not been to any non-Communist country except
for Thailand, Laos's neighbor across the Mekong River.

'Diversify Our Relationships'

Mr. Souban said the Prime Minister made the visits ''not only to diversify our
relationships, but also to find alternatives for what may be falling short from
elsewhere.'' He said the deficiencies were the result of ''the evolution in
Eastern Europe.''

Laos depends on foreign aid to improve living standards for its 3.9 million
citizens. The highly secretive Laotian Government closely guards its economic
data, so no information is available on the extent of assistance from the Soviet
Union and its Eastern European allies, Laos's main benefactors.

Because such information is not available, international aid agencies, another
main source of aid to Laos, have great difficulty in assessing its development
needs.

A Soviet resident acknowledged that Soviet aid had declined, but said Moscow
would never completely cut off support. He attributed the reductions not only to
the Soviet economic crisis but also to a realization that Laos, Vietnam and
Cambodia had often proved unable to insure the success of major projects.

'Political Will Exists'

Mr. Souban said Mr. Kaysone's meetings with officials in Tokyo and Paris were
encouraging. No concrete aid proposals emerged, he said, ''but the political
will exists.''

Mr. Souban said Laos had liberalized its economic structures independently of
the Soviet Union and saw no need for political changes. ''We have no lessons to
learn from Eastern Europe's changes, but they affect our economic prospects,''
he said.

Mr. Souban said that on reflection, a negative lesson could be learned from
Eastern Europe's changes. ''If it leads to anarchy, like in Rumania, we are
against it,'' he said.

A Westerner who has long associated with some senior Laotian leaders said he
found them traumatized by images of two events: the execution of President
Nicolae Ceausescu of Rumania and the opening of the Berlin wall.

But Mr. Souban rejected changing the country's rigid one-party system into a
pluralistic one, saying, ''The crushing majority of our people approve this one,
sole party, except some of those who live abroad.''

The Laotian view of the decline of Communist power in Europe parallels the view
of its most influential neighbor and ally, Vietnam. But Laotians, like Communist
and non-Communist diplomats and residents here, said this was not a view that
Hanoi imposed on Vientiane.

The consensus is that Vietnam no longer dictates to Laos as it did in the first
decade after the Communist victories in Indochina. Laos's assertion that the
50,000 Vietnamese troops once stationed here have been withdrawn is generally
accepted.

Mr. Souban, who was educated in a French military academy, said Laos's
geographical situation is an advantage in diversifying international
relationships. He stressed that trade has linked Laos with its neighbors -China,
Vietnam, Thailand, Cambodia and Myanmar, formerly Burma - despite any political
differences with those countries.

The Deputy Minister said the policy of diversifying relations made Laos eager to
resume links with the United States, which have been in abeyance since the
Communist victory.

''Sincerely, we want to clear the table of the past and turn over a new page,''
he said. ''We have good relationas with Japan, France, Britain and others. We
also want this with the United States.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Vientaine, Laos

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Refugees From Southeast Asia, Adapting Is a Slow Road

BYLINE: By ROBERT A. HAMILTON

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 1, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1479 words


WHEN Joseph Quy Vu came to this country from Vietnam, he spent two months in a
refugee camp and several more months finding a job and a place to live. That was
15 years ago. Now, though his children belong to local soccer and baseball teams
and he has made some friends in his South Windsor neighborhood, he still finds
adjusting to Western culture a difficult task.

''The Oriental is physically and mentally different from the European roots of
most Americans,'' Mr. Vu said, which makes the transition to a largely Caucasian
country all the more formidable for Southeast Asians.

He said a state like Connecticut, which is mainly suburban, presents a dramatic
change from the largely agrarian state that the Vietnamese fled. The immigrants
are awed by simple things like the well-tended lawns, paved roads that extend
even into rural areas, and water and electricity in every house.

While people in this country think nothing of starting the car to drive to the
corner and mail a letter, Mr. Vu's nephews in Vietnam think of a 10-mile hike as
a short walk.

''When I write to my family and tell them I go to the market once a week, they
wonder how we survive,'' Mr. Vu said. ''In my country, we had to go to the
market every day for fresh food, because no one had a refrigerator.''

''Everything here is different,'' he went on. ''It takes a long time to get used
to it.''

Nevertheless, state officials say that Southeast Asian refugees compose one of
the fastest-growing ethnic groups in the state, and as Connecticut prepares for
the 1990 census, those officials are trying to determine just how fast the
numbers have grown since about 2,500 refugees were counted in 1975. One estimate
puts the total today at more than 11,000.

Southeast Asian refugees began coming to Connecticut after the end of the
Vietnam War and they were sponsored by church groups and civic organizations.
''Before 1975, the only Southeast Asians in Connecticut were students at the
universities, but no refugees,'' said Hae C. Nguyen, a resettlement officer with
the state's Department of Human Resources.

Today, their numbers have grown to where they are sponsoring their own refugee
families, forming intrastate alliances to keep their culture alive and setting
up self-help groups.

Over the last several years Laotians, Cambodians, Vietnamese and Hmong -
tribespeople from the mountains of Laos - have set up Mutual Assistance
Associations, and the groups have joined to form the Connecticut Federation of
Refugee Assistance Associations, helping not only Southeast Asians, but also a
growing number of immigrants from Eastern Europe.

One recent immigrant, Khomsao Keovilay of Manchester, has even proposed
establishing a village of 25 homes for 250 Laotian refugees in the rural town of
Willington in northeastern Connecticut. Mr. Keovilay has said he intends to
build the village on 52 acres he and nine other immigrants bought for $150,000
in August.

The proposal has generated some opposition in town, but so far there is nothing
official to protest; Mr. Keovilay has not filed any formal plans with the town's
Planning and Zoning Commission, said First Selectman Roger W. Perry and the
commission's chairman, Herbert E. Klei.

Katrina Solstad Axelrod, director of the Connecticut Federation of Refugee
Assistance Associations, said that Mr. Keovilay, at the urging of the rest of
the people who bought the land, will not comment further on his plans.

''They're thinking this type of notoriety is not appropriate at this time,'' Ms.
Axelrod said. ''He's being respectful of the wishes of the other people in the
group.''

More Gradual Transition Sought

The refugees say they are not trying to set up their own society, only a place
where they and their children can make the transition from one culture to
another more gradually.

According to the 1980 census, there were 2,548 Southeast Asians of single
ancestry living in Connecticut, typically first-generation immigrants. Theron A.
Schnure, director of the Connecticut Census Data Center, said that in 1980 there
were 252 Cambodians, 858 Laotians and 1,438 Vietnamese. There were so few Hmong
at the time that they were not even listed in the Connecticut data.

Today, 8,200 Southeast Asian refugees live in Connecticut, three-quarters of the
total of 11,000 refugees who have settled in the state in the last 15 years, Mr.
Nguyen said, citing statistics from the United States Office of Refugee
Resettlement.

But Ms. Axelrod, of the refugee federation, said her group estimates the total
as at least 11,000 - from 3,700 to 4,000 Vietnamese, 3,500 Cambodians, 3,500
Laotians and 400 or more Hmong.

Southeast Asians made up about half of the 873 refugees who resettled in
Connecticut in the 1988-89 fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, Mr. Nguyen said, but
that decline reflects more a political decision by Washington to allow in
Eastern Europeans, who are now free to emigrate, than a change in the number of
Southeast Asians seeking to relocate here. Because of a cap on immigration to
the United States, the increased number of Europeans means fewer openings for
Southeast Asians.

'A Lot of Job Openings'

Mr. Nguyen said Connecticut has been particularly attractive, both to the
Federal agencies overseeing resettlement and to the refugees.

''We have a lot of job openings, and that's one of the important things for the
resettlement program,'' he said.

Theanvy Kuoch, project director of the Khmer Health Associates, a medical clinic
in West Hartford, and a founding member of Cambodian Mothers for Peace, said
studies by the Indochinese Psychiatric Clinic in Boston have shown that recent
immigrants' ties to the homeland cause problems when the homeland is in
upheaval.

''A lot of them want to deny, or they don't want to think about it,'' Ms. Kuoch
said. ''People in Connecticut who have family back in Cambodia are scared to
death. They want to be reunited, but right now it's impossible even to get in
touch with them.''

Ms. Kuoch spent 10 years trying to locate her own son, who remained in Cambodia.
He is now 16, and she expects him to join her in Connecticut this spring.

She said that Cambodians are not used to dealing with problems outside the
family, so it is harder for them to benefit from counseling.

''It's difficult for them to sit down with a therapist and talk about their
problems,'' said Ms. Kuoch, who has a master's degree in cross-cultural therapy.


No Buddhist Temples

While all immigrant groups go through a period of assimilation, that period is
longer for Southeast Asians, perhaps because they do not share the
Judeo-Christian roots of Europeans. A Polish immigrant can come to Connecticut
and join the Polish Club and the local Catholic Church. But there are no
Buddhist temples in the state, and no concentrations of Southeast Asians large
enough to have an organized club.

''Fifteen years ago, there was even more of a tendency for the Vietnamese people
in Connecticut to stick together,'' Mr. Vu said. ''We were lonely; we didn't
speak the language well, and we didn't have social contacts.''

About two-thirds of the refugees live in New Haven, Hartford and Bridgeport
areas, Ms. Axelrod said.

''The larger cities are attractive because there are more job opportunities, and
better mass transportation,'' she said.

The rest are scattered throughout the state. Most of the Hmong, for example,
live in the Enfield-Stafford Springs area, she said.

''We're really trying to get people to answer their 1990 census forms, because
it's difficult to get information on where they live,'' Ms. Axelrod said.

Assistance Aid Is Reduced

She said the population information is important because it can prove to state,
Federal and private funding agencies that social programs aimed at a particular
group are needed.

And it has become more important to use funds efficiently, she said, because of
cutbacks. Federal financing for refugee resettlement was reduced in the 1989
fiscal year, and was reduced again this fiscal year, so that each refugee can
now be given assistance for only four months instead of a year, as had been the
case.

''You can't move from Baltimore to Philadelphia and get adjusted in four months,
never mind from Southeast Asia to Connecticut,'' Ms. Axelrod said.

Mr. Schnure said the Census Bureau recognizes that there has been an influx of
Southeast Asians in Connecticut in the last decade.

He said that in the New Britain area, where there is a large population of
Laotians and Cambodians, public service announcements that explain the census
form have been running in their languages.

''There are language barriers that need to be addressed,'' Mr. Schnure
acknowledged. ''Many times, with an ethnic group, you need someone from the
group to make the bridge, to tell them how important it is that they respond to
these forms.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos; Joseph Quy Vu and his wife, Marie, with their children at their
home in South Windsor (NYT/Steve Miller)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 18, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

HONG KONG FACING REFUGEE LAWSUIT

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 874 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Jan. 17


An international legal effort has been organized to challenge the way this
colony screens Vietnamese boat people to determine which ones are genuine
refugees fleeing persecution and which ones are illegal immigrants who must
return home.

The litigation is being prepared by lawyers in the United States, Britain and
Hong Kong. It will name nine Vietnamese boat people detained in camps here as
plaintiffs and will argue that while they were screened out and their appeals
denied ''there are compelling facts that show all of these people are genuine
refugees who fled persecution in Vietnam,'' said Arthur C. Helton, director of
the Refugee Project of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights in New York.

All nine are in detention camps here, facing forcible return to Vietnam.

Mr. Helton said the legal cases would focus on the flaws in the screening
proceedings, from poor interpreters to the prejudgment demonstrated by
immigration officers.

Process Called Inadequate

The lawyers will also argue that by holding the Vietnamese in squalid,
overcrowded detention camps for months before they are screened, the government
is violating international human rights laws.

''We are not challenging Hong Kong's right to screen boat people and send back
the ones that are found not to be refugees,'' said Jerome A. Cohen, a senior
partner in the Hong Kong office of the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss,
Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, who has helped prepare the case. ''What concerns us
is the inadequacy of the screening process, the lack of counsel, the great
delays, the abuses of detention while awaiting a hearing.''

Mr. Helton said while the challenge could take ''some time'' to work its way
through a long appeals process here and in London, ''if the court initially
accepts the case, we will ask that the Hong Kong authorities be prevented from
continuing forced repatriation until the issues are resolved.''

If successful, he said, the litigation could force Hong Kong to greatly expand
the resources of the screening program, from more interpreters to trained
counselors for the Vietnamese.

The Hong Kong Legal Aid Society has agreed to pay for the proceedings, which
involve a number of prestigious Hong Kong lawyers, including three Hong Kong
barristers and a firm of solicitors.

''We will be getting the matter before the court within a few weeks,'' said
Daniel Fung, one of the barristers who will be handling the court case.
''Initially we will file in Hong Kong's High Court under a provision that allows
judicial review of any government administrative procedure which might be
unfair.'' #43,000 in Detention Hong Kong has more than 43,000 Vietnamese in
detention camps here, and last month it began to forcibly return some of those
screened out as illegal immigrants. More forced returns are expected this month.

The colony has said that all the boat people will be screened and that only
those found to be genuine refugees fleeing religious or political persecution
will be processed for resettlement in a third country.

Mr. Helton, Janelle Diller of San Francisco, who has worked with the Indochina
Resource Action Center, and David Burgess, a British solicitor, were here last
week to help lay the groundwork for the legal challenge.

In Hong Kong's screening process, immigration officials, through interpreters,
interview Vietnamese boat people, who have no legal counsel and virtually no
preparation. This week, the Hong Kong government defended the process, saying it
is monitored by the United Nations High Commissioner, which acts as a ''safety
net.''

But Robert van Leeuwen, who heads the United Nations agency here, said on
Tuesday that the United Nations has so few workers to check the cases ''we are
not able to insure with confidence that people who might be manditorily
repatriated in the future might not be refugees.''

If, after the interview, the Vietnamese is found not to be a refugee he may
appeal, but he has no right to be present at the appeal to argue his case, nor
can he send a legal representative. The appeals board simply reviews the case
file compiled by immigration.

One Man's Story

Mr. Helton pointed out that when it turns down a case, the appeals board
''doesn't even have to give a reason.''

The lawyer, who visited a detention center here to interview clients for the
action, said that one of the boat people whose case will be presented is a
37-year-old man who served as a paratrooper in the South Vietnamese Army until
1975. The man had been in a political re-education camp, been sentenced to
forced labor and had his household registration book revoked by the Government.

''The registration entitles you to citizenship, and is critical because all
civil rights and government programs are contingent on having such a document,''
Mr. Helton said.

The former soldier, who worked as a fisherman, was imprisoned and badly beaten
once for trying to flee Vietnam, Mr. Helton said. He finally escaped to Hong
Kong in 1988 with his wife and daughter.

Mr. Helton said that in the United States the man would be deemed a refugee.
''It is a clear case of persecution,'' he said. In Hong Kong, the man has been
deemed an illegal alien and is awaiting forced return home.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 30, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Asia's Latest Economic Miracle Is Vietnam;
Boat People and U.S.

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 232 words


To the Editor:

In ''The Boat People and the Commonwealth'' (editorial, Jan. 5), you
characterize the United States as resisting ''more than token resettlement of
boat people in the United States.'' That is wrong.

The United States has brought more than 930,000 Indochinese refugees to this
country since 1975, including 45,000 in fiscal year 1989 alone. From Hong Kong,
the United States has resettled more than 64,000 Vietnamese since 1975,
including 1,065 in fiscal year 1989.

The United States pledged at last June's international conference on Indochinese
refugees to resettle up to 50 percent of new Vietnamese asylum seekers in the
region who are found by screening programs to be refugees under international
standards.

The primary United States goal has been the assurance of first asylum -the safe
and humane reception of boat people - throughout the region.

While your statement about United States resettlement policy is factually
incorrect, resettlement cannot alone solve this problem. There are sufficient
Vietnamese in Hong Kong who have volunteered to return to Vietnam to make use of
the capacity of Vietnam to receive returnees. We have urged expansion of
voluntary return programs to relieve the Vietnamese population pressures in Hong
Kong.

PRINCETON N. LYMAN
Director, Bureau for Refugee
Programs, Department of State
  Washington, Jan. 16, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 30, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 133 words



Little Appetite for Stocks
American companies, which widely bought their own stocks and those of other
concerns during the boom of the 1980's, are apparently pulling back.

Market Place, page D1.

Waiting for Mandela
South Africa is gripped with anticipation of the release of Nelson Mandela, who,
with the help of a fax machine, is negotiating the outlines of what could be the
nation's future. Page A3.

On the Ho Chi Minh Trail
New villages have been built along the Ho Chi Minh trail, the network of routes
through Laos used by Hanoi in the Vietnam War. But the scars of American bombs
remain. Page A8.

Threats to Fish Species
Many native North American fish species are threatened or about to be, the
American Fisheries Association reports. Science Times, page C4.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 2, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Sounds Around Town

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 399 words



Crashing and Heaving

Last Exit, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street (219-3055). Last Exit's
improvisations are vast, primeval noises, crashing and heaving and sometimes
disgorging a shard of melody or a screech of guitar. With Ronald Shannon Jackson
on drums and Peter Brotzman and Bill Laswell on basses, the quartet makes music
with a deep bottom; Sonny Sharrock, a pioneering free-jazz guitarist, can evoke
pterodactyl calls or an earthquake at a glass factory. The group's first New
York performances are to take place tomorrow at 9 P.M. and midnight; tickets are
$12 in advance, $15 at the door.

Folk-Rock's Bite

The Lilac Time, CBGB, 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street (982-4052). Folk-rock
returns with a bite, and without nostalgia, in the Lilac Time's deceptively
serene songs. The lilting melodies and intricate arrangements - embroidered with
acoustic guitar, concertina and penny whistle -carry lyrics filled with quiet
discontent; they won't settle for folksy complacency. Tonight about 12:30 A.M.;
tickets are $9.

Music of Vietnam

Phong Nguyen Ensemble: Music of Vietnam, Washington Square Methodist Church, 135
West Fourth Street (545-7536). Seesawing, glistening lines for zithers and
lutes, ancient-sounding melodies for wooden flute, and singing that can be
delicate or forthright, carry the folk songs, theater music and ritual music of
Vietnam. Phong Nguyen, who plays Vietnamese stringed instruments, is a
musicologist whose repertory encompasses the music of both northern and southern
Vietnam. Tonight at 8; tickets, $10.

Drums and Paranoia

Rock Album of the Week: The Neon Judgment, ''Blood and Thunder'' (Play It Again
Sam/Wax Trax Records, 1659 North Damen Avenue, Chicago, Ill. 60647). Europeans
who are infatuated with American culture brew strange hybrids. On ''Blood and
Thunder,'' the Neon Judgment, from Belgium, throws together the mechanical dance
beat and guttural ricocheting vocals of industrial rock with blues harmonica and
folk-rock guitars. Half the album dispenses passable but ordinary industrial
rock, all electronic drums and paranoia, with lyrics in accented English. But at
its best - in ''Don't Wish Me Luck,'' ''1313'' (a prospective dance craze) and
''Facing Pictures'' - the Neon Judgment's jumble of citified electronics and
country-fried Americana is just off kilter enough to provide some new thrills.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 2, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WEEKENDER GUIDE

BYLINE: By ANDREW L. YARROW

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 764 words



URBAN LONELINESS

''Rapsodog,'' a theater work about happiness, busyness and survival in the late
20th century, will be presented this weekend by a French duo called the Mundial
Sisters at the Carey Playhouse of the Brooklyn Academy of Music. This sparse
meditation on working and urban anomie focuses on a mechanic and a fruit-seller,
and employs stray sounds like car engines and dogs barking. The Sisters -
Veronique and Martine Guillaud - will perform tonight and tomorrow at 8. Tickets
are $10 and $15. The academy is at 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, in the
Fort Greene section of Brooklyn. Information: (718) 636-4100.

HONG KONG FILMS

City, colony, commercial center and cinematic hothouse, Hong Kong has been a
thriving center of Asian film making for many years. This movie-making heritage
will be explored in a series called ''Romance, Gangsters and Chow Yun-Fat,''
beginning today at the Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue (at 70th Street). The
two-week series includes two screenings each of six films featuring the popular
Hong Kong actor Chow Yun-Fat. A satire on Hong Kong's materialism, ''Love Unto
Waste,'' will be shown tonight at 6:30 and Feb. 10 at 8:30 P.M.; ''Love and
Death in Saigon,'' about intrique and corruption at the end of the Vietnam War,
is scheduled for tonight at 8:30 and Feb. 10 at 6:30; ''Dream Lovers,'' a
romantic ghost story involving ancient terra cottas, is on the bill for Sunday
at 5 P.M. and next Friday at 8:30 P.M., and ''Love in a Fallen City,'' a romance
set in wartime Shanghai, will be screened on Sunday at 7 P.M. and next Friday at
6:30 P.M. A subsequent series of offbeat films by the Hong Kong director Tsui
Hark will be presented in April. Tickets are $7. Information: 517-2742.

Saturday

GLASS IN 12 PARTS

The composer Philip Glass will appear with his ensemble at Avery Fisher Hall on
Saturday for a performance of his early Minimalist work ''Music in 12 Parts.''
This 1974 four-hour cycle for woodwinds, electronic keyboards, soprano and sound
mixers will be presented in an eveninglong concert beginning at 6 P.M. with a
one-hour dinner break at 8 P.M. In addition to Mr. Glass on synthesizer, the
ensemble includes Jon Gibson, saxophonist and flutist; Martin Goldray,
keyboardist; Jack Kripl, flutist, piccoloist and saxophonist; Kurt Munkacsi,
sound designer and mixer; Dora Ohrenstein, soprano and keyboardist; Richard
Peck, flutist and saxophonist, and Dan Dryden, sound mixer. Michael Riesman will
conduct. Tickets are $30, $25 and $20. Information: 874-6770.

JACKIE ROBINSON TO MUSIC

Jackie Robinson, the Brooklyn Dodgers superstar who was the first black player
in major-league baseball, is the subject of a musical to be presented this
weekend at the Promenade Theater, Broadway and 76th Street. The show, ''Play to
Win,'' was commissioned by Theaterworks/ USA, a 29-year-old company that
produces works for children and families, and won the 1984 Audelco Award for
''best writing of a new show by black authors for the noncommercial theater.''
The show - written by James de Jongh, Carles Cleveland and Jimi Foster - traces
Robinson's struggles with racism and his ultimate success. It stars Michael
David Gordon and is directed by Ken Nixon. Performances are on Saturday at 10:30
A.M. and 12:30 P.M., and on Sunday at 12:30 P.M. Tickets are $15 and $12.
Information: 677-5959.

Sunday

WALL STREET HISTORY

A one-character play with a very long name - ''Uncle Dan's Financial Tips; or,
Sunday Is Sunday, but the Other Six Days Is for Business'' -will be performed on
Sunday at 2 P.M. at the Fraunces Tavern Museum to help kick off a new exhibition
on the history of Wall Street. The exhibition, ''Wall Street: Changing
Fortunes,'' traces the three-century history of one of the world's most famous
streets with such disparate artifacts as bull-and-bear cigar boxes, a stock
ticker, an early stock-exchange seat and Mother Goose-style poems about finance.
The exhibition, which also includes objects from two 1984 archeological digs on
the street, will be on view through Aug. 12. Hours are 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.,
Mondays through Fridays, and noon to 5 P.M. on Sundays. Admission is $2.50; $1
for students, children and the elderly. A Thursday lunchtime series of seven
lectures, ''Dollars and Dreams: The Evolution of Wall Street,'' begins this week
at 12:30 P.M. As for the play, it is about an eccentric 19th-century financier
named Daniel Drew, and is produced by the New Jersey-based East Lynne Company.
The tavern is at 54 Pearl Street. Information: 425-1778.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CAMBODIA FACTIONS SAID TO LINK ARMIES

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 25, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 874 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 3


A memorandum prepared by the Cambodian Defense Ministry says the two
non-Communist factions opposing the Phnom Penh Government are increasingly
cooperating on the battlefield with their dominant ally, the Communist Khmer
Rouge.

The document, provided to The New York Times by an opponent of American policy
toward Cambodia who recently visited the country, says the three opposition
factions took part in attacks on Pailin, Varin and smaller towns in Banteay
Meanchey Province.

The document offers details of how Phnom Penh says the three guerrilla groups
are working together tactically on the battlefield and tends to support the
assertions of Western diplomats who say cooperation between the non-Communist
factions and the Khmer Rouge is increasing.

Spokesmen for one of the non-Communist factions, the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front, deny such cooperation. But Western diplomats say the front
coordinates strategy with the Khmer Rouge on battlefield objectives and shares
military intelligence.

Sihanouk Explains Move

Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who leads the other non-Communist faction, acknowledged
coordination of military activity with the Khmer Rouge in an interview with The
New York Times in Beijing in December. ''The world may condemn us,'' he said,
adding that the military weakness of the non-Communists made cooperation with
the Khmer Rouge necessary, however distasteful, because the world valued
military strength more than moral purity.

The issue of non-Communist cooperation with the Khmer Rouge is important given a
Congressional ban on the use of American funds for even indirect aid to the
Khmer Rouge. American diplomats in Bangkok are sensitive to the problems raised
by the cooperation and have objected to it, fearing that Congress may cut off
funds for the non-Communists.

The United States, other Western nations and the non-Communist countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations support the three-party opposition
coalition, but provide support only to the two non-Communist factions. The
United States provides some $5 million in overt, non-arms aid to the
non-Communists and $20 million to $24 million more in secret, non-arms aid,
Western diplomats and American officials say. Weapons are formally paid for by
Singapore.

The Cambodian memorandum was provided by Jeremy J. Stone, president of the
Federation of American Scientists, who recently visited Vietnam and Cambodia.
Mr. Stone, an outspoken opponent of American involvement in the Cambodian war
and of any arms aid to the non-Communists, requested the memorandum from the
Defense Minister, Gen. Tie Banh.

Recognition of Hun Sen Urged

Mr. Stone advocates American recognition of the Phnom Penh Government of Prime
Minister Hun Sen, as the only obstacle to a return to power by the Khmer Rouge,
under whose rule more than a million Cambodians died.

The American Government shuns Mr. Hun Sen's administration, which was installed
by Vietnam 11 years ago after Hanoi drove out the Khmer Rouge. Washington
supports Prince Sihanouk as head of state and wants a comprehensive settlement
resulting in free elections supervised by the United Nations in which Mr. Hun
Sen would not have an unfair advantage.

The Defense Ministry document asserts that Sihanouk forces have sometimes paid
Khmer Rouge soldiers for help on the battlefield. In last month's battle for
Varin, which both the Sihanouk forces and the Khmer Rouge claimed to have
captured, Sihanouk forces paid $80 in Thai baht to each Khmer Rouge soldier, the
document says. In a battle for the commune of Nimit, the memorandum says,
Sihanouk forces paid $3,000 to Khmer Rouge division 450 for battlefield help.

A spokesman for the Sihanouk faction in Bangkok denied these assertions, calling
them ''rubbish'' and ''defamation.''

''The Khmer Rouge don't need any money from us,'' he said. ''They're a lot
richer than we are.''

More Cooperation Reported

Western diplomats said cooperation between the Sihanouk forces and the Khmer
Rouge was increasing, especially because of ammunition shortages as supply lines
lengthen. They said the Khmer Rouge, better organized and financed by China, has
more ammunition porters and supplies. The two forces have been sharing
ammunition, intelligence and artillery support, the diplomats said, and have
sometimes fought alongside each other for the same objective.

All the factions are trying to control as much territory as possible before a
new round of negotiations on a Cambodian settlement. Any settlement will
probably call for a cease-fire in place, the diplomats said.

Mr. Hun Sen and Hanoi have moved closer to Washington's position by agreeing to
a significant United Nations role in Cambodia, Mr. Stone said, ''while Sihanouk
is drifting closer to the Khmer Rouge.''

''The contradictions in the U.S. position are surfacing so rapidly that it will
be unpalatable for Congress to openly support the killing of more Cambodians by
continuing to provide virtually all the funding to the non-Communists,'' Mr.
Stone said. ''It's getting much harder to live with the contradiction that you
could support the non-Communist factions without supporting the Khmer Rouge
indirectly, which is against the law.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

War or Peace in Cambodia?

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 498 words


The New York Times's Steven Erlanger reports that several thousand Vietnamese
troops appear to have secretly re-entered Cambodia last fall to help stiffen
military resistance to the Khmer Rouge. That news is sure to complicate the task
of the Southeast Asian peace conference opening Monday in Jakarta, Indonesia.
Yet the threat of widened war could also concentrate the diplomats' minds, not
only at Jakarta but also in parallel talks among the five permanent members of
the United Nations Security Council.

Vietnam's promise to leave Cambodia must now be considered subject to reversal
until there is broad agreement on Cambodia's future. The U.S. insists that such
agreement must be reached. But the Bush Administration wrongly casts Prime
Minister Hun Sen as the main obstacle to an accord. Washington's chief Cambodian
ally, Prince Sihanouk, deserves the greater share of the blame.

The Prince and his non-Communist ally Son Sann have nationalist credentials that
Hun Sen, installed by the Vietnamese, conspicuously lacks. A coalition of the
three could theoretically bring a settlement. But Prince Sihanouk refuses any
deal that excludes his other ally, the genocidal Khmer Rouge. At that, Hun Sen
reasonably draws the line. What kind of legitimacy would come from partnership
with the murderers of more than a million Cambodians between 1975 and 1978?

This impasse sank last summer's Paris peace conference. Vietnam withdrew its
occupation army without a political settlement. The result was renewed fighting
as all sides maneuvered for bargaining leverage. A further result, it now seems,
was the return of Vietnamese troops.

But out of the diplomatic wreckage emerged a promising new approach, sponsored
by Australia. Following the successful precedent of Namibia, it would have the
U.N. enforce a cease-fire and supervise elections between competing Cambodian
factions. The Australian formula has won endorsement in principle from the five
permanent members of the U.N. Security Council, including Moscow, Washington and
Beijing, the principal foreign sponsors of Cambodia's combatants.

Refining this formula will be the main order of business next week at Jakarta.
Hun Sen, whose Government now controls most of the country, wants a small U.N.
presence for a short time. Opposition forces want a much larger U.N. role for a
longer time, to offset the advantages of incumbency. That's not unreasonable.
But the Namibia example shows that a relatively small U.N. supervisory force can
be effective.

The diplomats arrive in Jakarta under clouds of war. But they also come with new
incentives to compromise. Hun Sen and Vietnam need to avoid the embarrassment of
further use of Vietnamese troops. And the opposition now knows that it cannot
score an easy military triumph over Phnom Penh's wobbly army. What's still
needed is a strong push from Washington, Moscow and perhaps Beijing to
accelerate the negotiating process and bring real peace to Cambodia's killing
fields.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Slogging Surreally in the Vietnamese Jungle

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words



The Things They Carried
By Tim O'Brien
273 pages. Houghton Mifflin/Seymour Lawrence. $19.95.

Tim O'Brien's ''Going After Cacciato,'' published in 1978, was one of the few
Vietnam novels to capture that war's hallucinatory mood, the oddly surreal
atmosphere produced by jungle warfare, heavy drug use and the moral and
political ambiguities of American involvement. In relating the adventures of a
deserter and the soldiers who are pursuing him, Mr. O'Brien was able to use the
devices of magical realism to create a novel that evoked both the brutal
realities of that war, and the romantic yearnings of young men caught up in a
conflict they did not understand.

Having made something of a detour with his last book - ''The Nuclear Age''
(1985) was an ambitious but stilted portrait of a former 60's radical who
becomes obsessed with nuclear Armageddon - Mr. O'Brien returns in ''The Things
They Carried'' to the subject of Vietnam. The volume is a wonderful bookend to
''Cacciato,'' and at the same time a marvel of storytelling in itself. On one
level, it is a shattering fictional portrait of a group of foot soldiers, mired
in one of the war's obscure campaigns. On another level, it is an elegiac
tribute to the powers of storytelling itself - a tribute that celebrates the
transforming powers of the imagination, even as it acknowledges its limits.

In setting up the series of interlinked stories that make up ''The Things They
Carried,'' Mr. O'Brien tells the reader something about himself. He notes that
he didn't believe in the war. He notes that he considered dodging the draft. And
he notes that he could not muster the courage to say ''no,'' that he eventually
went to Vietnam out of fear of embarassment, fear of shame.

These facts, the reader knows from Mr. O'Brien's earlier memoir (''If I Die in a
Combat Zone''), are essentially true. Other ''facts'' attached to the Tim
O'Brien character and his war buddies are imaginative embroideries or outright
inventions - attempts to conjure up what Mr. O'Brien calls the ''surreal
seemingness'' of the war. For instance, in one story, Mr. O'Brien chronicles -
in wrenching detail - the events that led up to his shooting of an innocent
Vietnamese man. In another story, he writes: ''Twenty years ago I watched a man
die on a trail near the village of My Khe. I did not kill him. But I was
present, you see, and my presence was guilt enough. I remember his face, which
was not a pretty face, because his jaw was in his throat, and I remember feeling
the burden of responsiblity and grief. I blamed myself. And rightly so, because
I was present.''

''I want you to feel what I felt,'' he goes on, ''I want you to know why
story-truth is truer sometimes than happening-truth.''

The experiences of Mr. O'Brien's comrades in arms similarly appear to be a blend
of fact and fiction, reality and imaginative recreation. Although a disclaimer
points out that ''all the incidents, names and characters are imaginary,''
another introductory note reads: ''This book is lovingly dedicated to the men of
Alpha Company, and in particular to Jimmy Cross, Norman Bowker, Rat Kiley,
Mitchell Sanders, Henry Dobbins, and Kiowa'' - the names of the very heroes of
''The Things They Carried.''

In overlapping stories, the reader learns what happened to individual members of
Alpha Company. Ted Lavender is shot dead as he walks back from the lavatory one
evening. Kiowa dies during a sniper attack, his wounded body sinking into a
stinking, rain-drenched swamp, before his friends can rescue him. And Curt Lemon
is playing a dangerous game of catch with some hand grenades when he steps on a
land mine and is instantly blown to pieces.

Other members of the company live through the war, though their emotions do not
survive intact. After patching together hundreds of wounded men and packing
dozens more into body bags, the medic, Rat Kiley, starts having hallucinations
about corpses and giant insects; he shoots himself in the foot and is shipped
out to Japan. Norman Bowker makes it safely home to Iowa, but finds himself
unable to make sense of his life; he works briefly as an automotive parts
salesman, a janitor, a car wash attendant and a short order cook, then hangs
himself in the locker room of the local Y.M.C.A.

As for Mr. O'Brien, he returns home, enrolls in graduate school at Harvard and
goes on to become a writer. ''A nice smooth glide - no flashbacks or midnight
sweats,'' he writes. On the other hand, he realizes, he has been irrevocably -
and fundamentally - altered by the war: ''There were times in my life when I
couldn't feel much, not sadness or pity or passion, and somehow I blamed this
place for what I had become, and I blamed it for taking away the person I had
once been.''

In prose that combines the sharp, unsentimental rhythms of Hemingway with
gentler, more lyrical descriptions, Mr. O'Brien gives the reader a shockingly
visceral sense of what it felt like to tramp through a booby-trapped jungle,
carrying 20 pounds of supplies, 14 pounds of ammunition, along with radios,
machine guns, assault rifles and grenades. He conjures up the resupply choppers
that would arrive every evening with ''fresh watermelons and crates of
ammunition and sunglasses and woolen sweaters,'' sparklers for the Fourth of
July, and colored eggs for Easter. He describes the stultifying boredom of
waiting for action, hour after hour, day after day; and the terrible shock of
watching a friend be blown to bits, several feet away.

In addition, he manages that harder thing of making the reader understand the
difficulties and consolations of writing about a war - this war, any war, the
impossibility of conveying the horror, and the overwhelming need to make sense
of that horror by arranging sentences on a page. With ''The Things They
Carried,'' Mr. O'Brien has written a vital, important book - a book that matters
not only to the reader interested in Vietnam, but to anyone interested in the
craft of writing as well.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Tim O'Brien (Miriam Berkley)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 9, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Report of Raid Is Called Inflated

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 526 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 8


Claims by the Khmer Rouge on Sunday to have made a frontal attack on Cambodia's
second largest city, setting it ablaze, appear to have been exaggerated, Western
and Asian diplomats said here today.

In Phnom Penh, Government spokesmen said there had been no large attack on
Cambodia's second city, Battambang, but scattered attacks in the province around
it, and that life in the city was normal.

A newspaper editor in Phnom Penh told Agence France-Presse today, however, that
the Khmer Rouge assaults, beginning Friday night, ''were concentrated on several
posts on the periphery of the city.'' But the attacks, the editor, Khieu
Kanharith, said, ''were repelled after heavy fighting.''

And in an interview broadcast on Phnom Penh radio on Sunday, the Cambodian
Defense Minister, Gen. Tie Banh, said that guerrillas opposed to the Government
were advancing in areas close to the border with Thailand and that the
Government had abandoned some smaller villages to concentrate forces on larger
population centers.

The confused picture is typical of the situation in Cambodia since Vietnam said
it had withdrawn the last of its troops at the end of September. Diplomats here
say that each side has exaggerated its victories and discounted its defeats as
part of a larger psychological maneuvering to improve negotiating positions in
any future peace talks.

In fact, the diplomats say, the level of fighting has not been especially high
and the situation on the battlefield is best seen as a slowly shifting
stalemate, with Government forces slowly losing relatively unimportant ground.

The loss of Battambang, however, or even Sisophon, the capital of the
neighboring province of Banteay Meanchey, could change the climate of the war,
causing panic in Phnom Penh and heightened fears that the Khmer Rouge could take
power again.

The Khmer Rouge, who took power in 1975, presided over the deaths of more than
one million Cambodians before they were expelled by the Vietnamese, who invaded
in late 1978. Hanoi installed the current Phnom Penh Government, which is
opposed by a three-part coalition dominated by the Khmer Rouge. The opposition
also includes two non-Communist factions backed by the West.

The diplomats said the Khmer Rouge attacks were apparently made on the outskirts
of Battambang. Battambang's airfield was a target.

On Sunday, the Khmer Rouge radio said Battambang ''burned brightly'' from 1 A.M.
on Saturday and ''the fire was still raging at dawn.'' Diplomats said that a
school compound on the city's outskirts was also attacked.

The Cambodian newspaper editor, Mr. Khieu Kanharith, who is also a member of the
National Assembly, told Agence France-Presse that the Khmer Rouge were repelled
after heavy fighting. ''We don't think the guerrillas can take any of these
towns because we have massed our forces to defend them,'' he said.

He was speaking of Battambang, Sisophon and Poipet, the main border crossing
opposite the Thai town of Aranyaprathet.

On Saturday evening, the city of Phnom Penh was sealed off after five small
explosions were heard. Diplomats described the explosives as small plastic mines
with timers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: map of Battambang, Cambodia

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 18, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

At Last, Dawn for Cambodia?

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 437 words


There seems, finally, to be the promise of life in the Killing Fields. If all
goes well, the Khmer Rouge fanatics who slaughtered more than a million
Cambodians in the 1970's will, under a plan sponsored by the five permanent
members of the United Nations Security Council, be denied control of Cambodia.
Significantly, the group includes China, until now the principal benefactor and
armorer of the hateful Khmer Rouge.

China has agreed in principle with the U.S., the Soviet Union, Britain and
France to set up a United Nations administration in Cambodia to carry out
elections. All five say they will honor the results. A similar scheme worked in
Africa, where a U.N.-supervised election last November was the key to ending the
bitter civil war in Namibia.

Despite practical difficulties, the idea makes moral and political sense. It
also enables the Bush Administration to scrap a Cambodia policy that is neither
moral nor sensible.

What made the rescue effort urgent was the failure of an earlier conference to
agree on an interim Cambodian regime - just as Vietnamese troops were ending a
decade of occupation. A scramble for power ensued, with the odds favoring the
Khmer Rouge. Australia pressed energetically for a Namibia formula. By the time
France convened another meeting this week, even China was ready to approve a
larger U.N. role in Cambodia.

Beijing's shift suggests that Chinese hard-liners do have some regard for what
the world thinks. And China was also obliged to take account of a hardening
attitude against the Khmer Rouge in Southeast Asia, especially in Thailand,
whose territory the Chinese used to ship arms to the Khmer Rouge.

Still unclear is what China will do if the Khmer Rouge refuses to go along with
the U.N. plan. The five powers have agreed only on principles, not on crucial
details. The Namibia operation cost $700 million; a parallel effort in
devastated Cambodia is likely to cost more. Where will the money come from? And
who will fill Cambodia's seat at the U.N. until the vote?

In any case, the new plan mercifully gives the Bush Administration a way out of
a policy that looked heartless and even mindless. Arguing that Vietnam needed
still to be punished for installing a client regime 10 years ago, the U.S.
became China's strategic ally in funding an armed rebellion led by Pol Pot's
butchers.

Unremitting hostility to Hanoi and exaggerated deference to Beijing have
dominated America's Cambodia policy for much too long. The U.N. plan offers an
honorable way out for Washington. Much more to the point, it offers Cambodians a
way to end their endless nightmare.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 24, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Capital Restaurants Born of Global Politics

BYLINE: By JOAN NATHAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 4, Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 735 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 23


Ten years ago Gabriel Aubouin, the private chef for the French Ambassador in
Washington, decided to open a restaurant. ''A backer offered me $100,000,'' Mr.
Aubouin, 43 years old, said. ''That was the opportunity I was waiting for.''

Today Mr. Aubouin and his partner, the former maitre d'hotel at the French
Embassy, Raymond Campet, own La Brasserie, a popular French bistro on Capitol
Hill. ''I wanted to stay here because the opportunity to open a restaurant was
greater and more exciting than in France,'' Mr. Aubouin said. Mr. Aubouin's tale
reflects a peculiar Washington tradition of embassy workers who leave their jobs
to open restaurants. In the last few years, Alain Roussel, the chef at the
French Embassy, opened La Ferme in Chevy Chase, Md., and Pierre Chauvet, chef at
the Dutch Embassy, opened La Fourchette in Adams-Morgan, a Washington
neighborhood with many ethnic restaurants.

Sometimes new restaurants open out of political necessity rather than economic
opportunity. After Governments changed in Iran and Ethiopia, for example,
Iranian and Ethiopian restaurants opened around Washington, serving a ready
market of political refugees who missed their families and their food.
Restaurant watchers are now betting on when Panamanian and Eastern European
restaurants will begin opening.

David Carliner, a Washington immigration lawyer, said people who seek asylum in
the United States are permitted to work and to open their own businesses. Many
are former embassy officials, and restaurants offer an excellent outlet for
their diplomatic skills.

Eight Ethiopian restaurants opened in Washington in the 1980's. One of the
oldest, the Red Sea, opened eight years ago in Adams-Morgan. ''We were students;
one worked at the embassy,'' one of the three owners, Ghennet Gabre Medhin,
said. ''We didn't want to go back to Ethiopia. The first year it was the three
partners who did all the cooking. Now we are one step up. We have a cook.'' Most
of the restaurants open outside the high-rent district of downtown Washington.
Nguyen Van Thoi, who left Vietnam by boat in 1979, owns two Vietnamese
restaurants in northern Virginia, including My An 2, a tiny restaurant in a
shopping center in Falls Church that has several Vietnamese and Chinese
restaurants. In Vietnam, Mr. Van Thoi was an administrator for the Agency for
International Development. ''When I came here I studied aviation and then worked
in a gas station,'' he said. ''If you are not a mechanic or technician, which I
am not, a gas station is a terrible job. I worked hard and didn't make any
money.''

Like Greek, Chinese and Jewish immigrants before him, Mr. Van Thoi employs
members of his family. ''Your family can save you lots,'' he said. ''There is
less waste and no stealing.''

''I know public relations and how to greet the people,'' he went on. ''I am one
of the people most successful, but don't kid yourself, most of these restaurants
fail.''

Not all the people fleeing political regimes arrive in the United States
penniless. Across the street from the Red Sea is Meskerem, the fanciest of the
Ethiopian restaurants, with brightly painted tiles decorated with Ethiopian
motifs. ''My husband and I left Ethiopia and made some money in Saudi Arabia,''
Nafisa Said, 33, who runs the restaurant, said. ''When we came here we thought
there was a market for Ethiopian food.''

When the Shah of Iran fell in 1979, Fatola Samiy was the educational counselor
at the Iranian Embassy. He and his wife, Simin, had been collecting furniture to
take back to their home in Teheran. With no possibility of returning to Iran,
Mrs. Samiy went to work cooking. The antiques found a new home at the Caspian
Tea Room, a restaurant the Samiys opened in a shopping center in the Spring
Valley section of Washington, a residential area.

Like owners of many other ethnic restaurants, the Samiys learned that it was
wise to have a menu with ethnic and American dishes. ''There are not many
Iranians who live in this neighborhood,'' Mrs. Samiy said. ''We have to adjust
our menu for our American and Iranian customers.''

If politics governs restaurant trends, what is next in the nation's capital?
''Washington will continue to be a magnet for emigres,'' said Joel Denker,
author of ''Capitol Flavors,'' a portrait of Washington's ethnic restaurants.
''I see Somali cafes, Haitian Creole eateries, and even more Pakistani kebab
shops.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Nguyen Van Thoi, standing, chats with a customer at his
restaurant in Falls Church, Va. Mr. Thoi once worked for the Agency for
International Development in Vietnam. (NYT/Andrea Mohin)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 25, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

S.I. Man, 44 Stabbed Dead On His Beach

BYLINE: By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1011 words


A Vietnam War veteran suffering from emotional problems was hunted down and
stabbed to death on a remote beach on Staten Island Monday night by two men
because they thought he was a homosexual, the police said yesterday.

A Staten Island man was arrested in the killing yesterday and the police said
they were searching for a second suspect.

A police spokesman, Inspector Richard Mayronne, said detectives concluded after
talking with a suspect that James Zappalorti, 44 years old, was killed because
his attackers ''thought he was homosexual.''

''It's a bias incident,'' Inspector Mayronne said. Although the Staten Island
house where Mr. Zappalorti lived with his parents was ransacked, the police said
robbery was not the motive. The police said they did not know if Mr. Zappalorti
was gay.

Face Down on Beach

Investigators said Mr. Zappalorti's attackers knew him and purposely hunted him
down Monday on the Arthur Kill beach where he had a small, snug house built of
scrap lumber. ''They knew he was there,'' a police official said, ''They went
looking for him.''

Mr. Zappalorti, was found by his brother, Michael, at 2:15 P.M. Tuesday, lying
face down on the beach at the end of Androvette Street, across the street from
the family house and stained-glass workshop, Inspector Mayronne said.

Mr. Zappalorti's mother said yesterday that her son, who lived at home, was left
''shell-shocked'' by his experience in Vietnam. A neighbor described him as
''intelligent, but socially maladjusted.''

''His life was his beach house,'' said Owen Reiter, who lives across the street
from the Zappalortis. ''He was like Gilligan from 'Gilligan's Island' - very
innocent. He wouldn't hurt a fly.''

When he wasn't helping neighbors with odd jobs or working in the family's
stained-glass business, he could usually be found in sitting in the beach house,
watching the waters of the Arthur Kill, Mr. Reiter said.

The police said he he had been killed a few minutes before 9 P.M. Monday on the
beach. He had been stabbed many times in the chest, and his throat had been
slashed. His trousers and boots were lying nearby, along with a bloodstained
knife, the inspector said.

Twelve hours later, detectives arrested Michael Taylor, of 83 Androvette Street,
as he came out of a bar, the Surf Club, at 124 Ocean Avenue in South Beach, and
charged him with second-degree murder, Inspector Mayronne said. The police said
they were searching for a friend of Mr. Taylor, Phillip Sarlo, 26, of 138 Joseph
Avenue.

After questioning Mr. Taylor yesterday, the police announced that they had
evidence the two men sought out and attacked Mr. Zappalorti because they
believed he was homosexual. Police officials would not elaborate on what Mr.
Taylor said.

Inspector Mayronne said that, right after the killing, the two men used Mr.
Zappalorti's keys to get into his house, which they ransacked. Mr. Zappalorti's
elderly invalid mother, Mary, surprised them in the living room, and they told
her that her son had met them in a bar and given them the keys, she said last
night. Then, after asking to use the phone and being told to use the kitchen
one, they left. Onlly after they were gone did she realize some things were
missing, she said. They took a crystal rosary that belonged to the victim,
Inspector Mayronne said.

'86 Arrests

Ms. Zappalorti's father, Michael, was at church at the time.

In April 1986, Mr. Sarlo and Mr. Taylor were arrested and accused of kidnapping
a man, putting him into the trunk of a car and threatening to blow the car up or
slide it into the Arthur Kill, a police official said.

Mr. Sarlo was charged with attempted murder, forcible theft, kidnapping and
possession of a knife but pleaded guilty to a reduced charge of robbery. He was
paroled in March 1989. Mr. Taylor, charged as a juvenile offender, also pleaded
guilty and served 18 months in state prison. It was unclear last night whether
the kidnapping was motivated by anti-homosexual hatred.

Mr. Reiter, the neighbor, said Mr. Zappalorti was a kind man who helped his
older brother, Michael, in the stained-glass shop, called Michael and Sons,
which had been founded by their great-grandfather. He said the beach house was
decorated with ''old furniture, a crucifix and an American flag,'' and described
a man who was harmless and pleasant, and very attached to the isolated
neighborhood at the southwestern end of Staten Island, where tall weeds edge the
streets and dead-end roads taper off into forest.

''My kids played in the woods with him, and we never had any fears about
Jimmy,'' he said.

Mrs. Zappalorti said in a telephone interview last night that she had heard a
noise in the house and thought it was her son. When someone passed by her
bedroom door, she said, she called out, ''Jimmy.''

'I Saw Another Man'

''I think I shocked the man more than he shocked me,'' she said of the intruder.
''He thought the house was empty.''

''The man said, 'Your son gave me the key to meet him here,'' she said. ''I
thought that unusual and walked him to the door. When I put the light on I saw
another man.'' After they left, she said she noticed some things were missing.

''But I did see them, and I identified them from mug shots,'' she said. ''So
thank God for that.''

Mrs. Zappalorti said her son attended Tottenville High School but left before
graduating to enlist in the Navy in 1962, and was discharged on April 5, 1965,
with a disablity.

''He had a nervous breakdown,'' she said, adding that he had been on shipboard
and saw combat but she could not recall where.

Mr. Zappalorti's entire world revolved around the street where he lived, Mr.
Reiter said. Without asking for payment, he swept the street, trimmed hedges,
mowed lawns and put away garbage cans.

While other Arthur Kill beaches are covered with landfill, the local bit of
waterfront ''is cleaner than Jones Beach,'' he said. ''Jimmy would rake the
sand. He collected broken bits of bottles and made windows in the hut. He built
a walkway of discarded bricks. He was a harmless person.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

IN SHORT;
FICTION

BYLINE: By DAVID MURRAY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 286 words



SILVER STALLION. By Ahn Junghyo. (Soho, $19.95.) After almost four decades, the
Korean War has become a forgotten war. As the Korean journalist and translator
Ahn Junghyo makes clear in his second novel to appear in English, what is even
more forgotten, at least for Americans, is the impact that conflict had on the
Koreans themselves. Mr. Junghyo's stage is a small South Korean village and its
surrounding countryside; his cast is composed of the villagers and some American
soldiers, who all become unwitting actors in a tragedy. The central characters
are a group of teen-agers, particularly a young villager named Mansik, who
change from boys into under-age men as the American invaders involve them and
their fellow Koreans in the sordid moral and physical wreckage of the war. After
being raped, Mansik's mother joins the ''U.N. ladies'' (also known as ''Yankee
wives'') in the occupied area called Texas Town and suffers the social
consequences of prostitution. For Mansik and his friends, however, there is
retreat into a realm of fantasy. As the war goes on around them, they search, as
did their ancestors, for a secret cave, the home of a legendary warrior general
who was sent by the gods to free Korea from the Mongols. This search for the
general who rode a silver stallion helps to insulate the boys from the miserable
reality of war. Mr. Junghyo, whose earlier novel, ''White Badge,'' told the
story of Korean participation in the Vietnam War, is a strong writer and
graceful translator of his own prose, with a keen sense of his subject - a rural
people brought suddenly into a world they never made. As was true of America in
Vietnam, in Korea we sat very heavily on a very light country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A review of ''Silver Stallion'' by the Korean novelist Ahn Junghyo on Feb. 4
rendered the author's family name incorrectly. The review should have referred
to him as Mr. Ahn, not Mr. Junghyo.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Classic Conglomerate Wades Into the 90's

BYLINE: By FROMA HARROP; Froma Harrop covers the defense industry for The
Providence Journal-Bulletin.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 5, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1727 words


It has a reputation for business aplomb, but Textron Inc., the Providence, R.I.,
conglomerate, is also a company that's found itself on the crest of trends. Back
in the early 1950's, when single-mindedness was American corporate gospel,
Textron's founder, Royal Little, decided he needed a strategy to protect his
cyclical textile business, so he invented the modern conglomerate. In the
1960's, a Textron subsidiary, Bell Helicopter, rode the Huey, the signature
aircraft of the war in Vietnam, to record profitability.

Now, conglomerates no longer seem visionary and Textron, the nation's
17th-largest military contractor, is out on the edge of a trend - toward global
peace - that's problematic for defense-sector companies. President Bush's new
budget avoids the deep cuts feared by the military, but his determination to
pare away defense money over the next several years bodes ill for contractors.

Many of Textron's military projects have survived the cuts so far, but two of
its pet projects - the M-1 tank, for which a subsidiary is making gas turbine
engines, and the V-22 Osprey, the tilt-rotor helicopter-cum-plane - have dicey
futures. Textron has for years been conservative about allowing any one of its
business segments to dominate the others, but between 1984 and 1989, its
military component grew to 28 percent, from 19 percent, of revenues. Now,
Textron appears to be inching back from the military.

''We're used to thinking about changing markets,'' said Beverly F. Dolan,
Textron's chairman and chief executive officer, during an interview in
Providence, his soft Georgia accent an incongruous contrast to the icy panorama
of Colonial and industrial New England outside his window. ''That's certainly
one of the strengths of a conglomerate.''

Textron's deliberate strategy of spreading its earnings and investments among
aerospace technology, commercial products and financial services gives it more
flexibility than some of its behemoth competitors in defense. The General
Dynamics Corporation, for example, realizes 85 percent of it sales from
Government contracts; at the Northrop Corporation, that figure is 91 percent.

But contracting problems at Bell and a slowdown in the auto industry helped send
third-quarter earnings down 5 percent, to $59.5 million or 66 cents a share. Mr.
Dolan does not argue with analysts' estimates that operating earnings for all of
1989 will be around $3 a share, down from $3.10 in 1988. Revenues may show only
a slight increase.

Textron's style of diversification was virtually unknown in 1952 when Royal
Little, of Massachussets, founded the company. Seeking a way to counter the
periodic booms and busts that plagued his textile mills, Mr. Little bought a
slew of companies in unrelated industries.

Under Mr. Little, who died a year ago at age 92, Textron was soon producing
eyeglasses, bathroom fixtures, motor castings, machine tools, poultry and
lingerie. His acquisition spree culminated in the 1962 purchase of the Bell
Aircraft Corporation for $32 million. Today, the company's 33 divisions employ
57,000 people in five countries and every state except Alaska. Textron has 142
manufacturing plants in North America.

Recent changes in the executive suite suggest that Textron is, if not
backpeddling from defense, at least trying to bring the company into harmony
with its conglomerate philosophy. In December, Textron hired James F. Hardymon,
55, president and chief operating officer of the St. Louis-based Emerson
Electric Company, to fill the same positions at Textron. Mr. Hardymon is
regarded as the likely successor to Mr. Dolan, 62, who is expected to retire in
three years. Mr. Hardymon's strength, according to Mr. Dolan, is his experience
in operations at Emerson, where defense contracts account for 10 percent of
revenues. ''He was the guy who ran the train,'' Mr. Dolan said.  Mr. Dolan came
up through the ranks at Textron after it took over a golf-cart company he and
his brother had founded, E-Z-Go in Augusta, Ga., in 1960. His familiarity with
the factory floor contrasts with the more austere financial orientation of some
of his predecessors, including Rupert C. Thompson, a Providence banker, and G.
William Miller, a lawyer who became Secretary of the Treasury under President
Carter. (Mr. Miller was recently named head of Federated Stores Inc., to help
guide Robert Campeau's bankrupt American department store chain.) Howard A.
Rubel, an aerospace analyst with Cyrus J. Lawrence, Morgan Grenfell Inc. in New
York, says Mr. Hardymon's appointment sends a strong signal to stockholders that
Textron intends to arrest the slide in its return on investments. Return on
equity has slid, from 13 percent in 1987 to an estimated 11 percent this year.
The appointment may also counter a perception that the company is unfocused.
''Hardymon looks like a crackerjack manager,'' Mr. Rubel said. Textron's faith
in conglomeration is not universally shared, of course. ''Conglomerates create
confusion,'' said Lawrence Lytton, a multi-industry companies analyst at Drexel
Burnham Lambert. ''Investors prefer to make their own portfolio, as opposed to
hiring a C.E.O. and being one step removed from the process.''

To dispel any notion of wild diversification, Textron has typically sliced its
pie charts into just three segments: aerospace-technology, which currently
accounts for 44 percent of revenues; commercial products, 26 percent, and
financial services, 30 percent.

The recent increase in the defense segment is largely the result of two
acquisitions: the Avco Corporation, an aerospace and financial services giant
bought in 1985 for $1.4 billion and the Ex-Cell-O Corporation, a maker of
aerospace and automotive products, bought in 1986 for $1.05 billion.

To finance the deals, Textron sold more than two dozen nondefense operations,
including Shaeffer Eaton, a maker of pens and paper products; Bridgeport
Machines, a machine tool maker, and the Ex-Cell-O packaging systems division.
These sales still left Textron with long-term debt of $2.23 billion,
uncomfortably high, according to analysts.

The financial services' strong showing, starring Avco Financial, has offset some
of the problems in aerospace-technology. The ratio of bad loans is now under 2
percent, putting the financial segment, Mr. Rubel said, ''near the top'' in the
industry.

Some older members of the Textron commercial products clan, are also doing well.
E-Z-Go, Mr. Dolan's home base, has benefitted from a surge in golf's popularity.
Homelite, a Charlotte, N.C., maker of chain saws and generators, enjoyed a $3
million sales boom after Hurricane Hugo struck last fall.

Meanwhile, Bell is having ''a very good year'' overall, according to R. Jackson
Blackstock, a conglomerates analyst at First Boston in New York, because of its
robust foreign military sales and a strong commercial business. Over the first
nine months of the year, operating earnings at Bell rose 24 percent over last
year's levels. Textron reports an 18-month wait for deliveries on its light
commercial helicopters, the 206B Jet Ranger and 206L Long Ranger. And because
more than half the helicopters now in use in the non-Communist world were made
by Bell, the company does an ''enormous'' parts business, according to Mr.
Dolan.

Textron's biggest disappointment continues to be the Defense Department's
refusal to fund production of the V-22 Osprey tilt-rotor, on which it has spent
30 years of research and some $200 million. But cancelled weapons programs
typically flutter rather than plummet to ground, and the Osprey may well be
headed for a reincarnation, with help from allies either on Capitol Hill or
foreign markets. Cancellation domestically would force the company ''to go
offshore to look for money,'' said Jack Horner, Bell's president. ''With that
goes rights to building airplanes overseas and selling them back to the United
States.''

That threat aside, Textron is already looking to the economic unification of
Western Europe in 1992 as an opportunity for commercial products. Last summer,
Textron's Davidson Instrument Panel division formed a joint venture to supply
auto parts to a Ford Motor Company plant in the Netherlands. Textron also plans
the $250 million acquisition of Avdel, an English rivet maker, now stalled by
the Federal Trade Commission.

Despite areas of unsteadiness, Mr. Dolan seems to view the future with
equanimity: ''This is a damn good time to be a conglomerate.''

COMING IN ON A WING AND A PRAYER

Even before recent events in Europe and the Soviet Union prompted discussion of
deep cuts in the military budget, the defense-sector dollar was growing more
elusive.

Several of Textron's military products - for example, the re-entry system for
the MX missile, from Textron Defense Systems in Wilmington, Mass., and
air-cushioned landing crafts, made at Textron Marine Systems in New Orleans -
seem to be flourishing or holding steady.

But the effects of slowing Government funding were clear last year, when Textron
Aerostructures in Nashville, which had employed 7,300 people during its 1986-88
heyday, laid off more than 4,000 employees after completing contracts to build
wings for the B-1 bomber and the center wing section for the C-5 transport. New
contracts for parts of the Airbus A330 resurrected only a few hundred jobs.

Defense Secretary Richard M. Cheney has so far spared another Bell program, the
LHX (Light Helicopter Experimental), a new Army attack helicopter still in the
demonstration stage. Bell is developing the LHX jointly with McDonnell Douglas
Helicopter in Mesa, Ariz., in competition with a team from two other
contractors.

AT A GLANCE: TEXTRON
All dollar amounts in thousands, except per share data
Three months ended
Sept 30                            1989           1988
Revenues                     $1,741,200     $1,718,400
Net Income                       59,500         62,800
Earnings per share                $0.66          $0.77

Year ended
Dec. 31                            1988           1987
Revenues                     $7,285,500     $7,164,200
Net income                      234,400        256,300
Earnings per share                $2.67           2.92

Total assets, Dec. 31, 1988                $12,554,100
Long-term debt                                   5,462
Book value per share,
Dec. 31,1988                                    $14.56
  Stock price, Feb. 2, 1990
N.Y.S.E. consolidated close                     22 5/8
Stock price, 52-week range                   21-29 3/8
Employees,Feb. 2, 1990                          57,000
Headquarters                          Providence, R.I.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Making exterior auto parts at a Textron division in Georgia; A
utility vehicle from E-Z-Go, an early Textron acquisition; Textron's Vietnam-era
Huey drew record profits; pie charts of a breakdown of revenues and operating
profits for Textron, 1989 (Source: Company reports)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Bicycles, Not Cars, Show True Progress

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 297 words


To the Editor:

The caption on the photo of bicycle traffic in Ho Chi Minh City accompanying
your ''Phnom Penh Journal'' (Jan. 9) calls bicycling a ''primitive'' means of
transportation. The further implication is that although bicycles outnumber cars
in traffic there, progress will reverse that.

The situation for most developing countries is very different from the late 19th
century in the West, where the bicycle industry was the precursor to the
automobile and aircraft industries. Economic and resource constraints make it
most unlikely that societies such as Vietnam will take this route.

In global ecological terms, moreover, it is not clear that such development
would be welcome. Air pollution, the greenhouse effect and resource depletion
will escalate dramatically if the entire human population reaches the high
energy use of societies that rely heavily on the private automobile.

Sensible and sustainable transportation development will see industrial
countries moving toward a combination of efficient mass transit and
human-powered transport like the bicycle, rather than the automobilization of
developing countries.

Signs are in evidence. The president of the Volvo Corporation has called for
elimination of cars from the urban areas of Sweden. Bordeaux, France, plans to
eliminate motor traffic from 50 percent of its streets within 10 years. In
Italy, partial car bans are in effect in the centers of Naples, Milan, Bologna
and Florence.

New York City public officials have yet to offer a serious initiative to
restrict auto traffic. They will have to if New York is ever to become a truly
livable city.

JON ORCUTT
New York, Jan. 23, 1990
  The writer is executive director of Transportation Alternatives, a bi-cycle
advocacy organization.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FICTION COMES TO THE KILLING FIELDS

BYLINE: By DAVID MURRAY; David Murray, a former national and foreign
correspondent for The Chicago Sun-Times, writes frequently on military affairs.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 817 words



FOR THE SAKE OF ALL LIVING THINGS
By John M. Del Vecchio.
790 pp. New York: Bantam Books. $19.95.

Beginning in 1967, there has occurred in Cambodia an Asian holocaust in which,
according to some estimates, more than three million Cambodians have died -
casualties of civil war, political massacre, starvation, illness. Nor is peace
at hand, even now.

John M. Del Vecchio, whose 1982 novel about the Vietnam War, ''The 13th
Valley,'' was widely and deservedly praised, has now taken on the formidable
task of writing a novel about the cruelty, the shifting tides of loyalty, the
bloodshed and misery of Cambodia. On the very first page of ''For the Sake of
All Living Things,'' he states his basic theme: ''How did it happen? What were
the conditions and events that drove an unwitting people to the threshold of
extinction? Was Cambodia a gentle land or the heart of darkness? A sideshow or
an inextricable theater of the Southeast Asian war?''

This is surely an imposing list of questions. To answer them, Mr. Del Vecchio
has assembled a cast of believable characters who are representative of varying
points of view, not to mention social classes and nationalities, to act as a
chorus and to reflect the real events that have taken place in Cambodia. He also
relates current events across the Pacific, as American politicians and citizens
debated our ability either to extricate the United States from the conflict or
to achieve a victory.

Samnang is an 11-year-old Cambodian peasant who is conscripted into the Khmer
Rouge and rises, through brutal training and savage combat, to a position of
leadership. His sister Vathana is also separated from their father, Chhuon, and
grows up to marry a Frenchified heroin addict from Cambodia's upper class. As
her country falls deeper and deeper into civil war, she goes to work in a
hospital for refugees. There she meets and falls in love with an American
Special Forces officer, John Sullivan, an adviser to the Cambodian military who
has few illusions about that army's - or indeed his own nation's - ability to
win.

''It's like there's a monster outside and half the country's inviting it in and
the other half is pretending it doesn't exist,'' Sullivan tells Vathana, adding
that ''Cambodia needs international help.'' To which she replies: ''America is
very perplexing. You ask what will happen if we do nothing, but you think you do
much just speaking.''

Mr. Del Vecchio seems to believe that the United States lost the political will
to pursue a victory in Southeast Asia, and he underlines this belief through a
number of literary devices. Chief among these is a chronicling of events,
annotated by Sullivan and prepared as background research for a fictitious
Washington newspaper for which he works in the mid-1980's, after he leaves the
Army.

The memorandums, sections of which are periodically spliced into the narrative,
permit Sullivan - who was, after all, only a junior officer - to speak with
greater knowledge than his position might have given him, with the wider
perspective afforded by the passage of time. At one point, for example, Mr. Del
Vecchio shows Sullivan and his fellow advisers listening to a tape recording of
President Richard M. Nixon's ''pitiful, helpless giant'' speech of April 30,
1970, which announced the invasion of Cambodia, and gives us the soldiers'
instant reaction -that by tipping the American hand Mr. Nixon doomed the
invasion to failure. Then Mr. Del Vecchio switches to Sullivan's report, which
states that ''four days later the single most decisive battle of the Viet Nam
War ensued, a battle with four KIAs [killed in action]. That battle occurred
approximately twelve thousand miles east-northeast of Saigon, at Kent State
University in Ohio,'' when National Guard troops fired on antiwar demonstrators.

Mr. Del Vecchio, who served in Vietnam and covered the fighting as a combat
correspondent, has thoroughly researched the military and civilian aspects of
the Cambodian conflict. His narrative is filled with stark, bloody descriptive
passages that detail Khmer Rouge training procedures, taking us to the Khmer
Rouge's sadistic re-education centers, which were established following their
victory over the Cambodian Government. He also vividly depicts the hideous
conditions of life in the country at large. Likewise, the carnage that followed
the invasion of Cambodia by the North Vietnamese is set forth in a harrowing
manner.

Mr. Del Vecchio's opinions about America's role in Cambodia can be debated;
indeed, Cambodia's tragic history has been the source of much controversy for
the past 15 years. What cannot be debated is the power of Mr. Del Vecchio's
prose and the enormous amount of information he submits to his readers. He has
added another memorable book to the literature of the Southeast Asian conflict,
a tragic, bloody saga that seems to be with us forever.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Second Man Is Held In S.I. Bias Slaying Of a Beach Dweller

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 263 words


The Florida police yesterday arrested the second suspect in the slaying of a
44-year-old man with emotional problems who was hunted down and stabbed on a
remote Staten Island beach last month because his attackers believed he was
homosexual.

The victim, James Zappalorti, was found dead Jan. 23 on the Arthur Kill beach
where he had built a small shack from scrap lumber. He had been robbed and the
house nearby where he lived with his parents was ransacked.

One suspect, Michael Taylor, 24, a neighbor living at 83 Androvette Street, was
arrested the next day.

Last night, the New York City police reported that the second man sought in the
case was seized in Ocala, Fla. He was identified as Philip Sarlo, 26, of Joseph
Avenue in Willow Brook, S.I.

A spokeswoman, Sgt. Mary Wrensen, said the suspect had telephoned ''a person
known to this department'' at 2 P.M. yesterday. New York detectives alerted the
Ocala Police Department that he was expected to call again, and the Ocala police
seized Mr. Sarlo about 4 P.M. outside a restaurant as he was making a second
call to New York, Sergeant Wrensen said.

Investigators concluded that Mr. Zappalorti, a Vietnam veteran, was killed
because his attackers thought he was gay.

His mother told reporters that he had been left shell-shocked from his
experience in Vietnam and a neighbor called him ''intelligent but socially
maladjusted.''

Mr. Zappalorti helped neighbors with odd jobs and with the family stained-glass
business. At other times, he could be found in his beach hut, watching the
waters of the Arthur Kill.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

With Peace Talks Near, Cambodia Reports Victory

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 936 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Feb. 23


With a new round of peace talks starting here on Monday, the Cambodian
Government has achieved its first victory in a counteroffensive against
opposition forces in northwestern Cambodia.

Phnom Penh Radio reported today that the town of Svay Chek, a forward base of
the rebel Khmer People's National Liberation Front, had been retaken by
Government forces. The liberation front overran Svay Chek in December.

The guerrillas confirmed that their stronghold had fallen. ''Yes, the
information is correct,'' a liberation front official responded when asked by
Reuters about the Government report.

The goal of the Government offensive is to strengthen the hand of Prime Minister
Hun Sen going into the talks and to reduce the size of the area that the
opposition holds, currently about 10 percent of Cambodia.

Cease-Fire Is Proposed

Mr. Hun Sen has proposed that the Jakarta talks produce a cease-fire in place
and a United Nations presence to monitor the two Cambodian governments in their
respective territories while the United Nations organizes free elections.

For weeks, the situation in the northwest, near the opposition sanctuaries in
Thailand, has been in stalemate. Early successes by the opposition, consisting
of the Khmer Rouge, the followers of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, and the Khmer
People's National Liberation Front, have ground to a halt.

Government forces have not fought well, fleeing vital positions, and have been
too disorganized and inexperienced to mount quick counterattacks, Vietnamese
officials say. The opposition's inability to seize major population centers,
like the provincial capitals of Battambang and Sisophon, has been in large part
due to the presence of several thousand Vietnamese troops in defensive
perimeters, Eastern European diplomats say.

A Breathing Space

It is unclear whether Vietnamese troops have joined in the Cambodian Government
offensive.

Vietnam said all its forces were removed from Cambodia last September, almost 11
years after Hanoi invaded to oust the Khmer Rouge Government led by Pol Pot. It
is unclear how the Jakarta talks will be affected by the disclosure this week
that the Vietnamese have returned. But their presence has provided Mr. Hun Sen
with a breathing space to reorganize his army.

''The Sihanouk and K.P.N.L.F. forces are weak,'' a diplomat said. ''They proved
to be stronger than Phnom Penh believed, but not strong enough. No side seems to
be doing very well, at least in conventional warfare.''

Areas of Strength

Khieu Kanharith, editor of the semi-official weekly Kampuchea, said: ''This is a
war of mines and artillery. There is little face-to-face fighting.'' Eastern
European diplomats agree, saying that the amount of artillery fired by both
sides is enormous but rarely well-aimed.

The Khmer Rouge, however, remains unsurpassed at guerrilla warfare, the
diplomats say, concentrating on military and political work in the countryside,
where 90 percent of Cambodians live, and on the economic destabilization of the
country.

With the dry season, the level of fighting has increased in other parts of
Cambodia where the Khmer Rouge is strong, including parts of Kompong Speu,
Kompong Cham, Kompong Thom, Siem Reap and Kampot provinces, diplomats, aid
workers and doctors say.

As usual, Khmer Rouge targets are village administrators, teachers, bridges,
rice warehouses and ordinary peasants attempting to farm in mine-laced paddy
fields and orchards.

Khmer Rouge efforts to destabilize the economy and sow panic in Phnom Penh have
had some success.

Since December, the value of the Cambodian currency, the riel, has fallen by 54
percent on the black market, going from 240 riels to 370 riles to the dollar.
Last August, a dollar was worth 190 riels. Since December, the value of gold has
doubled, the price of rice has gone up 75 percent and the price of gasoline, 25
percent.

Two weeks ago, with rumors of difficulties at the front and news of sharp Khmer
Rouge attacks in Kompong Speu and Kampot provinces south of Phnom Penh, there
was frantic buying of dollars, rice and gold.

Prices Remain Higher

The dollar brought up to 500 riels for three days and prices soared before the
Government stepped in, Mr. Khieu Kanharith said. As much as $1.4 million was
involved, he said, and the Government has begun a criminal inquiry.

Aid workers said that students at the university in Phnom Penh were planning a
demonstration against the sudden rise in prices, and that some tanks were
stationed close to the university in case of trouble. But the demonstration was
defused.

While the riel has largely recovered, prices remain higher than before.
Officials say the Government has decided to drive prices down by selling gold
through the state bank at a cost some 20 percent below that on the black market.

Official corruption remains another serious problem hurting morale, diplomats
and ordinary Cambodians say, with poor soldiers passing through increasingly
wealthy cities.

Curfew to Curb Wealthy

The reimposition of a 9 P.M. curfew in Phnom Penh after the initial withdrawal
of Vietnamese troops was designed more to curb the highly visible excesses of
the wealthy than for security reasons, Mr. Khieu Kanharith said. ''We wanted
people here to feel the impact of the war. We know the widening of the gap
between the city and the countryside is a time bomb.''

Still, one senior diplomat said, ''the Government seems to be holding its own
now, and the Khmer Rouge are probably not so strong as some people feared. But
the war in the countryside goes on, and everyone is getting tired.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia showing location of Svay Chek

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 2, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

When Panama Invasion Outwears Its Popularity

SECTION: Section A; Page 32, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 236 words


To the Editor:

It is discouraging to encounter once again our nation's selective memories of
war. Your article on post-traumatic stress treatment for the American troops who
fought in Panama (front page, Feb. 7) quotes Dr. Tom Williams, a consultant to
the Army, as saying that the invasion ''was, unlike Vietnam, a popular action,''
and, ''That makes a difference in how they feel about it afterward.''

While I was fighting in Vietnam, in 1966-67, the war was, I thought, a popular
action. It was not until later that I started to realize how unpopular it had
become. I had not only my war experiences to trouble me, but a sense of guilt
for having participated in something thoroughly wrongheaded.

The invasion of Panama may have briefly scored high in the opinion polls, but
Americans are beginning to understand that it was undertaken largely for
domestic public relations. This reckless action solved none of Panama's
problems. As we grow weary of supporting an occupation force there - while
withdrawing our troops from Europe - this war, too, will produce increasingly
disturbing memories for those who participated.

Those who are charged with treating post-traumatic stress disorders had better
rid themselves of assumptions about the seeming popularity of this (or any) war
and its consequent potential for producing long-term problems.

GLENN PETERSEN
  Lawrenceville, N.J., Feb. 9, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Gives $10 Million to Help Boat People

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 17, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 196 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 17


The State Department said today that President Bush has released an additional
$10 million to help resettle Vietnamese refugees, most of whom have gone to
crowded camps in Hong Kong after dangerous sea voyages.

The United States and other countries sharply criticized the Hong Kong
Government last year for forcibly repatriating 51 Vietnamese to Hanoi. On
Friday, President Bush released $25 million from the Emergency Refugee Migration
and Assistance Program, $10 million of which will go to help Vietnamese
refugees, the State Department said. The new money is in addition to $11.1
million already pledged to the United Nations Comprehensive Plan of Action,
established to help resettle Vietnamese refugees.

Ambassador Jewel S. Lafontant, the State Department's coordinator for refugee
affairs, on Friday repeated in London the Government's pledge that the United
States would help settle half of all new Vietnamese boat people. That position
was taken in June by the United States at an international conference on
Indochinese refugees.

The State Department said that there are 55,000 Vietnamese in camps in Hong
Kong, which does not consider them political refugees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
The War Is Over, but 'China Beach' Continues

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1109 words


Inventive, imaginative, adventurous: these are just a few of the adjectives
least likely to be applied to the bulk of weekly television series. Prime time
remains dedicated to safe formulas and reusable stereotypes.

Every once in a while, though, an exception slips through the cracks, somehow
transcending the limitations of the grueling weekly grind. A current example is
''China Beach'' on ABC, now in its second full season and still mustering only
borderline ratings on Wednesdays at 10. (After tonight's episode, the series
will take a short break and return on April 16 to begin a Mondays-at-9
schedule.) ''China Beach,'' which was created by the writer John Sacret Young
(''Testament,'' ''A Rumor of War'') and William Broyles Jr., a former editor in
chief at Newsweek, did not get off to a promising start. Viewing the Vietnam War
through a rest-and-relaxation center next to a United States Army base in Da
Nang, the series seemed bent on playing down unpleasant realities -drugs,
fragging and the like - while exploiting the more standard fare of television
entertainment, i.e. assorted sexual alliances, complete with lots of muscles
glistening in the jungle heat.

Gradually, however, ''China Beach'' began finding its own distinctive voice, all
the while setting off in unexpected directions to encompass broader themes and
more sensitive issues. A first-rate performing company of regulars helps
considerably. Equally important, the actors are given scripts that refuse to be
easily predictable. Chances are taken and, more often than not, they pay off.
The last three episodes offer striking and contrasting illustrations.

In an episode called ''The Thanks of a Grateful Nation,'' written by John Wells
and directed by Mimi Leder, the brooding character of Dodger (Jeff Kober) left
China Beach and returned home to his parents with his half-Vietnamese infant
son. Finding no parades of welcome, Dodger stayed out of sight working as a
dishwasher in the local tavern, trying to deal with a blowhard V.F.W. boss who
would like to destroy all Vietnamese.

Dodger's best friend was leaving for Canada, refusing to go fight in the dirty
little war. Dodger was unable to offer him advice, though he didn't regret going
to Vietnam: ''Over there I counted. I meant something.'' Dodger and, it seemed,
everybody in his life had lost something.

In the final scene, he knelt in a veterans' cemetery crying aloud: ''I won't
forget. I promise I won't forget.''

In ''Skin Deep,'' written by Carol Flint and directed by Ms. Leder, a serious
beauty-and-the-beast motif was counterpointed with a lighthearted Miss China
Beach beauty pageant. Frustrated in trying to help a soldier - an aspiring
baseball player, whose face had been horribly disfigured by shrapnel - the nurse
Colleen McMurphy (Dana Delany) paid K. C. (Marg Helgenberger), the
money-obsessed prostitute, to raise his morale. Unable to break through the
bitterness of the bandage-wrapped patient, K. C. exploded in anger, telling him:
''Look, if you want one of the services I have to offer, make an appointment.
Lifesaving is not on my list.''

Meanwhile, working in the motor pool under a grumpy, bigoted sergeant, Frankie
(Nancy Giles) suddenly, in a Dennis Potter manner, burst into a one-woman
musical production number, singing ''Don't Make Me Over.'' And one pageant
highlight turned out to be a straightforward reading of ''Ode on a Grecian
Urn.'' At fade-out, K. C. was removing the soldier's bandages and leaning over
to kiss him, a single tear running down her cheek. What could have been simply
queasy, if not downright kinky, turned out to be unusually moving.

Last Wednesday's episode, written by Lydia Woodward and directed by Fred Gerber,
expanded the boundaries of the series even further, close to something
resembling heightened realism. After opening with the death of a young black
soldier, ''Skylark'' found McMurphy and Dr. Dick Richard (Robert Picardo)
bickering over silly nothings. Then hearing a recording of Ella Fitzgerald
singing ''Skylark,'' they saw an elderly black couple dancing romantically with
each other outdoors.

Ernie and Ruby, played with wonderful warmth and humor by Joe Seneca and Ruby
Dee, said they had come to entertain the troops. And sure enough, before long
they had most of the camp merrily dancing the cha-cha. They even got the
hardened K. C. to sleep between them, turning her into a pliant child in need of
a bedtime story, in this case something about ''a body all chopped up at the
bottom of Lake Geneva.''

As it turned out, Ernie and Ruby were the grandparents, long deceased, of the
dead soldier. They wanted to know about his final moments and felt so much
better knowing that someone took good care of him. Looking at McMurphy, Ruby
said, ''I knew from the first moment that you'd be the one.'' Angels? Of course.
But Ruby pointed out that with the work of McMurphy and Dr. Richard and the
others at China Beach, ''the world is full of angels.''

Their bickering behind them, the nurse and the doctor danced alone as night fell
and ''Skylark'' played again on the phonograph. The fanciful flight made a
perfect landing.

Ms. Delany, whose clean-cut, no-frills style is consistently refreshing, clearly
serves as the anchor figure in the weekly repertory company (which also includes
Brian Wimmer, Michael Boatman and Concetta Tomei). Her character can't help
radiating compassion from beneath the protective shell she uses to cope with the
horrors of war.

A promising newcomer to the cast is Ricki Lake (''Hairspray''). Whether the new
Monday time slot helps or hurts the survival of ''China Beach'' remains to be
seen. Clearly, ABC is pushing for heftier ratings. The pressures to conform to
market research will hardly be compatible with the admirable determination of
the series to be different from the general run of entertainment packages.

War Stories

CHINA BEACH, created by William Broyles Jr. and John Sacret Young; directors of
photography, Richard Thorpe and Francis Grumman; Mr. Broyles, executive
consultant; Lydia Woodward, executive script consultant; Carol Flint, executive
story editor; men's costumes by Le Dawson; women's costumes by Paula Kaatz;
music by John Rubinstein; a Sacret Inc. production in association with Warner
Brothers Television; Mr. Young, executive producer. Tonight on ABC at 10 P.M.

Colleen McMurphy . . . Dana Delany
Boonie Lanier . . . Brian Wimmer
Sam Beckett . . . Michael Boatman
K. C. . . . Marg Helgenberger
Lila Garreau . . . Concetta Tomei
Dr. Dick Richard . . . Robert Picardo
Dodger . . . Jeff Kober
Frankie Bunsen . . . Nancy Giles

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dana Delany as Colleen McMurphy in ''China Beach'' on ABC.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 26, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Klaus E. Knorr, 78, Professor; Argued Against Use of Military

BYLINE: By PETER B. FLINT

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 347 words


Dr. Klaus E. Knorr, professor emeritus of public affairs at Princeton University
and the director of its Center of International Studies from 1960 to 1968, died
of cancer yesterday at his home in Princeton, N.J. He was 78 years old.

Dr. Knorr, a German-born economist and political scientist, wrote many books
developing a thesis that the nuclear age had necessitated a global ascendance of
diplomatic and economic policies over military options. The volumes included
''On the Uses of Military Power in the Nuclear Age'' (Princeton University
Press, 1966), ''Military Power and Potential'' (Lexington Books, 1970) and
''Power and Wealth: The Political Economy of International Power'' (Basic Books,
1973).

In mid-1968, while the Johnson Administration was continuing to accelerate
American military involvement in South Vietnam, Dr. Knorr and three associates
at the Princeton center wrote a detailed proposal for the withdrawal of American
and North Vietnamese forces, the introduction of an international peacekeeping
force and the formation of a neutral Saigon government. The war continued for
seven more years.

Klaus Eugene Knorr was born on May 16, 1911, in Essen, Germany, and earned a law
degree at the University of Tubingen. He resisted increasing pressure to join
the Nazi party and immigrated to the United States in 1937.

He earned a Ph.D. at the University of Chicago in 1941. He then taught economics
at Stanford University and international economics and political science, first
at Yale and then at Princeton. He taught at Princeton for 28 years, edited the
journal, World Politics, for a decade and was the Tod Professor of Public
Affairs from 1964 until he retired in 1979.

Over the years, Dr. Knorr was a consultant to the Department of State, the
Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency and was awarded the
Government's National Intelligence Distinguished Service Medal.

Surviving are his wife, Marianne; two daughters, Monica, of Washington, and
Jean, of Alexandria, Va.; a son, Nicholas, of Glencoe, Ill., and four
grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

END PAPER: Community College;
Every Student Is a Story

BYLINE: By M. Garrett Bauman; M. Garrett Bauman teaches English and humanities
at Monroe Community College in Rochester, N.Y.

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 70, Column 1; Education Life

LENGTH: 1094 words


DESPITE the bargain-basement image and second-rate reputation of the community
college - the ''K Mart of Education'' is what some people call it - its inner
life is often rich and complex. In one row there may be a middle-aged
professional actor, an ex-marine who studies Amish philosophy, a wife and
husband who separated during the term, a young day-care worker who hugs abused
children every day, a French emigrant and an intelligence officer who says he
was left to die in an outpost in Vietnam because he refused to perform illegal
activities.

I'm not generalizing; this is one row of my introductory humanities course this
term. The rest of the class includes a young black entrepreneur who reads tax
forms the way some children digest comics; a professional race-car driver, a
welfare recipient, a half-dozen ''traditional'' students and a 40-year-old woman
who is the only member of her family not hooked on drugs.

In my first years of teaching, classes like this overwhelmed me. During one
office hour I may discuss existentialism in Sartre's ''Nausea'' with one
student, and to another student in my composition class explain how adding
''ed'' to the end of a verb forms the past tense. But I've come to rely on my
students. They are not empty vessels to be filled, but overflow with experience
that can make classroom theory walk in flesh and bone.

While analyzing a pious article on Vietnam, a veteran turned up the voltage when
relating how his unit evacuated a flooded village. ''The sergeant says people
can bring only one thing with them, the boat's so jammed. This woman with a baby
has a pig under her other arm. 'One thing!' the sergeant says. The woman throws
the baby into the river.''

''Oh, no!'' a girl cried. ''What did the sergeant do?''

The vet stared hard. ''Nothing. That's the way it was there.''

During a discussion of a James Baldwin essay on racism, an older black man told
of picking cotton as a boy and watching a white supervisor try to seduce his
mother; a white factory worker answered with his own story of being laid off
''because of reverse discrimination - they had to keep the minorities.'' A
middle-aged Italian woman told of taking her new, black boyfriend to a family
wedding and ''listening to the choking sounds of dying Italian grandmothers.'' A
skinhead type gritted his teeth and a young Puerto Rican woman lowered her head
as they contributed their own stories. Education emerges not just through texts
and theories but through sharing and shaping what's already inside students.

One 40-plus woman in that class may represent the community-college spirit as
much as one person can. During an operation several years ago the woman, Deana
Woods, died on the table. She told the class how she ''floated'' above the
doctors and saw herself dead. ''I cursed them to revive me,'' Mrs. Woods said,
''so I could try again. Now I'm taking all my second chances.'' She enrolled in
a medical-technician program, reads voraciously, wants the quickest route to a
useful life. Her success both astounds her and seems perfectly natural.
''Sometimes,'' she muses. ''This life seems like a dream. I can't imagine I'm
here.''

The dream doesn't come true for many. Fewer than half of all community-college
students nationally earn an associate's degree, and fewer than one-fourth attain
bachelor's degrees. Some critics say community colleges serve only to ''cool
out'' the lower classes by offering the illusion of opportunity while
ineffective remedial programs and crushing teacher loads make failure
inevitable. Others argue that an open-door policy cannot be compared to colleges
with restricted admissions, where success is practically guaranteed.

As Thomas DeSchaine of Grand Rapids Junior College in Michigan told a
community-college conference in 1988, ''It's easy to teach at Harvard. We really
have to teach. And our students have done some pretty wonderful things people
would not have expected.''

One such student was Steve Leakey, who admits he was illiterate when he enrolled
four years ago. ''I was Helen Keller almost,'' said Mr. Leakey, who at 27 has
crawled through two years of remedial courses. ''Walden'' in my humanities
course knocked him flat. ''Man, this was another language! I read this guy four
times. Nothing! Then I saw what he meant. It's about being more alive.'' He
studied home-building, constructed his own house on a hilltop and will soon earn
his associate's degree. As part of his social-services program he interns at a
mental-health clinic, where he's done wonders with some of the men. ''Hey, they
understand what it means to sweat for a 'C,' '' he said. ''I can offer them
something.''

Too few Steves swim all the way upstream, but community colleges are the only
ones that will even let him in the water.

Most community-college students are trapped between future success and present
survival. About 70 percent work full time while attending college full time.
Most failures occur when a student loses a baby sitter, can't concentrate during
an 8 A.M. class after a night of trick shift at the factory or because family
war erupted when Mom resigned as a maid to attend college. Several of my
students scrounge for returnable cans to get lunch money.

At the same time, traditional academic excellence does occur in community
colleges. Nearly a quarter of their students graduated in the top 20 percent of
their high school classes (compared with 38 percent of four-year college
students). Among my 4,000 students were people who became an Arctic explorer, a
State Senator, a Congressional candidate, a real-estate tycoon, college
professors, lawyers. Many conceal their community-college educations because of
stereotypes about the colleges.

Like their students, community-college teachers are stereotyped as second-rate
laborers in the college hierarchy. They average 15.5 hours a week in class and
16.3 more advising or tutoring students, while four-year college professors
teach only 8.2 hours and advise 11.3 hours more. Community-college professors
teach the production-line introductory courses to a total of 250 to 300
students, while university professors may have as few as 75 to 100 students, as
well as the freedom to develop unusual courses, frequent sabbaticals and time
for creative research. ''I feel like a leper,'' one Oregon community-college
professor admitted at a conference.

But there is one perk community-college teachers have. When they enter that
room, it's like finding a shelf of exotic books waiting to be opened to unfold
their stories.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

'Miss Saigon' Weighs Postponing Opening As It Seeks a Theater

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1504 words


''Miss Saigon,'' the smash hit London musical about the last days of American
involvement in the Vietnam War, may not be coming to Broadway this fall as
originally planned. Cameron Mackintosh, the show's producer, said yesterday that
it might not arrive until the spring of 1991, or even later.

The problem, he said, is finding an available theater big enough and with
appropriate sight lines for the huge show, a musical updating of the ''Madama
Butterfly'' story. ''Miss Saigon,'' in which a Vietnamese bargirl conceives a
child after a love affair with an American marine, has a cast of more than 40
performers and includes a helicopter landing onstage: the last American
helicopter that will leave Saigon in 1975.

His comments were the latest in what promises to be long and hard negotiations
between Mr. Mackintosh -whose hits include ''Cats,'' ''Les Miserables'' and
''The Phantom of the Opera'' and who is considered by many theater people to be
the most successful producer today - and the Shubert and Nederlander
organizations, both of which have indicated they are eager to land the musical
for Broadway. The negotiations will include not only the choice of theater but
also the terms under which the theater will be made available.

A lot of money is at stake in the ''Miss Saigon'' decision. Because of its
box-office success at the Theater Royal Drury Lane in London, ''Miss Saigon'' is
expected to be the next long-running blockbuster on Broadway and to roll up a
big advance before it opens, an advance that could rival the $19 million Andrew
Lloyd Webber's ''Phantom of the Opera'' attracted before its 1988 opening on
Broadway.

A Midas Touch

With ''Cats'' having taken in a net profit of $49 million in its United States
productions and ''Les Miserables'' having earned a net profit of $29 million
from its four American companies, Mr. Mackintosh is regarded as a man with a
Midas touch.

'' 'Miss Saigon' is a show we'd obviously like to have,'' said Robert E.
Nederlander, president of the Nederlander organization. ''It's a tremendous
hit.'' Bernard Jacobs, president of the Shubert Organization, Broadway's biggest
theater owner, said, ''Obviously 'Miss Saigon' is a big show, and everybody
would want to have it.''

''Miss Saigon'' was written by Alain Boublil and Claude-Michel Schonberg, with
Richard Maltby Jr. Mr. Boublil and Mr. Schonberg are the team that created ''Les
Miserables,'' which has been running at the Broadway Theater since March 1987.

Mr. Mackintosh said the new musical would probably cost at least $9 million to
do on Broadway, making it potentially the most expensive show in Broadway
history. ''It's a fairly open secret I've been hoping to go into the Mark
Hellinger Theater,'' Mr. Mackintosh said yesterday by telephone from his London
office. ''I think now that's unlikely.''

The Mark Hellinger, at West 51st Street and Broadway, is owned by the
Nederlander organization, Broadway's No. 2 theater owner, and Mr. Mackintosh was
speaking after returning from lunch with Mr. Nederlander.

A Matter of Timing

There are plans to build a 52-story hotel that would rise over the Mark
Hellinger and Neil Simon Theaters, and ''in order to erect the hotel, they have
to pull down the Hellinger's dressing-room block,'' Mr. Mackintosh said. ''It's
not going to hurt the theater, because the dressing-room block then gets
incorporated into the new building, but the whole procedure could take about 18
months, so as far as my timing is concerned it's bad.''

The dressing-room area was added to the theater after the Hellinger, originally
a movie palace, was converted to legitimate use, and occupies space needed for
the hotel. Even if the hotel had not presented a problem, the 1,600-seat
Hellinger is currently rented by the Times Square Church, which has about four
years to go on a five-year lease, and some arrangement would have to be worked
out with the church.

The search for a theater for ''Miss Saigon'' recalls the competition for
''Phantom,'' which involved Mr. Mackintosh and the Shubert and Nederlander
organizations as well as the No. 3 Broadway landlord, Jujamcyn Theaters. The
battle was eventually won by Shubert. ''Phantom'' is still playing to sold-out
audiences at its Majestic Theater.

Jujamcyn, all of whose five theaters are booked, is not currently involved in
''Miss Saigon'' talks because none of its theaters are considered large enough
for the show.

Because of his previous successes, Mr. Mackintosh has the leverage to drive hard
bargains with theater owners. Among the options he has put on the table are
buying the Hellinger outright (an idea rejected by the Nederlander organization)
and arranging for a closed-circuit pay-television broadcast of opening night.

''I think anybody and their wife would like to purchase the Hellinger,'' Mr.
Mackintosh said. ''But the Nederlanders made it quite clear they're not
interested in selling, and I don't blame them.''

He said that the closed-circuit idea ''has been discussed in the vaguest
possible terms, and as nobody's actually said no, it's still a possibility.''

A Big Enough Gross

The Hellinger is not the only theater being considered, but Mr. Mackintosh said
it was his first choice because of its size and suitability for the production
and because its 1,600 seats would provide a weekly box-office gross big enough
to make the show sufficiently profitable.

''The problem is finding a stage big enough to accommodate 'Miss Saigon,' '' he
said yesterday. ''Very few Broadway theaters have the sort of depth that most of
our European theaters have and the ones that do have it have, thank God, been
clogged up by some of my shows.'' No stage on Broadway is as deep as the one at
the Theater Royal Drury Lane.

''I'm not going to put 'Miss Saigon' on in New York in any less of a way than it
is appearing in London,'' he said, adding that the idea of bringing it in in the
fall ''is beginning to recede into the distance.''

Seen as More Likely for 1991

''Unless something miraculous happens in the next two to three months, I can't
see us doing it this year,'' he said. ''My feeling is that it is now more likely
to be the spring of 1991, if a theater becomes available. And if a theater
doesn't become available, the show won't come in until a theater does become
available.'' Mr. Mackintosh's comments, of course, are likely to be viewed as a
good bargaining position.

Mr. Nederlander said last week that ''a number of other Nederlander theaters are
possibilities,'' but he declined to name them or discuss details, saying it was
up to Mr. Mackintosh to do so.

Mr. Mackintosh said that one Nederlander theater under discussion was the
1,900-seat Gershwin, the largest on Broadway and the current home of the musical
''Meet Me in St. Louis.''

''The Gershwin is not out of the question if changes are made,'' he said, ''but
it is not possible to put the show into the Gershwin as it presently is. It's
such a huge space, it is almost too big a space for a certain kind of intimacy.
But it has a great deal of potential.''

As far as a Shubert house is concerned, Mr. Mackintosh said yesterday that
''they don't have any available.''

Protecting 'Les Miz'

There had been talk of moving ''Les Miserables'' from the Broadway Theater, a
Shubert house, to another Shubert house, perhaps the Shubert Theater on West
44th Street, if its current tenant, ''A Chorus Line,'' were to close or itself
move to another theater.

But Mr. Mackintosh discounted the idea. If ''Les Miz'' were to move to the
Shubert, ''a smaller capacity house with a second balcony, we wouldn't make any
savings on the running costs,'' he said.

''It's expensive to move,'' he said. '' 'Les Miz' took in about $580,000 last
week, and with it doing so well at the Broadway, I think it would be unfair to
the 'Les Miz' investors, and to myself, to do anything which could curtail its
life.''

Even if ''Les Miz'' were to move, Mr. Mackintosh said, ''we would have to make
alterations to the Broadway's proscenium, because of the way our show is
designed. With the aerial sequences and with the helicopter, we need as much
height as possible, so the whole audience can see.''

''At the moment,'' he said, in what may have been a message to the Shubert
Organization, ''nobody has offered me a theater where I could feel that the next
two to five years of 'Les Miz' are as safe in that theater as they are in the
Broadway.''

Among Shubert houses, Mr. Mackintosh said, the Imperial on West 45th Street, the
current home of ''Jerome Robbins's Broadway,'' ''was not out of the question,''
even though he was not sure it had ''quite enough depth.''

Mr. Jacobs of the Shubert Organization declined to comment about theater
possibilities for ''Miss Saigon.''

Mr. Mackintosh concluded by saying that he was ''a great optimist.'' ''I've
never known a good show not to find a home,'' he said, ''and I believe 'Miss
Saigon' is a good show.'' And Mr. Mackintosh knows that many other people think
so too.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A scene from the hit London musical ''Miss Saigon,'' which
Cameron Mackintosh, the show's producer, said yesterday might not arrive on
Broadway until the spring of 1991. (Alastair Muir); Cameron Mackintosh (Camera
Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Can Give Boat People Asylum

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 304 words


To the Editor:

Kerry McGlynn, director of the Hong Kong Economic and Trade Office, seeks to
defend Hong Kong's deportation to Vietnam of 51 Vietnamese boat people last
month (letter, Dec. 29).

The principal safeguard cited by Mr. McGlynn is monitoring by the office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees of Hong Kong's screening and
appeal procedure to determine who among the boat people are entitled to refugee
protection. However, that office, which ended 1989 with a $40 million deficit,
will be severely constrained in its ability to intervene in Hong Kong. Recently,
a senior High Commissioner official in Geneva told me that while his office
could assure that the 51 boat people who were returned Dec. 11 were not
''refugees'' deserving of protection, the same assurance could not be made in
the future because of limited resources.

Hong Kong thus runs the risk of returning refugees to face persecution, a
violation of international law, under an adjudication procedure that Amnesty
International characterizes as ''critically flawed'' and which recognizes as
refugees only about 2 percent of the boat people.

Instead, Hong Kong should pursue a policy of asylum. It has sufficient territory
to accommodate more than the 44,000 boat people subject to screening, as well as
constant budget surpluses and significant reserves. If the boat people were not
held in prison camps, but released and permitted to work, they would contribute
to the local economy, with its chronic labor shortage. Also, to provide asylum
instead of resettlement abroad should discourage those boat people who come
solely to seek resettlement elsewhere. An asylum policy would be pragmatic and
principled.

ARTHUR C. HELTON
Director, Refugee Project, Lawyers
Committee for Human Rights
  New York, Jan. 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 19, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 121 words



Soviet Force in Vietnam Cut

Pentagon officials said Moscow had reduced its aircraft at Cam Ranh Bay,
Vietnam, an American-built installation that has become Moscow's largest
overseas naval base. Page A6.

Testing Law Overturned

A Federal judge overturned a New York law requiring standardized testing
services to release the questions and answers from exams. Page B1.

Prices Rose 4.6% in 1989

Consumer prices climbed four-tenths of a percent in December, bringing the total
increase for the year to 4.6 percent. Page D1.

Flight Warnings Opposed

The F.A.A. will urge airlines to comply with Government policy and not tell
passengers of most threats against their flights. Page A15.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 20, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong's Luck

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 137 words


To the Editor:

Sure, the story of Hong Kong's Vietnamese boat people is sad, but the
''challenge'' you pose (editorial, Jan. 5) is not the answer. If members of the
Commonwealth ''opened their wide gates'' and cleared Hong Kong's camps of these
40,000 people, who would deal with the flood of new arrivals sure to fill the
camps? And, why should these people be ''distributed'' only among Commonwealth
members? Should it be entirely Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's problem
because Hong Kong is a British colony and is a convenient landing place for
rickety boats from Vietnam?

Forced repatriation may not be the answer either, but is the United States just
an innocent bystander in this ''worthy challenge''?

NANCY LOO
  New York, Jan. 5, 1990

The writer has worked in television news in Hong Kong.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 2, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Of a Platoon Lost in a Vietnamese Jungle

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 360 words


''Dog Tags'' must have been built from a do-it-yourself kit for Vietnam
exploitation films. Every cheap cliche is there, tossed on the screen in
ramshackle order. There is the platoon stranded in the jungle - a movie location
that is clearly the lush, emerald Philippines, without a rice paddy in sight.
There are the American P.O.W.'s who escape from a bamboo cage. And don't forget
the soldier who goes raving crazy, the child Vietcong (''Me no Charlie!'' he
cries) and the soldier whose leg is amputated by his buddies. ''Al, I feel
funny,'' he observes, to which Al can only say: ''The leg's gotta come off. Just
smoke the dope and go to sleep. When you wake up it'll be over.'' He wakes to
find a gorgeous Vietnamese woman making him feel better.

''Dog Tags,'' which opens today at the Quad Cinema, was written, directed and
produced by the Italian-born Romano Scavolini. And though Mr. Scavolini is now
based in the United States, he has not lost his roots. The first reel of this
film has a voiceover that recalls the awkward language and exaggerated,
mellifluous tones of an Italian Hercules film dubbed into English. From there it
goes into a ''Ten Little Indians'' phase, with many members of the platoon wiped
out one by one. And it ends in a Chuck Norris action-adventure stage; this movie
lacks the patriotic veneer of films like ''Missing in Action,'' but does have
more gallons of fake blood.

As the narrator says in setting up the story, ''The whole episode stank worse
than rotten eggs.'' There are many lines as trite as this in ''Dog Tags,'' but
none as true.

Buddies, Blood And Rotten Eggs

DOG TAGS, written, directed and produced by Romano Scavolini; director of
photography, John McCallum; edited by Nicholas Pollock; music by John Scott;
production designer, Art Nicdao; released by Cinevest Entertainment Group. At
the Quad Cinema, 13th Street, west of Fifth Avenue. Running time: 100 minutes.
This film is rated R.

Alan Hart ... Clive Wood
Roy Hope ... Baird Stafford
Willy Cross ... Robert Haufrecht
Captain Newport ... Mike Monty
Chris Hilton ... Himself
Tannoy Patoura Janty ... Jericho Ondevilla

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 20, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SCIENCE WATCH;
How Indochina Moved

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 2; Science Desk

LENGTH: 214 words


A team of Canadian, Chinese and French geologists has concluded that during the
past 50 million years, the collision of India with Asia pushed Indochina more
than 300 miles to the southeast and rotated it clockwise. This, they suspect,
swung Vietnam more than 400 miles away from China, forming the South China Sea.

They have also identified the fault in the earth's crust along which this motion
took place. It is a belt of severely altered rocks more than 600 miles long,
from Tibet to the Gulf of Tonkin. The Red River, which flows from China across
Vietnam into the gulf, follows this zone. This motion, the authors believe, also
explains why mountain ranges along this river lie in the same
northwest-southeast direction. This contrasts with the orientation of the
Himalayas, which is more to the east and west.

According to this hypothesis, the northward pressure of India has severely
squeezed Indochina, forcing it to slip southeast relative to the land farther
north. The proposal is advanced in the Feb. 1 issue of the journal Nature by a
team that has been studying the geology of China and Southeast Asia for several
years. They are associated with the Institute for the Physics of the Globe in
Paris, the University of Quebec and the Institute of Geology in Beijing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Paris Said to Halt Arms Aid to Sihanouk's Forces

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 394 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Feb. 24


Senior guerrilla officials say France has halted its arms supplies to a
guerrilla group fighting Cambodia's Communist Government after the covert
program was publicized.

France had been supplying Prince Norodom Sihanouk's fighters with sophisticated
assault rifles, rifle grenades and 89-millimeter antitank guns, the officers
said, speaking on condition of anonymity in recent interviews.

Witnesses said they saw at least a dozen fighters carrying the French assault
rifles among the guerrillas guarding Prince Sihanouk when he crossed into
northwestern Cambodia on Friday, ending 11 years of exile.

Witnesses have seen the other French weapons during trips in the last few months
to areas of northwestern Banteay Meanchey province, newly seized by the
guerrillas.

France Denies Arms Report

The French Foreign Ministry issued a denial when the Thai Army chief of staff
said in April that French arms were being shipped to the guerrillas through Thai
territory. The shipments were halted later in the year, the guerrilla officers
said. Western diplomats confirmed their account.

Prince Sihanouk's group is allied with the non-Communist Khmer People's National
Liberation Front and the Communist Khmer Rouge in a coalition fighting the Phnom
Penh Government installed by Vietnam after it invaded Cambodia in December 1978.
France did not provide the other two guerrilla groups with weapons, the
guerrilla officers said.

The guerrillas said the French-supplied antitank guns helped shift the tide in
the war as the resistance made major gains after September, when Vietnam pulled
out the last of its troops.

The guerrillas said they considered the new assault rifle more reliable than the
rifles they commonly use, the American-designed M-16, which is supplied by
Singapore, and the Chinese-made AK-47, supplied by China.

The coalition receives most of its arms from China.

France, a former colonial power in Indochina, is among non-Communist countries
that extend diplomatic support to the guerrilla factions.

A Cambodian state radio broadcast said that Prime Minister Hun Sen had rejected
demands by the guerrilla factions that his Government dissolve and give way to
United Nations administration.

His stand indicates that major disagreements remain before the talks that are
scheduled to begin on Monday in Jakarta, the Indonesian capital.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 26, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Chase Official to Head Global Securities Unit

BYLINE: By DANIEL F. CUFF

SECTION: Section D; Page 5, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 389 words


The Chase Manhattan Bank, believing that institutional investors are taking a
global approach, has combined its domestic pension trust and global custody
business and put Marshall N. Carter in charge.

Mr. Carter, 50 years old, who has headed up the global side of the Chase
operation, said that the business of acting as custodian for the assets of
pension funds is changing rapidly.

With the new setup, ''We expect significant growth,'' Mr. Carter said. ''This
has been a U.S.- and U.K.-based business that is now expanding into Europe and
Asia as European investment firms and pension funds in many cases are allowed to
invest outside their own countries.''

Historically, the custodial business has offered services for settling
securities trades and for safekeeping the securities. Now, Mr. Carter said,
speed in servicing the account and increased information about the account are
increasingly important. The institutional client can also get analytical
information about the account, allowing it, for example, to play ''what if''
games to test investment ideas. But the bank does not provide investment
management advice.

The newly combined unit, which has $250 billion in assets under custody, is
called the Chase Global Securities Services.

Mr. Carter came to banking by way of West Point, Vietnam and a program known as
the White House Fellowships. After West Point, he served two years, 1966 and
1967, leading a Marine infantry company in heavy combat in South Vietnam. He did
a second tour in 1970 and 1971 as an adviser to South Vietnamese Marines.

Before he joined Chase in 1976, Mr. Carter was a White House Fellow serving at
the State Department and the Agency for International Development. The State
Department service included membership on the department's 1975 Sinai
peacekeeping surveillance mission.

At Chase, Mr. Carter was sent to Rochester, to help merge a newly purchased
bank, Lincoln First, with Chase, before he got into the trust and custodial
business.

Mr. Carter, whose title is senior vice president at Chase, is a colonel in the
Marine reserves and is a commercially licensed airplane pilot. He spends about a
week a month in Europe on the Chase job. Mr. Carter and his wife, Missy, live in
Greenwich, Conn., where she has her own business as a career counselor. They
have two children.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Military Crew for Flight of Shuttle Atlantis

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 458 words



John O. Creighton

Mission Commander

Captain Creighton, a 46-year-old Navy pilot, logged 170 hours in space as pilot
of the space shuttle Discovery on a flight in 1985.

A graduate of the Naval Academy, he was a Navy pilot for 10 years, flying 175
combat missions, making 500 aircraft carrier landings and logging about 5,000
hours' flying time, mainly in fighter jets.

He received a master's degree in science and technology administration from
George Washington University in 1978 and a year later became an astronaut. He is
married to the former Terry Stanford.

John H. Casper

Pilot

Colonel Casper, a 46-year-old career Air Force pilot, is making his first space
shuttle flight.

He flew 229 combat missions in Vietnam and has logged more than 5,300 hours in
48 aircraft for the Air Force. He graduated from the Air Force Academy in 1966
and a year later earned a master's degree in astronautics from Purdue
University. He became an astronaut in 1985. He and his wife, Christine, have two
children, Robert, 7, and Stephanie, 5.

David C. Hilmers

Mission Specialist

Lieutenant Colonel Hilmers, of the Marine Corps, was a mission specialist on the
maiden voyage of the space shuttle Atlantis in 1985. He also flew on the
September 1988 voyage of the Discovery, the first shuttle flight after the
Challenger explosion in 1986.

He joined the Marine Corps in 1972, the year he graduated from Cornell
University. He received a master's degree in electrical engineering from the
Naval Postgraduate School in 1978 and became an astronaut in 1980.

Colonel Hilmers, 40, and his wife, Lynn, have two children, Matthew, 13, and
Daniel, 10.

Richard M. Mullane

Mission Specialist

Colonel Mullane, of the Air Force, a 44-year-old graduate of the United States
Military Academy, served as a mission specialist on space shuttle flights in
1984 and 1988, logging 250 hours in space.

As an Air Force pilot, he flew 150 combat missions in Vietnam. In 1975, he
received a master's degree in aeronautical engineering from the Air Force
Institute of Technology. He became an astronaut in 1979.

He and his wife, Donna, have three children, Patrick and Amy, both 21, and
Laura, 19.

Pierre J. Thuot

Mission Specialist

At 34, Lieutenant Commander Thuot (pronounced THOO-it), of the Navy, is the
youngest member of the Atlantis crew. He is making his first space shuttle
flight.

A 1977 graduate of the Naval Academy, he was a Navy pilot for six years, logging
more than 2,300 hours in more than 40 aircraft. He received a master's degree in
systems management from the University of Southern California in 1985 and a year
later became an astronaut. He is married to the former Cheryl Ann Mattingly.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Advocate for the Suffering Takes Over as Head of Mental Health

BYLINE: By DON TERRY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1119 words


As a young Army psychiatrist in Vietnam in 1969, Dr. Billy E. Jones listened to
the torments of American soldiers who had been put in a stockade for various
crimes during the war. Later, when he was a civilian, his patients were people
who, in addition to their own private anguish, suffered lives of poverty.

''This may sound corny,'' Dr. Jones said in a recent interview, ''but I've
always felt a commitment to treating people who for the most part wouldn't be
able to get help anywhere else but the public sector.''

Yesterday, Dr. Jones, who said he has always worked at public hospitals, was
sworn in as New York City's Commissioner of Mental Health. Mayor David N.
Dinkins told about 200 people at the City Hall ceremony that ''Dr. Jones's
professional history has been one of compassionate service.''

''He keeps faith with those who suffer,'' the Mayor said. ''Our city needs his
healing hand and his firm spirit.''

Dr. Jones began the job two days after leaving his post as medical director at
Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx, and with experience from Vietnam to the South
Bronx and on several fronts in between, all of which would serve him well, he
said in the interview.

''It can't hurt,'' he added with a laugh.

'Good at What He Does'

Mr. Dinkins announced Dr. Jones's appointment on the same day in January that he
announced the selection of Dr. Woodrow Myers to be the city's Health
Commissioner. Some critics of the Mayor have suggested that the timing was
deliberate. At the time, gay civil rights groups were bitterly opposed to Dr.
Myers's appointment, saying that his AIDS policies when he was state health
commissioner in Indiana had been unsympathetic toward homosexuals. By naming Dr.
Jones at the same time, the critics say, the Mayor tried to defuse the
opposition, because Dr. Jones is gay.

At the City Hall news conference in which Dr. Jones was introduced, the Mayor
made no mention of the 51-year-old doctor's homosexuality. And in an interview,
Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch dismissed the idea that Dr. Jones's being gay was a
factor in his selection. Dr. Jones was appointed ''because he's damn good at
what he does,'' Mr. Lynch said.

Dr. June Jackson Christmas, a longtime friend of the Mayor's and chairwoman of
his social-services search committee that recommended Dr. Jones, said the new
Commissioner was ''well qualified.''

''I think there are people who might say he's a little too calm, a little too
laid back,'' she added. ''Well, you need that in the midst of the distressing
situation that's going on. But I think he also has a quiet fire underneath.''

Little Direct Contact

After years in public hospitals, Dr. Jones's new job represents a departure for
him: The Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Alcoholism Services
has very little direct contact with patients. It finances and monitors about 750
mental health and alcoholism programs operated by the city and private agencies
and hospitals. Its budget, consisting largely of state money, is $684 million.

Besides supervising hundreds of outside programs, the department also plans the
city's response to changing mental-health needs as psychiatric problems arising
from drug use, especially crack, and other urban pressures mount.

Dr. Jones said that among his priorities will be to improve and expand mental
health services for children, the homeless and AIDS patients, though he said he
recognizes the constraints imposed by city and state budgets.

He said he also hopes to find better ways to battle drug abuse by the mentally
ill. Some of the mentally ill who are the hardest to treat are those who also
abuse drugs, the doctor said.

Tracing His Commitment

Dr. Jones traces his commitment to public health to a small house in Dayton,
Ohio, where he grew up.

His father, Paul, was a factory worker who never finished high school, and his
mother, Callie, cleaned houses. But they managed to send Dr. Jones, his sister
and brother to college - Dr. Jones to Howard University and then the Meharry
Medical College in Nashville. Around the dinner table, Paul Jones frequently
talked to his children about politics and the hard march by blacks toward civil
rights.

''As a result, I developed an interest in society and making it better,'' said
Dr. Jones, a Harlem resident since 1974.

As Commissioner he is taking a cut in pay, receiving a salary of $110,000 a
year. As medical director at Lincoln he was paid $175,000 a year, he said, and
earned an additional $10,000 from his private practice in Manhattan.

To ease the financial shortfall, Dr. Jones will be allowed to accept a teaching
position at the Medical College of the City University of New York with a salary
of $22,500. He will also continue his private practice.

When the Mayor announced Dr. Jones's appointment, the news was received with
some grumbling, not because of who Dr. Jones is but because of what he is not -
Hispanic.

The Association of Hispanic Mental Health Professionals as well as some Hispanic
individuals had tried to persuade the Mayor to appoint Dr. Luis Marcos, a
psychiatrist who is head of the city's department of mental hygiene services and
who is Hispanic.

Formidable Challenges

''There was some disappointment that Dr. Marcos was not selected,'' said the
association's president, Dr. Manuel Trujillo. ''But we are looking forward to
working with Dr. Jones. He knows the trenches and the policy makers.''

Dr. Marcos said the new Commissioner faces formidable challenges from
homelessness, drug abuse and poverty, all of which can aggravate mental illness.

Mary M. Windels, of the United Hospital Fund, a philanthropic and health-care
research organization, said she was cautiously optimistic. She said she has
known Dr. Jones since 1977, when he became head of psychiatry at Lincoln
Hospital. He took over a troubled department and slowly began turning it around,
she said.

'Has Shown an Open Mind'

''We're hoping as he moves into this new and very important job,'' Mrs. Windels
said, ''that he'll display the same kind of growth and sense of humor that he
used at Lincoln.''

She added: ''I think he has limited experience'' in broader public-health
concerns. ''But he has shown an open mind and the ability to move as times have
changed.''

When he makes a decision, it is only after some deliberation, said Martin S.
Begun, an associate dean at the New York University School of Medicine and the
chairman of the city's mental health board, an advisory panel.

''He's a soft-spoken, reflective, very sensitive professional,'' Mr. Begun said.
''He's not quick to shoot from the hip. You can't agitate him too quickly. In
that respect, he's a lot like our Mayor.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Billy E. Jones was sworn in yesterday as New York City's new
Commissioner of mental health. After the ceremony, he was joined by his mother,
Callie, center, and a niece, Eileen Smith. (The New York Times/Don Hogan
Charles)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In the Cocaine War ... The Jungle Is Winning

BYLINE: By Michael Massing; Michael Massing, a 1989 Alicia Patterson Fellow, has
written extensively on the United States' drug policies.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4984 words


NEAR THE TINY VILLAGE OF Santa Lucia, deep in the Peruvian jungle - a vast,
untamed land of luxuriant vegetation, steeply rising hills and swollen rivers,
where gun-toting narcos and murderous thieves mix with peasant activists and
Maoist guerrillas - United States officials are putting the finishing touches on
a new military base meant to serve as America's forward outpost in the war on
cocaine.

The runway, 5,200 feet of compacted gravel, cuts like a broad alabaster band
through the dense emerald brush. Daily, C-123 supply planes fly in from Lima,
250 miles away, carrying everything from boots and bottled water to dynamite and
machine guns. Dark-green Huey helicopters, pressed back into service after their
time in Vietnam, slice gracefully through the sky, filling the heavy tropical
air with a deep, resounding buzz. Thatched sheds, green tents, piles of black
sandbags, and dark, brooding skies all contribute to the wartime atmosphere.

This time, though, it's not the Marines or the infantry that's doing the
fighting, but the Drug Enforcement Administration. About a dozen D.E.A. agents
are stationed here, trim, clean-cut types wearing camouflage pants and black
army boots. A few months ago, these men were busy arresting drug dealers on the
streets of Chicago and Seattle. Now they're in the middle of the Peruvian
jungle, living in tents and conducting paramilitary raids. Backing them up is a
crew of American pilots, mechanics, aviation experts and ex-Special Forces
operatives with experience in Vietnam and El Salvador. In all, 30 or so
Americans are serving alongside 120 Peruvian policemen in what is surely the
most dangerous anti-narcotics post in the world.

The Upper Huallaga Valley, which extends for 200 miles along the Huallaga River,
is home to the world's finest coca. An estimated 250,000 acres are covered with
the crop, and conditions are ideal for growing more. There's abundant rainfall,
year-round warm temperatures and steep tree-covered slopes well beyond the reach
of the law.

The jungle canopy offers excellent cover for primitive laboratories, where
amateur chemists work day and night to turn the coca leaves into a gooey paste,
called pasta basica. Small airplanes from Colombia - home of the giant cocaine
cartels, which process and distribute the drug - come to pick up the paste and
transport it to the Peruvian-Colombian border, where it's refined into cocaine
hydrochloride, or cocaine powder. From there it is smuggled into the United
States, feeding the nation's immense, insatiable habit.

Today, coca is Peru's largest export, earning more than $1 billion a year. As
many as one million of the country's 21 million people are involved in the
trade. Peruvian coca accounts for perhaps 65 percent of the cocaine entering the
United States, and more than half of it is grown in the Upper Huallaga Valley.

It's here, then, that the United States has chosen to make its strongest stand.
The goal: stopping the flow of cocaine at its source.

The program is already well under way. Active-duty Special Forces advisers are
training Peruvian anti-narcotics police (Continued on Page 88) in jungle
warfare, and Peruvian pilots have been sent to Fort Rucker, Ala., to learn to
fly helicopters. The United States is expanding its intelligence presence in
Peru and plans to build a new, highly secure embassy in Lima. And, even as
construction continues at the base in Santa Lucia, the United States is planning
to build several more just like it.

''The Upper Huallaga Valley is going to be the model for the world,'' says an
American official helping to implement the program. ''We're slowly developing a
package that can be used anywhere, whether it's opium, poppy or coca fields
we're trying to get rid of.''

The United States is embarked on a five-year, $2.2 billion aid program for the
Andean region, which may include more than $600 million for Peru alone.
President Bush's visit last month to Cartagena, Colombia, to meet with Andean
leaders was a sign of just how much importance the Administration attaches to
the region. Coming not quite two months after the invasion of Panama, the
Cartagena meeting marks the start of an era of heightened United States
involvement in Latin America to fight drugs. United States efforts in the Upper
Huallaga Valley provide an indication of what - if anything - the country can
hope to achieve in halting the flow of cocaine at its source.

FOR JOURNALISTS INTENT on visiting the base in Santa Lucia, there's only one way
to go - the United States Embassy's one-day, no-nights group tour. The package
includes transportation from Lima (a C-130 cargo plane), guest lectures
(featuring the head of the embassy's narcotics assistance unit), and plenty of
good photo opportunities. A tireless tour guide, supplied by the United States
Information Service, helpfully corrects any misapprehensions a visitor might
form.

As we step off the C-130, ominous, low-lying clouds are rolling in, darkening
the surrounding vegetation and lending the base itself an eerie, spectral cast.
Clumps of Peruvian anti-narcotics policemen emerge from the mist, their AK-47
rifles perched on their shoulders.

We're packed into trucks and whisked to the end of the runway, where we suddenly
find ourselves on the banks of the sluggish, muddy Huallaga. In a big
hollowed-out pit stands a pick-up truck, loading up with earth. The Huallaga,
we're told, has been diverted in order to create a source of gravel for the
runway. In waging the drug war, the United States has altered the river's very
course.

We climb back into the trucks and are driven to a small patch of coca - all that
remains of the coca farms that flourished here before 1987, when the Government
began operation of the base. Today, the grove serves as a ''demonstration
plot.'' We are encouraged to wade in and break off a souvenir. Seen up close,
the infamous plant - about four feet tall, with bright green leaves and red
berries - appears rather innocuous, a plain, untrimmed woodland bush.

A Peruvian worker appears, clutching a whirring, long-stemmed instrument. It's a
John Deere gas-powered, heavy-duty weed-cutter. The man moves briskly into the
thicket, and, like a suburbanite trimming the hedges, effortlessly slices
through the rows of sturdy shrubs.

The gardener is a member of the Special Project for Control and Eradication of
Coca in the Upper Huallaga - Corah, for short. Corah was created by the State
Department, which provides its annual budget. American officials maintain that,
with John Deere's assistance, Corah's 400 workers can raze more than 2,500 acres
a month. ''Spread out over 12 months, that could take out a big chunk of the
crop,'' one official says.

But the program has encountered problems. Eradication is not popular with the
area's farmers. Since 1982, when Corah was set up, nearly 40 of its workers have
been killed in the line of duty. Most have fallen victim to the Sendero Luminoso
(Shining Path), the fanatically Maoist guerrilla group that seeks to inflict on
Peru a Chinese-style Cultural Revolution. The Upper Huallaga Valley has become
Sendero's chief stronghold, and coca its primary means of support.

A year ago, the attacks on the coca cutters became so intense that the United
States had to suspend the program, and Corah members were put to work building
the runway at Santa Lucia. Today, they are virtual prisoners of the base,
reduced to waiting for tour groups like ours to come by so that they can
practice their coca-cutting craft. No date has been set for resuming the
program.

It's lunchtime. We're led to the officers' mess, a small, functional building
with screened windows and long wooden tables, where we find a handful of D.E.A.
agents, pilots, and ex-Special Forces members. Over beef stew, cornmeal gruel
and salad, we ask the Americans what it's like to live in this remote outpost,
with guerrillas and traffickers just beyond the barbed wire. They're not saying,
though; presumably, they've been instructed not to talk to us about anything
substantive. We end up discussing sports and the weather. ''When's Connie Chung
coming down here?'' asks one laconic pilot.

After lunch, we board helicopters for a visit to a laboratory recently raided by
the D.E.A. Destroying labs is the D.E.A.'s chief mission in the Upper Huallaga.
If enough labs are destroyed - so the theory goes - the price of coca will fall
and farmers, already worried about the threat of eradication, will give up
growing the plant and cultivate something else.

The Hueys are very roomy, easily accommodating eight journalists, two pilots and
a D.E.A. agent armed with an AR-15 semiautomatic rifle, a jungle knife and 400
rounds of ammunition. Only a few minutes from the base we see the first
rectangle of coca, its light-green leaves standing out clearly from the
surrounding palms, cornfields and forest. Soon the plant is everywhere, climbing
like a weed up the steep hillsides.

Twenty minutes out of Santa Lucia, we reach the lab. The jungle canopy is so
thick that we have to make four passes over the site before we can make out the
shiny metallic structure. Unfortunately, we can't touch down - too dangerous.

Even from several hundred feet, though, one can see what the D.E.A. agents are
up against. Though this had been a big lab - complete with filter racks, drying
tables, generators, even a kitchen -it was well hidden from view. When the
agents stormed off their helicopters, they found a lot of chemicals but no coca
paste, and no traffickers. The noise of the helicopters had given those working
there plenty of time to flee.

During 1988, the D.E.A. destroyed 75 labs and seized 5,900 kilos of base -
impressive, until measured against the valley's output, believed to be one
million kilos of base every year. ''The Huallaga Valley is three times the size
of El Salvador,'' notes an American military officer in Peru, ''and the United
States has only eight helicopters to patrol it.''

Most officials at the United States Embassy recognize that, short of sending in
the 82d Airborne - something Peru would never tolerate - there's a limit to what
the United States can accomplish in the Huallaga. As this reality has sunk in,
American officials have increasingly pinned their hopes on the one institution
they think could make a difference in the drug war: the Peruvian military.

In Washington's view, the military could help in a variety of ways. Peruvian
soldiers could inspect the traffic on the Huallaga's main highway, currently a
caravan of coca paste. They could track the cartel's airplanes as they fly in
from Colombia, then seize them while they're on the ground. And they could help
protect D.E.A. agents and Corah workers as they attack the local drug trade.

Peru's generals, however, have long resisted getting involved in the war on
drugs. For them, the real war is the one against the Sendero Luminoso - a
conflict that has claimed 15,000 lives over the last 10 years. Anything that
might divert men and materiel from that conflict is stoutly opposed. In Peru (as
in the United States) drug trafficking has always been viewed as a
law-enforcement matter and, thus, better left to the police. Unfortunately,
Peru's police have proved hopelessly corrupt and inept, frequently joining with
the traffickers to plunder coca growers.

So, in recent months, the United States Embassy has been trying to persuade the
Peruvian military to get involved in the anti-drug effort, says a senior United
States official in Peru, adding, ''Much of the leadership of the Peruvian armed
forces agrees with this.''

In fact, it's not quite that simple, as I learned when I visited Tarapoto, a
town 70 miles north of Santa Lucia.

ONE WARM AFTERNOON, about 75 rice and corn growers have gathered in the Casa
Campesina, an airy warehouselike building on an unpaved street in Tarapoto. For
four months they have been waiting for the state's marketing agencies to pay
them for their crops, but still the money has not come. Things were getting
desperate, and a regional farmers' union had proposed a 20-day strike in which
farmers would block all traffic on the main highway. It would be a provocative
act, sure to spark violence, and the farmers were now meeting to decide whether
to proceed.

As they milled about in front of the hall, a green army jeep pulled up. Out
stepped Gen. Alberto Arciniega, the commander of Peru's Security Subzone No. 8.
At the age of 48, the general has a smooth, unlined face, a neatly trimmed
mustache and thinning dark hair; although of medium height, he gains added
presence from his erect military carriage and a gold-plated walking stick that
he grasps in his left hand. Having heard about the proposed strike, Arciniega
had come to offer his views. Moving toward the entrance, he stopped to banter
with a few peasants, then strode inside and took a seat at the raised table in
front.

Until December, General Arciniega was the top commander in the Upper Huallaga
Valley. His headquarters was about 10 miles from Santa Lucia, in the town of
Uchiza - which also happens to be the hub of Peru's drug trade. For months,
United States officials had implored Arciniega to move against the traffickers.
In October, Gen. Maxwell Thurman, commander of the United States Southern
Command in Panama, met with Arciniega at Santa Lucia and urged him to get
involved. But the general declined.

Incensed, United States Embassy officials, with the D.E.A. in the forefront,
tried to get Arciniega removed from his post. In Washington, Melvyn Levitsky,
the assistant secretary of state for international narcotics matters, appeared
before a Senate subcommittee and criticized the general for failing to protect
Corah eradication teams and for preventing the Peruvian police from entering
areas under his control. Levitsky went on to mention ''reports'' that Arciniega
was ''taking payoffs from traffickers.''

At the Casa Campesina, Arciniega sat impassively as Segundo Centurion, a leading
peasant organizer, made an impassioned plea for the strike. ''Ninety percent of
the peasants in the region are growing coca,'' said Centurion, his voice tight
with anger. ''This may be a 'crime,' but the Government's agrarian policy has
forced them into it.'' It was now time for action, he said, adding, ''Nothing is
going to keep us quiet in the search for social justice.'' The peasants
applauded loudly.

Rising to his feet, Arciniega fixed the peasants with a stern look. ''I'm the
son of a campesino,'' he declared in a booming voice. ''I know what it means to
work in the countryside.'' Nonetheless, the general went on, he would not permit
a strike. Local elections were coming up, and the guerrillas were trying to
disrupt them. A strike would only help their cause. ''We must remain united to
prevent this destruction of the country,'' Arciniega asserted.

Arciniega spoke in quick, excitable bursts, managing to sound both populist and
imperious. By the time he turned to the subject of coca, he was shouting.
''Officials of the United States Government call the coca growers drug
traffickers,'' he bellowed. ''They even say that I, General Arciniega, am a drug
trafficker. They say this because I think of the real needs of my people -
because I support the campesino.''

The general spoke with pride about his efforts to encourage farmers to shift
from coca to yucca, cocoa and other food crops. Such a strategy, he said, was
much more effective than simply treating coca growers like criminals and
eradicating their fields. ''To be a drug trafficker and a coca grower are two
different things,'' Arciniega declared. ''I want to attack the coca problem -
but not by attacking the campesino.''

As the general walked briskly to his jeep, he invited me, along with two
Peruvian journalists, to come along with him. We drove to the army barracks on
the edge of town and entered the general's quarters, a spare-looking bungalow
with a worn vinyl floor and naked overhead bulb. Changing his uniform shirt for
an army-green T-shirt, Arciniega sat down in a plastic rocking chair and poured
a round of beers, the first of many.

''These U.S. officials fly up to Santa Lucia for a four-hour tour and think they
know everything about Peru,'' he said, making no effort to hide his contempt.
''The coca problem is so great, the Americans need someone like me to serve as a
scapegoat. It's easier to destroy General Arciniega than to change the
situation.''

It was around midnight when Arciniega, still going strong, took out a fifth of
12-year-old Ballantine's Scotch. Several of his officers joined us around the
table, and the general kept refilling our glasses while continuing his
monologue, punctuating each point with a ''Salud'' and a sip.

A bottle of Ballantine's goes for $30 in Tarapoto, and its sudden appearance at
the general's table inevitably brought to mind the State Department's corruption
charges. It is well known in the valley that small planes regularly touch down
at the municipal airport in Uchiza - seat of the general's headquarters - take
on coca paste and fly out again, all under the watchful gaze of military
officers. According to some townspeople, the ''fee'' for the airport's services
ranges up to $15,000 a flight, and is divided between the officers and the local
town council. Though it has not been shown that the general himself has
profited, it seems clear that the men under his command have reached some sort
of accommodation with the traffickers.

As soon as the issue is raised, Arciniega grows indignant. ''Madness,'' he calls
the charges, demanding that the State Department produce evidence. Until it
does, Arciniega has little time for the matter. ''The Americans think that all I
have to worry about is fighting the drug traffickers,'' he told me. ''In fact,
as political-military commander of the zone, I have 20,000 different problems,
only one of which is drug trafficking.''

By far the greatest of those problems, he said, is the Sendero Luminoso. Coca is
Sendero's lifeblood. The guerrillas have protected the growers and make sure
they receive a good price for their crop; in return, Sendero has levied a 5 to
15 percent ''tax'' on the earnings. They also charge the traffickers up to
$15,000 for each flight into the region. All told, the insurgents have been
earning perhaps $30 million a year from coca, enabling them to spread their
operations throughout Peru.

Eliminating coca, then, could help eliminate Sendero. But in Arciniega's view,
eradication is not the answer. ''There are 150,000 campesinos cocaleros'' -
coca-growing peasants - ''in the zone,'' he said. ''Each of them is a potential
subversivo. Eradicate his field and the next day he'll be one.'' The Corah units
''come with 200 workers, uproot the campesino's plant - and leave him nothing!
He becomes a criminal. And who protects him? Sendero!'' The key to beating the
guerrillas, the general said, was to win over the peasant, thereby depriving
Sendero of its base. Eradication could help convince growers to get off coca -
but only if it was tied to a crop-substitution program.

Earlier this year, Arciniega raised the idea with United States officials of
setting aside 10,000 acres of land near Santa Lucia and putting farmers to work
on it growing oil-bearing palm trees; Corah would have provided the necessary
technical expertise. But, he says, the Americans weren't interested.  ''It's a
myth,'' says one United States official, ''that all of these coca growers are
traditional peasants whose land is being despoiled by eradication, and that this
will drive them into the arms of the insurgents.''

In that official's view, the growers are mostly unemployed people from big
cities who've migrated to the Upper Huallaga to make some money. If their farms
are destroyed, he says, ''We're not at all certain they'll go into the hands of
Sendero Luminoso. More likely, they'll go to Cuzco,'' a city in the mountains
hundreds of miles to the south. General Arciniega sees the growers as humble
peasants struggling to scratch out a living; at the United States Embassy in
Lima, officials have coined their own term for them - ''gold rushers.''

IN THE RUGGED COUNTRYSIDE around Tarapoto, hundreds of columns of smoke rise
into the air, each marking a new field being burnt into the forest. Tarapoto was
until recently a sleepy farm town, its residents dependent mostly on rice and
corn.

Today, the area is in full bloom. Almost everyone is growing at least some coca.
Dollars, once scarce in Tarapoto, now circulate widely, and the town is
experiencing a modest building boom, with several hotels under construction.
Prices are rising steadily, and so is the crime rate.

Why the rush into coca? In many respects, it is a ''miracle'' crop. It will grow
almost anywhere with a minimum of attention. Highly resistant to disease, it
requires no insecticides and little fertilizer. And it produces three or four
harvests a year, compared to only two for rice and corn. Finally, and most
important, a peasant can earn up to $1,000 an acre of coca - several times the
return on other crops.

Yet many of Tarapoto's growers have turned to coca only reluctantly. ''Coca
brings a lot of money, but it also brings a lot of danger and suffering,''
explains Julio Garcia Pineda, a soft-spoken 68-year-old peasant leader. Coca
growers, he says, ''live in constant terror and fear'' - fear of the police, who
steal money, farm animals and coca paste; fear of the traffickers, who force the
peasants into debt and kill those who can't repay. Most campesinos, says Garcia,
turn to coca ''only because they are hungry.''

Garcia was speaking on the main floor of the Banco Agrario, the state-controlled
institution where most of Tarapoto's campesinos do business. The place was
mobbed with concerned rice and corn growers seeking to postpone the deadlines
for repaying their loans. For four months the Government had failed to pay the
farmers for their crops, yet now their loans were coming due - at an annual
interest rate of 1,350 percent.

The mood in Tarapoto had grown militant. About 100 farmers had taken over the
offices of the Government's rice-marketing board, vowing not to leave until they
were paid for their crops. On walls around town graffiti were springing up -
''Che Lives'' and ''Justice Begins for the Rich'' - presumably put there by the
Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, another Peruvian guerrilla group that is
rapidly gaining recruits in the northern part of the valley.

''If campesinos get involved with coca, it's because the Government has
abandoned them,'' said a farmer standing outside the Casa Campesina. ''I don't
want to grow coca, but I have no alternative,'' said another man. ''I can't
survive any other way.''

Neither farmer had been paid by the Government in four months. By contrast, at
coca harvest time, the traffickers show up like clockwork to buy the leaves -
and they pay in cash.

''A REALLY INTELLIGENT anti-narcotics program for the United States would be to
buy the rice and corn of our farmers, and to pay a price competitive with
coca,'' General Arciniega told me during our conversation. ''If the United
States had a sincere interest in solving Peru's coca problem, it would invest in
the Upper Huallaga Valley and help develop it.'' How much money would be needed?
''About $3 billion,'' the general said.

This year, Washington is sending Peru $110 million in aid. That's more than
twice as much as last year, but most of it will go for security-related items -
fuel for helicopters, weapons for drug fighters, reinforcements for Santa Lucia,
supplies for the Peruvian military. The Administration has allotted only $3.1
million for economic assistance. That sum is expected to rise considerably next
year, but many remain skeptical that this will make much difference.

''Even if we spend $500 million, we're not going to get Peruvians to stop
growing coca,'' says one United States official. ''With that sum, I could pave
the Upper Huallaga over, but they'd simply move over to the next valley.''

The reason, he says, is the desperate state of Peru's economy. Guerrilla
sabotage, together with gross Government mismanagement, has devastated the
country, shrinking the country's gross national product by 20 percent in a year,
causing unemployment to soar and pushing inflation to near 3,000 percent. Given
this, the Americans argue, any development aid would simply be wasted. The only
hope, they maintain, is to drive down the price farmers receive for their crops
- and that means destroying more labs.

IN DECEMBER, AMERICAN OFFICIALS were buoyed by the reassignment of General
Arciniega, who was transferred - in a scheduled rotation - to a high-level
position at the Ministry of Defense. United States Embassy officials are hoping
that his successor, Gen. Luis Chacon, will prove more helpful. ''We will see
greater cooperation in narcotics control as a result of our negotiations with
the Peruvian Government,'' says a senior official in Peru.

He may be disappointed. ''The problem is not Arciniega,'' concedes another
United States official. ''President Garcia knew what he was doing. His
Government approved of it.''

Indeed, Arciniega has become something of a celebrity in Peru. The Peruvian
press has portrayed him as a fervent nationalist, and in the Upper Huallaga
itself he is seen as a sort of Robin Hood, putting his career on the line to
help the lowly campesino.

This has left United States officials shaking their heads. How could a general
accused of corruption be admired, applauded, and patted on the back by his own
Government? The answer became apparent to me while accompanying Arciniega on one
of his tours of the valley. The destination was Rioja, about 60 miles from
Tarapoto. Though he hadn't notified the town of his visit, Arciniega had his
Bell 212 helicopter circle it three times - a calling card of sorts.

By the time we finally touched down, the Mayor and a half-dozen town elders had
appeared on the tarmac. We repaired to a thatched restaurant, where, over
endless rounds of beer and some cold salted fish, the general listened to a
lengthy recitation of local woes. The town's electric generator was near
collapse. The roads were in appalling condition. And, on top of it all, the
Tupac Amaru guerrillas had just made their first appearance in town.

After listening to this, a distracted Arciniega said feebly that there was
little he could do to help. Finally, he mentioned what was bothering him: the
State Department's corruption charges. Immediately, the Mayor, a rotund,
self-assured man named Alfonso Alva Gonzales, stood up and, glass raised,
offered a toast.

''If someone has smeared the image of the general,'' he said, ''it is my
responsibility as the Mayor of Rioja to affirm the friendship that our citizens
feel for you. We all are happy because of the concern you, as military
commander, have shown for us.''

The Mayor went on in this vein for several minutes, laying it on a bit thick -
Rioja did need help with its generator - but his remarks seemed heartfelt, and,
after everyone had applauded, the general was back to his normal cocky self.
Clearly, the citizens of Rioja had far too much on their minds to worry about
whether a brigadier general was on the take.

Much the same could be said for Peru as a whole. In Lima these days there are
lines for sugar, rice, cooking oil - even bread. One week, the Government did
not have enough funds to pay its employees.

In such times, the war on cocaine seems a low priority. As Peru's presidential
campaign heats up before the April elections, the candidates have clashed
furiously on virtually every subject - except drugs. At a time when American
officials seem to be embracing the drug war in place of the cold war as the axis
of American policy in the region, in Peru itself drugs are hardly an issue.

This is not surprising. Economically, coca is one of the country's few bright
spots. The dollars earned from coca flow from the Huallaga directly onto the
streets of Lima, where hundreds of informal money changers waving stacks of
bills offer to change dollars for Peruvian intis. The changers are condoned by
the Government, and everyone from businessmen to tourists uses them. This is
Peru's real banking system, sustained almost entirely by coca dollars.

People like General Arciniega, then, may be living off the drug trade, but so is
the rest of the country. ''Fighting the drug trade is suicide for us.'' says one
Peruvian journalist.

It's hard to find a Peruvian with a kind word to say for the Bush
Administration's approach to the drug problem. ''It seems that the U.S. plan
does not plan for development,'' says Augustin Mantilla, the Minister of the
Interior. As Peru's top cop, Mantilla is the closest thing the country has to a
drug czar. And he is not happy with United States policy. Until the United
States provides more economic aid, says Mantilla, all the money it spends on
controlling drugs will be for naught. He cites the base at Santa Lucia as an
example. Though not a bad idea in itself, says Mantilla, ''it will be more
useful when there are development projects around it to defend.''

Already, though, the United States is looking beyond Santa Lucia. Peru's coca
fields are expanding at a rate of 10 to 20 percent a year, much of it in areas
previously untouched by the crop. Coca is being grown in eight different
Peruvian river valleys. In one, the Urubamba, in eastern Peru, the coca crop may
one day rival the Huallaga's.

The United States has planned its response. In 12 to 18 months, construction of
a second base is to begin, near the Colombian border. As coca spreads, so will
the rationale for other Santa Lucias.  On this point a State Department official
was quite clear. ''The bottom line,'' he said, ''is we're going to have to
escalate.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Destroying coca in Peru, which supplies up to 65% of the U.S.
market. (Esly Salinas/Saba) (pg. 26); A U.S. drug agent in Peru searches by
helicopter for traffickers. Inset: Villagers with woden spears hunt Shining Path
guerrillas (Esly Salinas/Saba; Alejandro Balaguer/Sygma) (pg. 27)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 10, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Ron Wolin, 55, Dies; Sued Port Authority Over Ban on Leaflets

BYLINE: By GLENN FOWLER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 282 words


Ron Wolin, an antiwar advocate who brought a class-action lawsuit in the 1960's
that allowed the distribution of political and religious leaflets in bus
terminals and other transportation centers and that led to the right to solicit
contributions in such centers, died on Sunday at Cabrini Hospital. He was 55
years old and lived in Manhattan.

His companion, Avis Lang, said he died of pneumonia resulting from lymphoma.

Mr. Wolin was the lead plaintiff in a United States Supreme Court case argued by
the American Civil Liberties Union against the Port Authority of New York and
New Jersey. The Court ruled that handing out literature denouncing the war in
Vietnam and discussing the issue with people passing through the terminal
constituted an expression of free speech in a public place.

The decision applied only to publicly owned centers, not to terminals owned by
railroads or bus companies. But later litigation extended political and
religious expression and solicitation to virtually all transportation terminals
and shopping centers in the country.

The case was cited in recent court actions that have established the right to
beg in transportation and similar centers.

Mr. Wolin was the executive director of the Cartoonists Guild from 1969 to 1983.
He was not a cartoonist but had developed a wide acquaintance among artists
through his organizing efforts in the antiwar movement.

Ms. Lang said that in recent years, Mr. Wolin had been active in asserting
patients' rights to receive nontraditional treatment for diseases like cancer.

Mr. Wolin is survived by his parents, Harry and Bobbi, of North Miami Beach,
Fla., and a sister, Joan Strauss of Oyster Bay, L.I.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 24, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An obituary on March 10 about Ron Wolin, an antiwar advocate who brought a
successful lawsuit to permit the distribution of political and religious
leaflets in publicly owned transportation terminals, misstated later decisions
on the issue. Unlike transportation terminals, privately owned shopping centers
in New York and nearly all other states are still permitted to limit leaflet
distribution and solicitation.

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Nga Tran Engaged to Peter Manbeck

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 54, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 194 words


Mr. and Mrs. Tinh N. Tran of San Diego have announced the engagement of their
daughter Nga Thi-Tuyet Tran and Peter Charles Manbeck, the son of Harry F.
Manbeck Jr. of McLean, Va., and the late Lois L. Manbeck. A spring wedding is
planned.

Miss Tran, a graduate of Texas Tech University, expects to receive a law degree
in May from Columbia University, where she is a Harlan Fiske Stone Scholar. She
received an M.S. degree in chemical and petroleum engineeering from the
University of Southern California at Los Angeles. Her father, who is retired,
was a mechanical engineer in Saigon. Her mother, also retired, was a civil
servant in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the South Vietnamese State
Department.

Mr. Manbeck, an associate in the law firm of Sullivan & Cromwell in New York,
graduated cum laude from Wesleyan University. He received a law degree magna cum
laude from the University of Michigan, where he was a member of The Law Review.
His father, who retired as a general patent counsel for General Electric in
Fairfield, Conn., recently became the Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks and
an Assistant Secretary of Commerce in Washington.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Nga Tran (Nancy Pindrus)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 13, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

William F. Raborn Is Dead at 84; Led Production of Polaris Missile

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 763 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 12


William F. Raborn Jr., a retired Navy vice admiral who led the development of
the Polaris nuclear missile in the 1950's and later headed the Central
Intelligence Agency under President Lyndon B. Johnson, died of cardiac arrest on
March 7 at his home in McLean, Va. He was 84 years old.

Admiral Raborn was the first director of the Navy's Fleet Ballistic Missile
Program, which supervised development and production of the world's first
submarine-launched nuclear missile, the Polaris. The weapon was hailed as an
American triumph in the cold-war arms race and as a boon to the country's
allies, whose acceptance of American nuclear missiles on their soil was a
constant source of friction with the Soviet Union.

More important, the Polaris proved the harbinger of a series of
submarine-launched missiles that changed the nature of the American nuclear
force.Today, more than half of all nuclear warheads are carried on missiles and
torpedoes in submarines, largely because the vessels are mobile and extremely
difficult to detect.

Answering Johnson's Call

Admiral Raborn was widely praised for completing development of the missile well
ahead of schedule by holding his staff strictly accountable for each stage in
the weapon's progress. Among colleagues, he was regarded as a skilled seaman and
manager, a man who kept on his office walls pictures of great naval officers as
well as organizers in science and industry.

He was also the quintessential military man who, it is reported, rushed out of
retirement in 1965 after President Johnson asked him to succeed John A. McCone
as Director of Central Intelligence.

In his book on the C.I.A., ''The Agency,'' John Raneleagh quoted a former
colleague of Admiral Raborn who described the admiral's reaction when sworn in
as Director: ''After the President had said some kind things about him, about
how he'd searched the country over and the only man he could find really capable
of running it was ''Red'' Raborn, there he was with tears trickling down his
cheeks and coming off his chin in steady little drops. They really were.''

Mr. Raborn was Director of Central Intelligence from April 1965 to June 1966,
when he was succeeded by his deputy, Richard M. Helms.

His tenure was widely described as a difficult one. His predecessor, Mr. McCone,
had been dismissed, in part, because he openly disagreed with the President on
intelligence issues involving the expanding war in Vietnam. Mr. Raborn, trained
in the military hierarchy, worked to satisfy President Johnson's demands that
the agency provide more intelligence and run clandestine operations in the war.

Service in World War II

William Francis Raborn Jr. was born June 8, 1905, in Decatur, Tex. He graduated
from the United States Naval Academy in 1928 and was commissioned an ensign.
After World War II service in Washington and at sea, he became a captain in
1945, and, in 1952, he was made an official in the guided missile division of
the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations.

In 1954, he became commander of the destroyer Bennington, where his Navy career
took an abrupt and, it first seemed, unfortunate turn. In May 1954, an explosion
and fire below decks killed 91 of the Bennington's crew and injured at least 20.
Although Captain Raborn was praised for his handling of the disaster, he was
assigned to a program that ranked near the bottom of the Navy's priorities:
developing an intercontinental nuclear missile for submarines.

He took charge of the Polaris project on Jan. 1, 1956, and, then a rear admiral,
rode herd on its manufacturers and planners. On July 20, 1960, the first Polaris
was launched from a submarine, the George Washington, that was submerged off
Cape Canaveral.

The missile landed on target 1,150 miles away.

Second Career in Business

Admiral Raborn retired from the Navy in 1963 and moved to California, where he
became a vice president of the Aerojet-General Corporation. He returned to the
company for three years after serving as director of the C.I.A.

From 1970 to 1986, he managed his own concern, the W. F. Raborn Company, in
McLean.

Admiral Raborn received the Distinguished Service Medal and the Presidential
National Security Medal during his years in the Navy and at the C.I.A.

He is survived by his wife, Mildred T. Raborn; a son, William F. Raborn 3d, and
a daughter, Priscilla Richardson, both of California; three brothers, B. M.
Raborn, C. B. Raborn and R. C. Raborn, all of Texas, and four grandchildren. He
was buried in the United States Naval Academy Cemetery in Annapolis, Md.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: William F. Raborn (Associated Press, 1965)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 2, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
The New 'Sooners'

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 719 words


Seers and prognosticators of all varieties are taking loose advantage of the
calendar to proclaim that a ''new decade'' is ushering in a ''new world'' that
will follow upon the deflation of Communist pretensions and the end of the
Soviet empire.

I decline to join in these hosannas on two grounds, the first minor and
personal. To me, the ''new decade'' will not begin - any more than some new
decade is born every new year -until Jan. 1, 1991: The Decade of the Nineties.
That decade will begin not with a zero (1990) but with a 1 (1991) and continue
not through 1999 but through its 10th year (2000).

The new ''sooners'' who defy this arithmetical logic also run ahead of
themselves in proclaiming a ''new world.'' We face, in fact, a changed and not a
new world; and in some ways, it's more nearly an old world predating the cold
war that has come to an end.

The German problem is certainly not new, though it now arises in a different
context. The conflicts of Eastern Europe, once the confining cloak of Communist
rule has been thrown off, may well be reawakened in all their ancient
malignities. Mikhail Gorbachev's struggle with the dissident republics of his
forcefully built empire is a magnification of a problem that has plagued the
U.S.S.R. almost from its inception. And, as has always been the case, even when
cold war hostilities obscured it, the nations' economies and trading positions
will be the surest determinants of their power.

Admittedly, in world affairs, there's not much difference in ''changed'' and
''new,'' except when the latter connotes something never before seen - such as
men walking on the moon. There are few such developments. If, however, ''new''
is taken to mean something different from what was perceived a year or 10 years
or a quarter-century ago, then at least two such ''new'' developments strike me
as note-worthy.

One of these is the removal of the threat - if there ever was one - of the
Soviet invasion of Western Europe. The West's perception of such a threat, since
the late 40's, has been a primary - perhaps the primary -force in Western
policy. It has been responsible, among other things, for NATO and the billions
of dollars U.S. taxpayers have poured into the defense of Western Europe, every
year for nearly a half-century.

The idea of a war in Europe has shaped the training of U.S. military forces, to
their detriment in Vietnam and even, some critics say, in the recent invasion of
Panama. Deterring the Soviet Union from such an invasion has been an important
rationale for the U.S. nuclear arsenal.

If the Soviets have relinquished their control in East Germany, Poland and the
rest of Eastern Europe, however, it can hardly be any longer imagined that they
plan to lunge across Germany and France to the English Channel. Some of us have
argued that at least since Stalin's day there was no realistic likelihood of
such an attempt; one reason was the likely unreliability of Warsaw Pact forces,
which now has been demonstrated. Thus, the exposure of the ''Soviet threat to
Western Europe'' as a paper tiger, if that exposure is accepted, liberates the
West from a powerful and prevailing policy imperative.

It follows, also, from the acquiescence of Moscow in the removal of Communist
control in Eastern Europe that the Soviets are not eager -if they ever were - to
sustain a satellite nation half a world away in Central America, much less to
build it into a military threat to the United States or the Western Hemisphere.
Yet, it was that ultimate threat that the Reagan Administration fell back upon
to justify its recruiting, arming, financing and control of the so-called
contras as a force with which to overthrow the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua.

Now, after Mr. Gorbachev's retreat from Eastern Europe, it would take a highly
charged imagination indeed to suppose that he intends to sustain a major Soviet
outpost and military base in Central America. President Bush certainly can be
under no such illusion.

Washington has made it clear that it will not permit Nicaragua to molest its
neighbors. Why not draw the lesson of Eastern Europe, then, and leave the
Sandinistas to the Nicaraguan people? Or would that be too ''new'' a world for a
U.S. still bent, as in Panama, and as always, on dominating its so-called
''backyard''?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 2, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Reason and Law Reject Our Panama Invasion;
'Gringo Imperialism'

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 198 words


To the Editor:

Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega never threatened the Panama Canal; the United States
always had sufficient force on hand to protect United States citizens short of
all-out war. General Noriega was Panama's problem, not ours.

Our President made the self-serving decision to decapitate the Panamanian
Government, but it is the Panamanians who will pay the price in destruction of
lives and property, civil disorder in cities suddenly without police and other
essential services, a smashed and looted economy, and the makings of a classic
and extended guerrilla-induced civil war.

Our true national interests in Pan-American stability and prosperity will once
again be thwarted by legitimate and unified Latin hatred for ''gringo
imperialism.'' As our ideals triumph over Soviet arms in Central Europe, our
arms make a mockery of our ideals in Central America.

In the names of the millions of dead and dispossessed in Vietnam and Cambodia,
El Salvador and now Panama, when are we finally going to be true to our ideals
of human rights and self-determination, and stop ''saving'' oppressed people by
destroying them?

WILLIAM D. SEARLE
Scottsdale, Ariz., Dec. 23, 1989

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words



International    A3-15

Gen. Manuel Noriega surrendered to United States authorities in Panama, giving
President Bush the final victory he had been seeking. Gen. Noriega was flown to
Florida to face trial on drug charges.    Page A1

As word spreads of surrender, joy erupts in Panama     A1

Noriega faces long, uncertain legal journey     A12

Woman leads G.I.'s in combat in Panama, an Army first     A13

Panama's new security chief quit less than two weeks after the new civilian
Government appointed him to head the remnants of the Panamanian Defense Forces.
    A13

The killing of two nuns in Nicaragua, one an American, was not carried out by
the American-backed contras, a contra official said. But clergymen in the area
said they had ''no doubt'' the rebels were responsible.    A10

News analysis: The muted response to the killing of two nuns in Nicaragua by the
Bush Administration sharply contrasts its reaction the killing of an American
marine by Panamanian soldiers just two weeks ago.    A10

Ex-Bolivian aide who is a drug suspect denied bond     A11

Moscow sent troops to Azerbaijan to reinforce its forces along its borde with
Iran after more reports of violent protests by angry crowds demanding an open
frontier.    A1

A delay of Rumania's elections planned for April has been requested by some of
the nation's nascent political parties. Opposition leaders say they need more
time to organize strategy and support.    A14

The legacy of the shattered economy left by Nicolae Ceausescu now confronts the
Rumanians grappling with ways to turn their street revolt into a broader
transformation.    A14

Whispered no longer, hearsay jolts Bucharest     A14

President Vaclav Havel's amnesty for 20,000 prisoners has decimated the work
force at the nation's biggest auto maker. Dependent on convict labor, factories
like the Skoda plant, which exports 50,000 cars a year, have been paralyzed.
A15

Assassination attempt in Lebanon fails     A3

Oil spill cleanup continues; defects in Iranian tanker cited     A3

Stiff security for militant as trial in Gaza Strip opens    A5

China won't release two dissidents, Fang Lizhi and Li Shuxian, who sought refuge
in the U.S. Embassy in Beijing after the June crackdown, contrary to recent
reports, the Government said.    A8

Vietnam's Secretary General will resign, Communists say     A6

U.S. judge limits damages for Pan Am suits     A3

National    A16-21, D20

The Resolution Trust Corporation, created to manage the massive savings and loan
bailout, was ordered by the Bush Administration to sell the real estate it
inherited from hundreds of defaulted savings institutions.    A1

Sales of new homes surged 9.6 percent in November     D1

Drug gangs' recruitment of dealers in Chicago is becoming more aggressive and
insistent. For those young people who resist, the threats from gangs are as
ominous as any anti-drug message.    A1

Barbara Bush is being treated with low-level doses of radiation to relieve
persistent double vision, discomfort and tears stemming from a thyroid
condition.    D20

Secretary of Labor Elizabeth Dole has begun modifying Govenment policy toward
labor. In the Pittston strike, she acknowledged the value of collective
bargaining, and she has pushed for worker safety.    A16

Mafia prosecutors quitting as strike force disbands     A18

Fewer AIDS cases than estimated are expected in the next three years, according
to a report by the Federal Centers for Disease Control. Researchers are arguing
fiercely about the causes of the decline.    D20

An AIDS patient was shot by a friend and killed in a Los Angeles hospital room.
The friend then committed suicide.    D20

A ferocious dinosaur predating Tyrannosaurus rex is found     A21

Campbell hires a new chief executive     D1

Sematech today: A cash dispenser     D1

G.M. displays the Impact, an advanced electric car     D1

Regional    B1-5

The hiring of 1,848 police recruits who were to have entered the Police Academy
this month will be delayed indefinitely, Mayor David Dinkins said in his first
major act as Mayor.    A1

Edward I. Koch's new home is no Gracie Mansion, but it's bigger - and better
furnished - than the $475.49-a-month rent-stabilized apartment in Greenwich
Village he vowed he would never give up.    B1

City Council, with new powers, affirms raises for its members     B2

Chancellor takes city cars away from 14 school board officials     B3

A health insurance plan for children in New York State and an overhaul of the
way the state distributes education aid were proposed by Gov. Mario Cuomo during
his eighth State of the State address.    A1

Excerpts from Cuomo's State of the State address     B4

Cuomo defuses a protest and still makes a point     B5

A ruptured underwater pipeline has leaked as much as 500,000 gallons of heating
oil into the Arthur Kill between Staten Island and New Jersey. Environmentalists
say the spill is a major threat to wildlife.    B1

Patients are being transferred from hospital to hospital for the first time by
the Emergency Medical Service in an effort to find scarce beds for the seriously
ill at New York City hospitals.    B1

Opposition to premium increases proposed by New Jersey Blue Cross and Blue
Shield for 605,000 subscribers has risen among organizations representing the
elderly, women and minorities, who will bear most of the increase.    B3

Bridge and tunnel tolls might go to $6 by 1993. The Port Authority has proposed
the increases as part of a capital-improvement plan. PATH train fares would
rise, to $1.50.    B1

Girl, 12, is raped, burned and stabbed     B3

Atlantic City mayor and three others are indicted     B2

Neediest Cases    B2

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Refugees Protest Forced Repatriation by Hong Kong

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A demonstration yesterday at the Hei Ling Chau detention center off the
coast of Hong Kong. The protest coincided with a visit by members of the Women's
Commission for Refugee Women and Children. (AP)

TYPE: CAPTION

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 11, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Butler Aviation Chief Sees a Brighter Future

BYLINE: By DANIEL F. CUFF

SECTION: Section D; Page 4, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 444 words


The Butler Aviation Corporation, a company that has had some finanacial and
performance problems, is getting a fresh start with new owners and a new chief
executive, William W. Boisture Jr. The appointment comes four months after a
Fort Worth investment firm, Acadia Partners L.P., which is backed by the Robert
M. Bass Group, bought Butler from North American Ventures Inc. for $83 million.

After his appointment was announced yesterday, the 45-year-old Mr. Boisture, who
has been a fighter pilot and an executive at aviation companies, said Butler had
a good franchise in the industry. ''We think the potential to invest further in
the aviation services business is a good one at this time,'' he said.

Mr. Boisture will replace Thomas F. Comeau as chairman, president and chief
executive. Mr. Comeau has been asked to remain as a consultant. Mr. Boisture
said Acadia hoped to strengthen Butler by improving its performance, including
modernizing the company's equipment, refurbishing its plants and employee
training programs.

Butler plans to move its headquarters later this year to Dallas-Fort Worth from
Montvale, N.J., to be more centrally sitiated for expansion.

Mr. Boisture resigned from Ports of Call Inc., a Denver-based supplemental air
carrier, where he was president. The company, which is shedding assets, said
that it had completed the sale of a fleet of 707 aircraft by the Boeing Company
for $30 million and that it was continuing talks on selling a leisure travel
business to the Charterwest Capital Company and a Denver investor group.

Dorsey R. Gardner, a Ports of Call director, was named president. Mr. Gardner is
also president of Kelso Management Inc., which owns 59 percent of the company's
voting stock.

Mr. Boisture said Butler, which provides fuel and maintenance to corporate,
private commercial and government aircraft at 29 airports, planned to expand by
acquisition. ''This company will no doubt need to change over the coming year,''
he said, ''and that's our intention.''

Mr. Boisture, a 1967 graduate of the Air Force Academy, spent 10 years in the
Air Force, including a combat tour in Vietnam, and left the service as a major.
During his tour, he graduated from the Air Force Fighter Weapons School and, as
an exchange officer, from the Navy Fighter Weapons School of ''Top Gun'' fame.

After leaving the Air Force, Mr. Boisture was vice president of marketing for
Canadair Inc., the American subsidiary of the Canadian maker of the Challenger
corporate business jet. In 1984, he became president of Simuflite Training
International Inc., a Dallas-based provider of pilot training. He joined Ports
of Call in 1987.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Briton Pledges Hong Kong Changes

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 751 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Jan. 16


The British Foreign Secretary wound up a four-day visit here today, saying Hong
Kong wanted to see the pace of democratic changes quickened as the colony moves
toward its return to Chinese control in 1997.

The Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, said that if London and Beijing could not
agree on reforms here, Britain would proceed on its own.

While the visit produced no concrete announcements on changes, Mr. Hurd said
Britain would announce within weeks how many seats in the largely appointed
60-member Hong Kong legislature it would open to direct elections.

He said the number would be considerably more than the 10 Britain had suggested
in its original reform proposal two years ago, a number that had been widely
criticized from the beginning as too few.

Chinese 'More Suspicious'

He also repeated his assessment that ''the first prize'' would be a political
arrangement that would continue after the Chinese takeover. But he said if that
were not possible, if Britain could not reach agreement with the Chinese, ''then
we have to take our own decisions'' on reforms and their pace up until 1997.

He acknowledged that since the military crackdown on the democracy movement in
Beijing last June the Chinese leaders ''have been difficult because they feel
somewhat defensive.'' He added, ''They are more suspicious than before.''

But Mr. Hurd insisted there was also a ''powerful Chinese incentive'' to
integrate Hong Kong successfully under the ''one country, two systems'' formula.

The new Foreign Secretary, who once wrote a novel about the Chinese takeover of
Hong Kong that he said had a happy ending, has been visiting the territory at a
time when confidence in its future is critically low, with many of the most
successful residents lining up to emigrate to avoid life under the Chinese
Communists. Many have criticized the British for their failure to set up a
strong, functioning democracy before the Chinese take control.

A Liberal's Complaint

Mr. Hurd said he had come to Hong Kong to ''assess opinions here'' on reforms.
Most politicians who met with him politely described the discussions as useful.

But Martin Lee, an outspoken liberal legislator, said it had been months since
Hong Kong people, repelled by the killings in Beijing on June 4, began to demand
more democracy and ''the British Government is still listening without doing
anything.''

A wide range of Hong Kong politicians and pressure groups now support a
political plan that calls for 20 directly elected seats next year and 30 seats
-half of the legislature - directly elected by 1997.

But China, which controls the drafting of the Basic Law that will govern Hong
Kong after 1997, has said it wants only 18 directly elected seats by 1997.
Currently, members of the legislature are appointed by the colonial government
or elected by constituency groups such as lawyers and social workers.

Advice From Beijing

A conservative pressure group of Hong Kong entrepreneurs, who returned today
from a meeting with top Chinese officials, including Prime Minister Li Peng,
said they had been told that Hong Kong must proceed cautiously and only
gradually increase the ratio of directly elected members.

Vincent Lo, the businessman who headed the delegation, said senior officials in
Beijing had told them that ''to increase gradually will help Hong Kong's
stability and prosperity, and avoid having the radicals make use of the
situation.''

At a news conference at the end of his trip today, Mr. Hurd also reaffirmed
Britain's intention of continuing the forced repatriation of Vietnamese boat
people screened out as non-refugees.

Robert Van Leeuwen, the head of the Hong Kong office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, which monitors the screening process, said he shared
the concern of Amnesty International and other relief agencies that the
screening procedures were dangerously flawed.

'We Don't Have the Resourcs'

In the process, immigration officers interview boat people to determine if they
are ''genuine'' refugees fleeing religious or political persecution. Asked if
the United Nations monitoring program was an effective safeguard and could
prevent genuine refugees from being sent back, Mr. Van Leeuwen said, ''No, we
don't have the resources to provide a safety net.''

He added, ''We are not able to insure, with confidence, that people who might be
mandatorily repatriated in the future might not be refugees, that there might
not be refugees among them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Vietnamese boat people protested forced repatriation in a
demonstration at a detention center in Hong Kong yesterday as Douglas Hurd, the
British Foreign Secretary, was given a tour of the camp. (AP)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In Dubious Battle in Afghanistan

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 457 words


America's policy triumph in Afghanistan a year ago has turned sour. Washington
expected a swift rebel victory when the Soviet Union ended a decade of
occupation last Feb. 15. It didn't happen. Now the onus for fueling a murderous
war falls on the U.S. and Pakistan, the main supporters of a quarrelsome rebel
coalition. And with the Russians gone, Najibullah, the leader of the
Soviet-installed Kabul regime, presents himself as champion of national
sovereignty in a country long hostile to foreign meddling.

This is the essence of a report by John Burns in today's New York Times
Magazine. His account should be required reading in the Bush Administration,
which is finally reviewing its Afghan policy. With little dissent, Washington
has rebuffed Soviet proposals for a mutual arms cutoff and a political
settlement, and continues to supply $700 million annually to the Afghan
resistance.

Standing tough made sense when Russian troops occupied Afghanistan and when
Pakistan felt genuinely threatened by an aggressive Soviet Union. These
circumstances have changed; the policy hasn't. The results have distorted
American purposes and principles.

Civilians by the thousands have been killed by rebels firing U.S.-supplied
rockets into city centers. Now it is American reporters, not Russian troops, who
are asked in anguish: ''Why do you do this to us?'' Peter Tomsen, a special
envoy sent by President Bush, told Mr. Burns that the carnage reminded him of
atrocities in Vietnam.

Amid the disorders of war, Afghanistan has again become a major source of
heroin, with guerrilla leaders doubling as drug kingpins. At one point, the U.S.
envoy to Pakistan authorized discussions with a rebel commander about poppies.
The commander said he would suppress his own traffic for a fee: $2 million a
week. The offer was refused.

A year after the Soviet pullout, the 15 rebel groups seem able to unite only
against compromise. They've failed to seize a single city and have made Peshawar
a byword for corruption. Their most fiery leaders - notably Gulbuddin Hekmatyar,
the protege of Pakistan's military - would turn Afghanistan into a
Khomeini-style fundamentalist state. Yet lower-echelon American officials risk
their careers if they send negative reports home.

None of this makes Kabul's Soviet-installed regime more attractive, or removes
the stains from Najibullah's hands. Indeed, Moscow is already hinting that his
departure is negotiable, if Washington shows some willingness to support a
broad-based interim regime. In any case, the Bush Administration is right to
rethink its entire Afghan policy. That's the first vital step to peace. What
conceivable American interests are served by pouring more arms into this dubious
battle?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 6, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Sihanouk Says He'll Go Home

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 65 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Feb. 5


Prince Norodom Sihanouk said today that he would return to Cambodia by the end
of the month to live in a ''liberated zone'' administered by his guerrilla army.
Prince Sihanouk, who lives in exile in Beijing, Paris and Pyongyang, North
Korea, quit two weeks ago as the leader of a three-party coalition fighting
Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia but still claims to be the head of state.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 9, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

2 Gang Members Slain in Chinatown Restaurant

BYLINE: By MARVINE HOWE

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 380 words


A clash between rival Vietnamese and Chinese gang members in Chinatown early
yesterday left two young men dead and three people wounded, the authorities
said.

The police identified the suspected assailants as members of the Canal Street
Boys, which they said was the latest name adopted by a gang of ethnic Chinese
from Vietnam.

The two youths who were killed were identified by the police as Peter Wng, 20
years old, and Dak Leong, 19. Both were said to be members of the Chinese gang
known as the Ghost Shadows.

A Heated Turf Feud

The authorities said the attack appeared to be the latest chapter in a turf feud
between the relatively new gangs like the Canal Street Boys, and the older
established Chinatown gangs, like the Ghost Shadows.

The police said the Canal Street Boys, who have been operating mostly on Canal
Street for the last two years, have been involved in extortion, robberies and
several homicides.

The latest incident began at 3:50 A.M., the police said, when a group entered
Winnie's Bar and Restaurant, at 104 Bayard Street in Chinatown, and opened fire.
Mr. Wong was pronounced dead at the scene, and Mr. Leong died on arrival at
Bellevue Hospital Center.

A police spokesman, Det. Joseph McConville, said two people were wounded inside
the restaurant. He identified them as Robert Shu, 27, shot in the groin, and
Theresa Lau, 21, shot once in the left upper arm. Other police sources said that
neither Mr. Shu nor Ms. Lau was known to be a gang member. Ms. Lau is a student
at New York University.

A police officer parked in front of Police Headquarters heard the shots and
chased a man with a gun who ran from the restaurant, the Chief of Detectives,
Joseph R. Borrelli said. The officer, who was not identified, shot the suspect,
Qui Tram, 23, in the left shoulder and arm, the police said. He was taken to St.
Vincent's Hospital and was listed in stable condition last night. The police had
not charged Mr. Tram as of last night.

''I heard some people shooting and the noise woke me up,'' said Sebastian Rueda,
a 41-year-old unemployed and homeless carpenter, who has been camping out in the
pavilion at Columbus Park just opposite Winnie's. He said there were often loud
late night brawls in the place, but ''this time was different.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Two youths died in a clash between Chinatown gangs in a Bayard Street
restaurant. ''I heard some people shooting and the noise woke me,'' said
Sebastian Rueda, above, who was sleeping nearby in Columbus Park. (The New York
Times/Neal Boenzi)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Ms. Luong Plans To Wed in August

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 68, Column 5; Society Desk

LENGTH: 178 words


Minh-Chau Luong and Willam Maxwell Crouch Jr. plan to marry in August, the
prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs. Luong-Si Chuong of Cherry Hill, N.J.,
have announced. Mr. Crouch is a son of Dorothy M. Crouch of Bridgeport, Conn.,
and the late Mr. Crouch.

Ms. Luong, 44 years old, is a French translator at the United Nations. She is a
graduate of the Sorbonne and has a master's degree from the Institute of
Political Studies in Paris. Her father, who was an Assistant Secretary of State
for Agriculture in South Vietnam, retired as a counselor in refugee assistance
at the Camden, N.J., campus of Glassboro State College.

The future bridegroom, 44, is an author and a sales executive at the General
Business Envelopes Company in Hartford. A graduate of St. George's School in
Newport, R.I., and Columbia University, he received a master's degree in
journalism from Pennsylvania State University. He and Mrs. Walt Kelly edited
''Phi Beta Pogo,'' published by Fireside Books. His father was the founder and
president of the Equity Paper Company in Bridgeport.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ms. Luong and Mr. Crouch

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 995 words





International

3-28



Nelson Mandela will be freed today, ending more than 27 years of imprisonment,
President F. W. de Klerk announced. Mr. de Klerk appealed to Mr. Mandela to
steer South Africa toward a negotiated political settlement.          Page 1



Bush calls Mandela's release a bold and significant step           17



De Klerk and Mandela: The road from apartheid           18



Rebels in Ethiopia claim to have captured Red Sea port           5



Troubles plague U.S.-built hospital in Liberia           14



German unity is a German issue, Mikhail Gorbachev told the West German
Chancellor Helmut Kohl in Moscow. But Mr. Gorbachev also said Germany's borders
with Poland, established after World War II, must remain inviolate.          1



A strategic arms treaty calling for cuts in long-range nuclear weapons will
likely be completed later this year. The U.S. and Moscow appear to have resolved
their differences over limits on sea- and air-launched missles and verification
measures.          1



Secretary of State James Baker became the first American government official to
testify before a committee of the Soviet Parliament.          20



Baker presses Bulgaria for free and fair elections           20



Visas for scientists from East said to lag           22



Baltic economic independence, promised by a new law, is being resisted by
regulators in Moscow who cut supplies to factories, freeze bank assets and move
to outlaw free-market experiments.           21



Vietnam's Communist leadership, shocked by the Soviet party's decision to
abandon its monopoly on power, has shown no signs of abandoning Communism.
           22

Chinese, too, feel few ripples from Soviet party's move           19



The largest source of heroin coming into America is once again the Golden
Triangle of Southeast Asia despite United States efforts to halt the flow of
drugs from the region for more than 25 years.           26



Recruit bribery scandal spills into Japan's crucial elections           28



East Timor bishop writes of persecution and torture           23



Areas controlled by Afghan rebels face famine           27



The emigration of Jews from Israel, mainly to the United States, has been
overlooked by Israeli officials preoccupied by the huge wave of Soviet
immigrants.          3



Rights group assails Iraq for ''ruthless'' repression            13



Lebanese tell of mutiny against Gen. Michel Aoun           12



Britain's enduring House of Lords, which has been called anachronistic, would be
replaced by an elected second chamber of Parliament, the Labor Party has
proposed.          26



Questions arise as gray whales avoid Baja California waters           10



In Brazil, chaos is rising with the rate of inflation           11



For the Sandinistas, political paraphernalia for every mood           28



NATIONAl/30-37, 47-48



World-wide production of Perrier was halted and 72 million bottles of the
sparkling mineral water were recalled by Perrier officials, who are scrambling
to learn how the solvent benzene contaminated several bottles.          34



The great Perrier drought: some mourn, some gloat           34



Renewed racial animosity in Selma, one month before a 25th anniversary
commemoration of the ''Bloody Sunday'' protest, has flared after the school
board decided not to rehire the city's first black superintendent.          30



The investigation of Mayor Barry by a grand jury has intensified during Mr.
Barry's absence for drug treatment. The jury could complete its work in the
coming week, officials said.          30



Lyndon Johnson stole his election to become a Senator in 1948 by manufacturing
thousands of votes in Texas, says a new book, ''Means of Ascent,'' by Robert
Caro.          30



Debate on adoption focuses on rights to see family histories           36



Racketeering trial begins in San Francisco for Federal judge           35



Amended warning labels due for liquor bottles           34



Wine maker fails to thwart street alcoholics           37



40-year countdown is seen for the world's environment           48



American Medical Association chief resigns unexpectedly           30



REGIONAL/38-46



The effect of AIDS on the fashion industry reaches beyond those who have died.
As designer labels falter and smaller houses die, many say the greatest casualty
may be creativity.          1



New indictments against John Gotti are being considered by prosecutors and
investigators, who are scheduled to meet on Tuesday to discuss strategy against
Mr. Gotti in the 1985 murder of Paul Castellano.          38



The racially motivated arson in Canarsie has prompted indignation from
neighbors, a welcome departure, officials say, from notorious cases of racial
attacks against which few white residents spoke out.          40



Helicopter crashes in East River; all five aboard rescued           38



PAC gifts underscore New York incumbents' advantage           41



Neediest Cases          46



Obituaries          44



Arts/Reviews          69-70, 73



Campus Life          51-55



Fashion          64-65



Life Style          56-60



Pastimes          72-75



Weddings          66-69


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SUMMARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 2, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

'Miss Saigon' Finds Home on Broadway

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 949 words


''Miss Saigon,'' the hit London musical about America's last days in Vietnam,
will open at the Broadway Theater in March 1991, the show's producer, Cameron
Mackintosh, announced yesterday.

Mr. Mackintosh said the show would cost $10 million to produce, making it the
most expensive in Broadway history. Because of its huge cost, he said, the show
will have an unusual price scale. About 1,230 orchestra and mezzanine seats at
the 1,765-seat theater will be sold for $60 each, the current top Broadway
ticket price established last year by ''Jerome Robbins's Broadway.'' But about
200 seats in the front mezzanine, which in many theaters are considered among
the best in the house, will cost $100 each.

The announcement of the selection of the Broadway Theater, which is owned by the
Shubert Organization, came after months of negotiations. Mr. Mackintosh, whose
hits include ''Cats,'' ''Les Miserables'' and ''The Phantom of the Opera,''
talked with both the Shubert and the Nederlander organizations, the two biggest
Broadway theater owners, and both of them were eager to obtain the musical
updating of the ''Madama Butterfly'' story. Whither 'Les Miserables'? The
Broadway, the current home of ''Les Miserables,'' is a Shubert theater, and Mr.
Mackintosh said ''Les Miz'' would move to another Shubert house. Neither Mr.
Mackintosh nor Bernard Jacobs, the president of the Shubert Organization, would
discuss which other theaters were being considered, but two possibilities are
the Imperial, the current home of ''Jerome Robbins's Broadway,'' and the
Shubert, whose current tenant, ''A Chorus Line,'' the longest running show in
Broadway history, is closing March 31. The Robbins show, winner of last year's
Tony Award for best musical, is expected to go on tour by the time ''Miss
Saigon'' opens.

Mr. Mackintosh said the Shubert Organization, the largest Broadway theater
owner, had provided ''attractive terms to move 'Les Miz' to another of their
theaters.'' Mr. Jacobs said he was ''very pleased'' to have landed ''Miss
Saigon'' but declined to discuss the terms.

''Miss Saigon,'' written by the two ''Les Miz'' authors, Alain Boublil and
Claude-Michel Schonberg, with Richard Maltby Jr., has been a big box-office
success at the Theater Royal Drury Lane in London. The tale of a Vietnamese
bargirl who conceives a child after an affair with an American marine is
considered likely to be the next long-running Broadway blockbuster. It has a
cast of more than 40, and special effects that include a helicopter landing
onstage.

House-Hunting Difficulties

Mr. Mackintosh had at first considered opening ''Miss Saigon'' in autumn 1990,
but postponed his plans, he said, because of the difficulty of finding an
available theater big enough and with appropriate sight lines for the huge
physical production, as well as one that had enough seats to support the show's
large cost.

His original first choice had been the 1,600-seat Mark Hellinger Theater on West
51st Street, a Nederlander house that is currently occupied by the Times Square
Church, which has a five-year lease on the building. A hotel that is planned to
be built over the Hellinger and the Neil Simon Theater on West 52d Street also
complicated the situation.

''From the outset, there were two problems in bringing 'Miss Saigon' to New
York,'' Mr. Mackintosh said yesterday. ''One was physical and the other
financial. The show in London at the Theater Royal Drury Lane is playing in a
2,250-seat theater with an 85-foot stage. This is the first time with any of my
shows that I have gone from a bigger theater in London to a smaller one in New
York.''

Because of the large cost of ''Miss Saigon,'' he said, he had to choose between
two possibilities: raising the price of tickets to $65 throughout the Broadway
Theater, which he was ''loath to do,'' or creating the unusual scale.

Keeping the Money in the Family

''Even at $100 for the front mezzanine, it's less than half of what people are
paying ticket brokers in New Jersey for seats to 'Phantom of the Opera,' '' Mr.
Mackintosh said. ''At least this money will go directly to the production, in
order to keep the overall ticket scale comparable to current prices.''

In recent years, the two-part, eight-and-a-half-hour Royal Shakespeare Company
production on Broadway of ''The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby'' had a
$100 top, for every seat in the house.

In addition to the $100 and $60 tickets, about 200 seats in the rear mezzanine
will be sold for $45, and on Monday through Thursday nights and Wednesday
matinees 100 rear-mezzanine seats will be available to students for $15. On
weekends, those seats will be sold to the public for $30, as will any not bought
by students at the other performances. The $100 and $60 seats will be $75 and
$55 at Wednesday matinees. Mail-order booking is to begin within the next two
months, he said.

Bigger, but Alas Not Better

Mr. Mackintosh had also considered the Gershwin Theater, which is run by the
Nederlander organization and which with 1,900 seats in its normal configuration
is the largest theater on Broadway. But from the beginning he felt that the
Gershwin would need major redesign work in order to accommodate his show.

And he said yesterday that ''despite the tremendous creative efforts by Robert
Nederlander to redesign its interior, I finally decided that remodeling the
Gershwin to make it artistically viable for 'Miss Saigon' would have reduced the
number of seats to a point where it wasn't financially viable.''

Mr. Nederlander, the organization's president, said yesterday that he had not
spoken to Mr. Mackintosh about the decision and would have no comment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cameron Mackintosh (Camera Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: East Germany;
Berlin Hospital Weathers a Drain of Doctors

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 653 words

DATELINE: EAST BERLIN, March 3


Friedrichshain Municipal Hospital, a 1,280-bed institution not far from the
center of the capital, suffered like the rest of the East German health system
from the loss of qualified people when the mass exodus from this country began
last summer.

Thirty physicians, 60 nurses and 30 of its technical and housekeeping employees
left for West Germany, its medical director, Dr. Joachim Berndt, said. He added
that this was not bad for a staff of 2,000, and that at provincial hospitals the
rate of loss was generally higher.

But in an interview in his office this week, Dr. Berndt, a surgeon, said there
was reason to take heart. The departures were part of a migration that led to
the downfall of the Communist Government, which, in turn, has made the
reunification of Germany a virtual certainty. And this, he said, will lead to
the convalescence of a medical system that has been suffering from even deeper,
longstanding ailments.

Even more than most other formerly Communist countries, East Germany made its
citizens live in isolation from the West. Severe travel restrictions left all
but the most favored of its professionals comparatively separated fom their
colleagues and the advances in their fields.

Worked in Nicaragua

The surgeon said the only foreign experience he and most of his colleagues
gathered was in countries that enjoyed close relations with East Germany but
suffered from medical underdevelopment. He himself has worked in Vietnam and
Nicaragua.

Moreover, Dr. Berndt said, the chronic shortage of convertible currency left
hospitals and the entire medical profession equipped below the state of the art
and its practitioners unfamiliar with the use of the latest techniques. He said
being in Berlin had afforded him and his colleagues, with the help of the West
German medical profession, at least access to recent literature. This was not
true for most physicians in other areas, he said.

Dr. Berndt said that while the departures last year had been the most dramatic
wave, the medical profession, particularly nurses, had been suffering from
steady personnel attrition because of the low pay scales of this country and the
constant temptation to defect to West Germany.

Hospital nursing has been becoming an increasingly demanding night-and-day-shift
profession as patients spend only the period of their need of most intensive
care in hospitals, Dr. Berndt said. Consequently, hospitals have been steadily
losing nurses to public clinics, which work during the day only. Even there,
earnings were low, and many went to work in industry or in the West.

Pay Differences Greater

The pay differences are even greater for physicians, Dr. Berndt said. He said
that when the borders were opened last November, nurses and others used their
days off to see what sort of jobs they could get in West Germany. The nurses who
did not return have made those who remained work much harder, said the director,
and they no longer have the time to give patients more than the most essential
attention.

The medical director said many of the technical and housekeeping workers who
fled had been replaced by people who have been losing their jobs as Government
institutions are reduced in size. He said he had been able to replace the
physicians who left with younger practitioners, but conceded that there was a
loss in knowhow as experienced doctors went to the West.

The most worrying difficulty, Dr. Berndt said, remained the shortage of nurses.
''You can do a world-class operation, but if a complication arises at night and
the right help is not there, you lose a patient,'' he said.

Nonetheless, Dr. Berndt was optimistic. He said that as far as his profession
was concerned, reunification was already under way. Direct contacts have been
established with two major hospitals in West Berlin, joint medical meetings are
being held, and a steady flow of supplies is reaching here.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk




Israeli settlers in the West Bank with the help of the Government are trying to
lure Soviet Jewish immigrants with special loans and aid. Thus far, only 1.5
percent of the new immigrants have acted on the offers.             3

P.L.O. welcomes confederation with Jordan, official says             5



General Aoun is said to be likely to yield power             6



Only violence will alter South Africa, say leaders of the newly legalized
Pan-Africanist Congress, the sole black movement to oppose proposed talks with
President de Klerk.             14



Nelson Mandela's visit to Tanzania will bring him face to face with the
rank-and-file membership of the African National Congress. Party members' morale
is sagging after years of exile.             14



Tanzania's ruling party washes its laundry in public             15



U.S.-Japan trade talks concluded with Prime Minister Kaifu promising to take
''serious'' action to address trade problems. He said a solution lies in
encouraging Japanese to insist on an improved quality of life.

22



Sino-American relations are worsening after brief thaw             8



North and South Korea wage war of words over a tunnel             9



Protester is killed in Kashmir by police gunfire             11



American, first since the war, lives and works in Vietnam             17



NATIONAL/23-27



States are facing budget problems as they discover that economic forecasts have
been too optimistic. More than half of the 50 states are struggling to run a
balanced budget and avoid a deficit.            1



The Forest Service abuses its lands, professionals in the agency are saying.
They point to policies for the service's 191 million acres of forest that
promote logging and road building instead of preservation.            1



A formula for rating wine vintages in France pits an American economist's theory
against tasters who think the rankings should be based on their trained,
delicate senses.            1



Counting the homeless in the census will be a flawed effort, all sides agree.
Homeless advocates say they must choose to participate in a process they think
will undercount the homeless or object by boycotting.            24



Walter Fauntroy will run for mayor of Washington, giving up his job as the
District of Columbia's non-voting delegate in Congress. The announcement, the
subject of much speculation for the last 10 days, further confused the contest.
             24



House moves to restore health benefits for the elderly             23



Violence reported in Greyhound strike; one driver killed             24



The tanker captain in the nation's worst oil spill has alternately been
described as reckless and as a hero in five weeks of testimony in an Alaskan
courtroom.            26



International expedition completes trek across Antarctica             27



REGIONAL/28-32



A ban on plastic food wrappings in Suffolk County was overturned by a state
court because the county did not prepare an environmental impact report. County
officials said the effect was obvious.            28



Regents Scholarships in New York are going mostly to young women this year,
apparently for the first time in the 77 years of the awards.            28



A park planned for the West Side of Manhattan along the waterfront may cost
about $331 million - $70 million more than is pledged.            32



Sharpton leads 300 in a demonstration through Bensonhurst             28



A contest for those who brush their cats' teeth             28



New Jersey fire and explosion kills one and hurts two             29



Obituaries            30



Neediest Cases            29



Arts/Reviews            51-52, 55



Stronger profile for culture             52



Theater: ''Dividends,'' a comedy             51



Music: ''Girl Crazy'' in concert              51


Louisiana Jazz Ensemble             55



Campus Life            35-37



Fashion            46-47



Life Style            38-42



Pastimes            54-56



Weddings            48-51


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SUMMARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

William Appleman Williams Dies; Gadfly of Foreign Policy Was 68

BYLINE: By PETER B. FLINT

SECTION: Section D; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 495 words


William Appleman Williams, a historian known for his sharp critiques of American
foreign policy, died of cancer Monday at Newport (Ore.) Community Hospital. He
was 68 years old and lived on the Oregon coast at Waldport.

Dr. Williams was a prolific and influential writer of a dozen revisionist books
that challenged prevailing views of American history, deploring the United
States as an imperialist power pressing its economic and ideological will around
the globe. He was a professor at the University of Wisconsin from 1960 to 1968
and at Oregon State University from 1968 to 1986, when he retired with the title
emeritus.

The genially combative professor, who termed himself a radical and was often
called the founder of the New Left school of American history, was particulary
critical of America's role in the cold war and in Vietnam.

With passionate argument and complex analysis, he championed self-determination
for all people and argued that a refusal by Americans to acknowledge a national
desire for expansion and global hegemony has led to major errors and confusion
over the nation's future.

Focus on Self-Determination

''The act of imposing one people's morality upon another people is an imperial
denial of self-determination,'' he wrote in his 1976 book ''America Confronts a
Revolutionary World: 1776-1976.'' ''Once begun, there is no end of empire except
war and more war.''

Detractors accused him and other revisionists of employing a double-standard: of
justifying or explaining Soviet actions by citing national security while
measuring western actions against a utopian ideal. Reviewers termed his works
provocative, honestly stated and admirable, but they challenged some arguments
as flawed, simplistic and naive in relying on good intentions and communal
feeling.

His other books include ''American-Russian Relations, 1781-1947'' (1952), ''The
Shaping of American Diplomacy, 1750-1955'' (1956, 1962, 1970), ''The Tragedy of
American Diplomacy'' (1959, 1962, 1972), ''The Contours of American History''
(1962, 1966) and ''The Roots of the Modern American Empire'' (1969).

The historian was a native of Atlantic, Iowa, and a graduate of the United
States Naval Academy, where he earned a bachelor's degree in engineering. In
World War II, he was a Navy line officer in the Pacific and was later treated
for battle wounds for more than a year.

He earned master's and doctoral degrees at the University of Wisconsin and
taught history at six colleges. He also taught at the University of Melbourne as
a Fulbright scholar in 1977, was president of the Organization of American
Historians in 1980 and taught a course in maritime history at the Oregon Coast
Community College last fall.

Survivors include his wife, Wendy; a son, Ward, of San Francisco; two daughters,
Kyenne, of Madison, Wis., and Savoy Jade, of Hull, Mass.; two stepchildren,
Justin, of Eugene, Ore., and Kathy, of Beavercreek, Ore., and three
stepgrandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: William Appleman Williams

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 13, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST;
Mongolian Politburo Urges An End to One-Party Rule

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 840 words

DATELINE: ULAN BATOR, Mongolia, March 12


Responding to a growing democracy movement in this Communist nation, the
Politburo proposed today that the ruling party give up its monopoly on power and
that officials and dissidents work together on a new constitution. Under the new
charter, rival political parties would apparently be able to compete in
democratic elections.

Jambyn Batmonh, the 64-year-old President and party leader, said that the entire
Politburo should be replaced and that an extraordinary party congress should
convene on April 10 to choose a new Central Committee and agree on a new party
policy.

The decisions represented a stunning achievement for a democratic movement that
just a few months ago appeared to have little chance of achieving major changes.

''It is very important to elect new leaders from the ranks of the young, clever
and the reform-minded,'' President Batmonh told a meeting of the Central
Committee that began today. He said the Politburo had unanimously agreed on the
proposals in his speech.

Politburo Change Expected Today

Mongolian officials said the Central Committee would probably choose an entirely
new Politburo on Tuesday. They also said that at a meeting of the Mongolian
legislature beginning on March 21, the committee would probably end the
constitutional monopoly of power for the ruling party.

In the meantime, Mr. Batmonh said, organizations nationwide are to hold
competitive elections to choose delegates to next month's extraordinary party
congress. The congress is to choose a new Central Committee and decide on party
policy.

A committee of party officials and opposition members will devise a new national
constitution, President Batmonh said. But the situation is in such flux that it
is not even clear what group within the Government must eventually approve the
charter.

Normally, the Great People's Hural, the national legislature, would approve a
constitution. But President Batmonh has agreed to a national referendum to
determine whether the public still has confidence in that group.

Sandwiched between the Soviet Union and China, Mongolia has a population of 2
million people, outnumbered by 13 million sheep. Today's announcement marked the
unambiguous arrival in Asia of the remarkable torrent of change that swept
through Eastern Europe late last year.

Others Watch Warily

North Korea, Vietnam and especially China are likely to be apprehensive that the
news about events in Mongolia will prompt calls for change in those hard-line
Communist Governments.

The democracy movement in Mongolia has already aroused wistful interest among
Chinese intellectuals. The Chinese leadership is believed to be alarmed at the
possibility that nationalist fervor in Mongolia could spill over and cause
unrest among the three million ethnic Mongolians who live across the border in
China.

Terbichyn Tchmeddort, the chief Foreign Ministry spokesman, said in an interview
that today was a historic day in the history of Mongolia. Before long, he said,
Mongolia would have a multiparty democracy like those of Europe and the United
States.

''In other words, the radical reformers have gained a majority of the party,''
Mr. Tchmeddort said.

One political grouping, the Mongolian Democratic Association, has already
declared itself a political party. Others are expected to do the same as the
nation prepares for competitive elections.

Mr. Batmonh spoke somberly to the Central Committee during his speech, which was
shown on national television. He endorsed a proposal that includes changing the
party's name from the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party to simply the
Mongolian People's Party, its original name in the early 1920's. And he voiced
hope that these changes would give the party new vitality in a more competitive
world of elections.

''The party believes it should no longer have a leading role guaranteed to it
under the Constitution,'' Mr. Batmonh said. ''That does not mean the party
necessarily will give up a leading role, but could achieve this by its deeds,
rather than by clause in the Constitution.''

Democracy's Bloom

The leadership's concessions underlined the growing strength of the democracy
movement. Mongolia is remote from Western influence, and almost half its
population is made up of herdsmen who live in the grasslands with their sheep,
goats, cattle, horses and camels.

When the protests began in December, only a few thousand joined in. But the
protests grew, and the Government responded with tolerance rather than
repression, and even provided the dissidents with television time to air their
views.

Western diplomats have said the Commmunist leadership is in a stronger position
here than its counterparts in Eastern Europe, partly because of the party's
willingness to go in new directions and partly because there is less of a sense
here that Soviet-style Communism was imposed on local people.

While there is considerable resentment of Soviet domination of Mongolia, the
Soviet Union is also regarded as a useful protector against China.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map: The events in Ulan Bator are likely to stir apprehension across
Communist Asia. (The New York Times/March 13, 1990)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Mutual Funds;
The Hidden, Hated and Half Dead

BYLINE: By Carole Gould

SECTION: Section 3; Page 16, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 971 words


It was a marketers' nightmare: On the day that the Chase Manhattan Corporation
launched its Vista Growth and Income Fund, the Dow lost more than 500 points in
the dizzying drop that turned October 19, 1987, into Black Monday.

But the fund's investment managers - self-proclaimed ''contrarians'' James L.
Manley and Kenneth G. Fuller - were not daunted by the inauspicious beginning.
Although less-than-enthusiastic investors forced them to wait five months before
investing, they left the gate with a bang.

With holdings divided into three categories - the hidden (unknown stocks), the
hated (unpopular stocks) and the half dead (stocks in depressed industries) -
the fund had a sterling first year, returning 56.9 percent in 1989, compared to
a 31.6 percent rise in Standard & Poor's 500-stock index.

More impressive, Vista was the only growth-and-income fund in the year's top 25
performers. It posted more than double the gains of all growth-and-income funds,
which returned an average of 23.2 percent in 1989, according to Lipper
Analytical Services. Growth-and-income funds, which invest in dividend-paying
stocks and are considered the industry's ''bread and butter'' funds, don't give
investors the sizzle of a hot stock fund; they are middle-of-the-road funds that
almost never become top performers.

So what's behind Vista's success? Enter the odd couple. Mr. Manley, 50 years
old, is an M.B.A. in a dark suit who has spent his entire career with Chase. Mr.
Fuller, 44, traveled a more circuitous route to money management. Recuperating
from grenade wounds that he suffered in Vietnam, he began reading Adam Smith at
a military hospital in 1970. ''It seemed to me that money managers were well
paid to study things, to use their minds and be creative,'' he said. ''Besides,
you can wear blue jeans to work.'' It wasn't until 1985, after 15 years as a
securities analyst, that he joined Chase and got to wear his jeans full time.

While the reserved Mr. Manley and the jocular Mr. Fuller are opposites in many
ways, their personal differences merge into one cogent investment philosophy.
They look for stocks that are out of favor, primarily among small companies,
whose prices they expect to double in two or three years. ''Companies are run by
human beings who tend to make mistakes and then correct them,'' said Mr. Fuller.
Vista buys in, he said, just as the companies seem ready to fix their mistakes.

Vista's strong performance last year, of course, is no guarantee of a strong
performance this year. Even trying to replicate that performance ''could lead to
disaster,'' Mr. Manley said. ''We have no intention of being up 57 percent again
next year.''

The team has already shifted the strategy that won such success last year. The
$10 million fund is moving slowly into the stocks of big companies - Cray
Research Inc. and the Control Data Corporation are two holdings - to stay on top
of market opportunities. It is now heavy on technology and energy stocks and
light on stocks of companies in financial services and the consumer sector - a
complete flip-flop from last year's strategy.

And it has sold off nearly all the holdings that made it sizzle last year:
Spiegel Inc., the Chicago-based catalog merchandiser; the Service Merchandise
Company, the catalog showroom operators based in Nashville, and the warrants of
the Federal National Mortgage Association, or Fannie Mae.

Both men say the fund's small size gives them room to move quickly as the market
shifts. And they get even more maneuvering room by using S.& P. 500 futures when
they are nervous about the market and don't want to be fully invested. Index
futures let investors trade without having to buy all the stocks individually.
The futures make up 20 percent of Vista's portfolio and are used as a hedge, not
for speculation.

The fund's biggest holding is Seagate Technology, a computer peripherals company
in Scotts Valley, Calif. Because the market lacked confidence in the company's
earnings forecast when Mr. Fuller bought it late in 1988, Seagate falls into the
''hated'' portion of the portfolio. But he says management is cutting costs and
the stock price fails to reflect Seagate's acquisition of Control Data's data
storage division. He calls the stock a risky play for individual investors.

The team's favorite ''hidden'' stock is California Biotechnology Inc., in
Mountainview, Calif. It is not well followed because it is small and its stock
price has tumbled to about half the level of its initial public offering in the
early 1980s. But the value of its headquarters and its cash holdings equal the
current stock price, and Mr. Manley reasons that any scientific breakthroughs -
the company produces growth hormones and cardio-pulmonary products, among others
- come to investors free of charge.

A ''half dead'' holding is the Parker Drilling Company, of Tulsa, Okla., a
contract oil well driller with a big international business. Parker cut its debt
from more than $300 million in 1982 to less than $20 million today. Vista bought
Parker three months ago for $7 a share; it now sells for about $11.



HIGH-YIELD JUNK

The more risk investors assume in a bond fund, the more they are paid. That's
why funds holding corporate issues that are rated below investment grade yield
more than funds investing in high-grade corporate bonds. Such differences in
yield are usually consistent and move in unison with one another.

But now, yields on ''junk bond'' funds are moving independently of the others as
bad news in the junk bond market depresses prices and lifts yields. At some
point, those yields will have to move back into alignment, experts say, but no
one is predicting when.

That means investors scouting for bargains in junk will have to place their own
bets on when the market will hit bottom.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vista's 'contrarians,' James L. Manley and Kenneth G. Fuller
(The New York Times/Neal Boenzi); graph: average 30-day yields on bond funds,
Feb. 1989-Jan. 1990 (Source: Lipper Analytical Services)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 24, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Roy Scheider in a Parable of the Cold War

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 591 words


Col. Jack Knowles (Roy Scheider) is the sort of guy who, upon hearing that three
bullies stole his young son's bicycle in the schoolyard, wonders why the boy
couldn't hang on to it; after all, there were only three of them. This kind of
attitude made him a hero in Vietnam, but since then he has been a belligerent
misfit. Still in the military, and now stationed in West Germany near the
Czechoslovak border, Knowles remains a sorehead and a ticking time bomb.

In ''The Fourth War,'' which was directed by John Frankenheimer, K=nowles meets
his match in the form of a Soviet officer named Valachev (Jurgen Prochnow) who
fought in Afghanistan and carries much the same chip on his shoulder. These two
begin their cat-and-mouse game during a border skirmish that ends with the death
of a Czechoslovak would-be deserter as American troops stand helplessly by. In
his outrage, Colonel Knowles furiously pitches a snowball at Colonel Valachev's
helicopter.

After this, round after round of petty sabotage ensues. Knowles sneaks across
the border at night and sets fire to a Soviet guards' station; Valachev blows up
Knowles's jeep with a rocket-propelled grenade. The voice of reason in all this
is Harry Dean Stanton, surprisingly good as a general who fully understands
Knowles's belligerent psyche. The surprise is not that Mr. Stanton is good,
because he is always good, but rather that he adapts so easily to the general's
rock-solid, authoritative mode. Tim Reid is also notable as another officer with
a much more traditional idea of his duties than Knowles has.

With the thawing of the cold war, an entire cinematic genre has begun to melt,
and the results promise to be fascinating. ''The Fourth War,'' which takes its
title from Albert Einstein (who said that if a third World War were ever fought
with nuclear weapons, the fourth would be fought with stones), is an attempt to
mirror that confusion.

Giving equal emphasis to the unwavering dedication of these seasoned soldiers
and the essential childishness that underlies their tenacity, ''The Fourth War''
takes some unusual risks. It attempts to understand the heroism of a man like
Knowles by casting him in an extremely foolish light, and the result is an
idiosyncratic portrait. As in their earlier teamwork on ''52-Pickup,'' based on
the Elmore Leonard novel, Mr. Scheider and Mr. Frankenheimer work well together.
Mr. Scheider's performance is both steely and absurd, as befits the
contradictions inherent in the story.

Mr. Frankenheimer relies on standard touches at times, but he also fills ''The
Fourth War'' with interesting little asides. The intercut scenes of both
American and Soviet troops watching a football game (with markedly different
responses), or the episode in which Knowles waylays some Soviet soldiers and
coerces them into singing ''Happy Birthday,'' give the film its distinctively
odd, not-so-cold war flavor.

THROWING STONES

THE FOURTH WAR, directed by John Frankenheimer; screenplay by Stephen Peters and
Kenneth Ross, based on the novel by Mr. Peters; director of photography, Gerry
Fisher; edited by Robert F. Shugrue; music by Bill Conti; production designer,
Alan Manzer; produced by Wolf Schmidt; released by New Age Releasing. Running
time: 104 minutes. This film is rated R.

Jack Knowles . . . Roy Scheider
Valachev . . . Jurgen Prochnow
Lieutenant Colonel Clark . . . Tim Reid
Elena . . . Lara Harris
General Hackworth . . . Harry Dean Stanton
Sergeant Major . . . Dale Dye
M.P. Corporal . . . Bill MacDonald

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Harry Dean Stanton as General Hackworth in ''The Fourth War.''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 27, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

In Asia, His Cold War's Over

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 550 words


Mikhail Gorbachev's dramatic diplomacy has transformed Europe and transfixed
Americans. Less noticed, he has also started breaking the cold war ice in the
Far East. But President Bush acts as if there's nothing new on the Pacific
horizon.

He and his cautious Defense Secretary, Dick Cheney, have drawn up plans for only
token reductions in the sizable U.S. military presence in the region. The
opportunity cries out for more forward-looking diplomacy and bigger cuts.

Mr. Gorbachev's Asian shifts are sweeping indeed. He agreed, in the Euromissile
talks, to remove 400 medium-range missiles from Soviet Asia.

He promised a unilateral withdrawal of 200,000 troops from the Far East -
proportionately larger than his proposed reductions in Europe.

He pulled Soviet forces out of Afghanistan and encouraged Vietnamese troops to
leave Cambodia.

Now he's reducing his Pacific fleet by a third and withdrawing all forces in
Asia based outside Soviet borders - most notably at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam.

These military moves are opening diplomatic doors. Mr. Gorbachev has begun a
dialogue with China that could turn hostility into military disengagement along
their border.

He's coaxing North Korea to break out of its shell and settle its differences
with the South. By establishing limited consular relations with Seoul, he showed
the way. And the Soviet leader is reaching out to a suspicious Japan.

All these developments diminish the dangers that the U.S. faces in the region
and allow for a significant drawdown of U.S. forces. How has Washington
responded? Hardly at all. On a recent trip to Japan, South Korea and the
Philippines, Defense Secretary Cheney announced marginal troop withdrawals -
5,000 from South Korea, where the U.S. has 43,000 stationed, and 7,000 of the
50,000 based in Japan. By comparison with Mr. Gorbachev's moves, Mr. Cheney's
East Asia Strategy Initiative seems a misnomer.

When Mr. Cheney testifies before Congress this week on his trip, he'll have the
chance to give a fuller account of what he sees ahead. Two questions stand out:
What potential threats now justify maintaining the current size and shape of
U.S. forces in Asia? And how might well-timed force cuts be used to promote
peaceful change? Three examples illustrate how careful cuts could make a
difference:

Having provided South Korea with the means to defend itself, the U.S. can now
encourage it to engage the North in talks. Additional cuts and a scaling down of
joint exercises might help draw the North into dialogue.

Washington might now reconsider its pressure on Japan to spend more on defense.
Japan ranks third in the world in military spending and its armed forces are
starting to make its neighbors uneasy. Continued United States-Japanese defense
cooperation will be needed to persuade Tokyo to refrain from building up while
Moscow and Washington build down.

As the Philippines becomes less hospitable, it would be sensible for the U.S. to
plan for cutbacks in its large naval and air bases there.

Throughout the Far East, the Soviet threat is receding. The U.S. remains a
reassuring military presence, so withdrawals should not be extreme. But it can
go very much further than Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney so far contemplate if they are
to think as big as Mikhail Gorbachev does.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 30, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Higher Risk of Rare Cancer Found for Vietnam Veterans

BYLINE: By WARREN E. LEARY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 903 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 29


A long-awaited Federal study released today said that Vietnam veterans had a
higher risk of contracting a rare cancer but that the risk could not be linked
to exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange.

The cancer, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, was one of six cancers chosen for study
because veterans' groups had expressed concern about their incidence in those
who served in Vietnam. But there was no evidence that Vietnam veterans had
higher rates of the five other cancers, the study said. And the rates of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma were highest in veterans with presumably low exposure to
the herbicide, which was used to defoliate trees and plants to deprive the enemy
of cover.

But researchers, veterans' groups and the Department of Veterans Affairs all
said the study and previous Federal studies had not resolved the question of
whether use of the herbicide in the Vietnam War was responsible for cancer or
other serious health problems. The study was conducted by the Centers for
Disease Control.

The veterans' department, responding to the study, announced that it would honor
disability claims related to non-Hodgkin's lymphoma from veterans who served in
Vietnam and adjacent waters. Some of the claims are among 36,000 previously
denied because the department would not honor claims based on exposure to Agent
Orange. But the department said there was still no evidence that the defoliant
was the cause of the cancer.

Benefit of the Doubt

Edward J. Derwinski, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, said it was unnecessary
to specify a cause of the cancer to designate it a service-related health
problem. After consulting with President Bush about the latest findings, he said
there was enough information on the cancer risk to give Vietnam veterans the
benefit of the doubt that it is related to their service in Southeast Asia.

''My decision is not a scientific decision,'' Mr. Derwinski said at a news
briefing. ''It's a policy decision.'' He added that he hoped that the decision
to compensate for the cancer would help heal some of the divisiveness and ill
will between between Vietnam veterans and the Government because of the dispute
over Agent Orange.

The Centers for Disease Control said its study of six selected cancers found
that only non-Hodgkin's lymphoma was more prominent in Vietnam veterans than in
servicemen who served elsewhere at the same time. The Vietnam veterans were
found to be roughly 50 percent more likely to contract the ''relatively rare''
cancer of the lymphatic system than their counterparts elsewhere, the centers
said.

The five-year study looked at the medical records of Vietnam veterans and non-
Vietnam veterans who were cancer patients of similar ages. The results were then
compared with the records of similar groups with no cancer. In addition to
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, the cancers studied were soft tissue sarcoma, Hodgkin's
disease, liver malignancy, nasal cancer and nasopharyngeal cancer.

Dr. William L. Roper, director of the centers, said the only increased risk was
in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. For men in the general population aged 35 to 59, the
age of most Vietnam veterans, the annual risk of developing the cancer is 1 in
10,000, he said, compared with 1.5 per 10,000 among Vietnam veterans.

''The study did not find any evidence that the increased risk might be due to
Agent Orange exposure,'' he said. The study could identify no cause of the
increased risk, the researchers said.

An odd finding, the centers said, was that an examination of subgroups of
veterans found that those serving on ships off the Vietnam coast had the highest
risk of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, higher even than ground-based troops in regions
of heaviest use of Agent Orange. There was no explanation of the finding and a
department spokesman said the higher cancer risk was not seen in Navy veterans
of the same period who served in other waters. Anthony J. Principi, Deputy
Secretary of Veterans Affairs, said about 2.6 million Americans served within
Vietnam's borders. The department has denied 1,600 disability claims for
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. But he said the department would immediately re-examine
those and 200 pending claims with the idea of granting compensation.

Cost of $20 Million

Assuming that someone with this cancer is 100 percent disabled, he said,
veterans granted this service-related disability would be compensated on average
about $1,527 a month and the benefit would be retroactive to the date the claim
was filed. The department expects to get 450 more claims a year for this cancer.
Extending the benefit, it said, will cost the Government about $20 million in
the first year, subsequently increasing by $2 million a year.

Veterans' groups, who had criticized the study before its release, noted that it
was not designed specifically to study Agent Orange and said that it should not
be used in trying to exonerate the chemical as a cause of veterans' health
problems.

John Sommer, director of Veteran Affairs and Rehabilitation for the American
Legion, said veterans felt there was sufficient evidence to link Agent Orange
and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, as well as other ailments.

He noted this was the third Congressionally mandated study by the centers
related to Agent Orange. ''It has generally been disappointing,'' he said.
''Some things were learned from the C.D.C. studies, but not much with
relationship to Agent Orange.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 2, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Oliver Stone Is Ready to Move On From Vietnam

BYLINE: By GLENN COLLINS

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1490 words


Oliver Stone's eyes were puffy from sleeplessness, and when he smiled, as he did
frequently, his lips drooped with exhaustion. He had just stepped off ''the
tube,'' as he called it - the Concorde from Paris, where he had visited the
grave of Jim Morrison of the Doors and scouted locations for his next film, a
celebration of the rock icon.

Mr. Stone had flown in from France on his way home to Los Angeles and was busily
promoting ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' the film he directed based on Ron
Kovic's 1976 autobiography. It stars Tom Cruise as a Vietnam veteran who turns
against the war. ''This is the time when I feel empty,'' Mr. Stone said, sitting
in a midtown publicity office. ''The film is out. It's the people's vote now.''

During its first weekend of limited release, ''Born on the Fourth of July''
opened strongly in five theaters in five cities. The film goes into wide release
on Friday.

The book and the film tell the story of a gung-ho product of 1950's patriotism,
following him through his years as a marine, his subsequent anguish as a
paraplegic in a Veteran's Hospital, his struggles with his family and his
ultimate fulfillment as a leader of Vietnam Veterans Against the War. Too Many
Fastballs?  ''Born,'' as Mr. Stone calls the film, has won many favorable
reviews and appears on a number of top 10 lists for 1989. But there have also
been unfavorable reviews by critics who complained that Mr. Stone's style is too
intense and intrusive. They link Mr. Stone's directorial pyrotechnics in
''Born'' with his previous work in ''Platoon'' and ''Wall Street,'' and with his
screenplays for ''Scarface,'' ''Year of the Dragon'' and ''Midnight Express,''
for which he won an Academy Award.

''They say I'm unsubtle,'' Mr. Stone said. ''But 'We need above all a theater
that wakes us up: nerves and heart,' '' he said, quoting Antonin Artaud, the
early 20th-century French actor and drama theorist whom Mr. Stone cites in
support of his film-making esthetic. ''They say I throw too many fastballs. But
Nolan Ryan has done pretty well at that,'' he said, referring to the Texas
Rangers pitcher. ''Can I last as long as Nolan Ryan?''

''I'm in the face all the time,'' Mr. Stone acknowledged of his cinematic style.
''Always in your face.'' Is it his intention to manipulate audiences with a form
of cinematic agitprop? ''I hate the very concept of bullying any audience into
anything,'' he said. ''I put my passion out there, my honest feelings. That's
all I do. Some people like that, and some feel it's too strong.''

'I'd Do Noriega in a Second!'

There is an incongruous stillness to the words of the 43-year-old director whose
films are so visceral. Mr. Stone often paused before speaking quietly,
thoughtfully forming his responses. The only evidence of his intensity was the
way he grasped his cup of coffee as if it held the key to his survival.

There was irony, he said, in the fact that ''Born on the Fourth of July'' opened
on the same day that the United States invaded Panama. ''It's a reflection of
the same kind of Vietnam-style thinking,'' he said. ''That we can set other
people's houses in order. It goes right to the point of my movie.''

''Noriega would make a great movie,'' Mr. Stone said. ''Graham Greene could have
created him.'' Is it a movie he'd like to make? ''I'd do Noriega in a second! If
Shakespeare were alive, he'd try him. I love Central America as a canvas.'' It
was there that he directed ''Salvador,'' his 1986 portrait of a sleazy news
hound, played by James Woods, caught in the strife of El Salvador.

Mr. Stone stood to get more coffee; he stretched. He is six feet tall. His hair
is the color of a black Ace comb. He was still in his Concorde clothes, which
included a black T-shirt under an aqua work shirt with an unbuttoned button-down
collar.

He sipped some coffee, then said it was better that ''Born on the Fourth of
July'' is coming out now, more than a decade after the first, stillborn attempt
to film it. In 1978, with Al Pacino in the lead role and Dan Petrie as director,
the film, for which he wrote the screenplay, came within three days of shooting.
Then the financing fell through.

'Platoon' and Beyond

''I needed to do 'Platoon' first,'' Mr. Stone said of the 1986 film he wrote and
directed, which won four Academy Awards, including best picture and best
director. ''But 'Born' has more layers to it,'' he continued. ''It encompasses
the 'Platoon' experience.'' Although two of the stars of ''Platoon'' - Tom
Berenger and Willem Dafoe - appear in ''Born,'' the film is not so much a sequel
as ''a companion piece to 'Platoon,' an extension,'' he said.

He said ''Platoon'' helped create a climate in which a movie about an antiwar
veteran could be featured on the cover of Time magazine, as ''Born'' was the
week it opened.

''And this new generation of kids -emblemized by Tom Cruise - they're
discovering the war for the first time,'' he added. ''They are astonished to
learn what happened. They really have a need to know about it. Tom was that
way.'' ''He could have made 'Top Gun II,' and instead he's killing himself on
crutches in our film for nothing,'' he said. To keep expenses down on the $18
million film, Mr. Cruise deferred his customary multi-millon-dollar movie
paycheck for a percentage of the box office, which will earn him multi-millions
only if the film is a hit.

Time to Move On

Mr. Stone said there was a third Vietnam movie he would like to make -''not
about soldiers, that's all I can say, but I have a plan in mind'' - but he said
he already had the war out of his system. ''I feel able to move on,'' said Mr.
Stone, who served in Vietnam for 15 months and was wounded twice. The
experiences of making ''Platoon'' and ''Born'' were ''cathartic to me, and I
felt a bit of an obligation to make them,'' he said.

''There had been no realistic Vietnam movies, and I felt it was important to
remember the way it was, before we all got too old,'' he said. ''I wanted to fix
it in memory for those who were there, and to remind young people that it
happened, so they wouldn't let it happen again.

''Once Ron told me, 'I'd never want another young man to go through what I went
through.' Well, I'm not in a chair like Ron, but I feel the same way. All the
boys I knew who died -they'd have died for nothing if we hadn't remembered the
war.

''Ron and me, we're like brothers,'' Mr. Stone said. ''For 10 years now. I've
grown to love him as much as any man.'' Both are veterans; both have Roman
Catholicism in their backgrounds; both won Bronze Stars and Purple Hearts
fighting in Vietnam.

''I wrote 'Platoon' alone in 1976, and I never talked to another Vietnam veteran
until I met Ron in 1978,'' Mr. Stone said. ''It was very important to me, to be
able to speak with him. About being there. About being back. I didn't find
hostility when I came home. What startled me was people's totally implacable,
merciless indifference.''

''The other side of the coin to Ron in the 60's was Jim Morrison,'' Mr. Stone
said of the subject of the film he will direct in the spring. Val Kilmer, who
played Tom Cruise's rival pilot in ''Top Gun,'' will take the role of Morrison,
the charismatic lead singer of the Doors, who died in Paris in 1971.

A Different Role Model

''Morrison's father had been in the military, and Jim went exactly the other
way,'' Mr. Stone continued. ''Ron was the good boy, and Jim Morrison was the bad
boy. I can shed some light on that. There's a lot of the bad boy in me. There
was a lot of the rebel: I really wanted to find the bottom of the barrel. That's
why I became a wiper in the Merchant Marine. That's why I went to Vietnam. When
I was there, I wanted to be at the lowest level, the guy who cut point. I was a
rude boy, as the English say. I still am. I identify with Morrison.

''He was a shaman. He was a god for me, a Dionysian figure, a poet, a
philosopher,'' Mr. Stone said. ''I'd like to bring his life out into the
light.''

He also identified with Mr. Kovic, Mr. Stone said. ''In a way, I merged Ron's
story with that of other veterans, including me,'' he explained. ''Ron had the
radicalization experience of the veterans' hospital, and I didn't. It took me a
lot longer for me to turn against the war than Ron -and on that, the movie is
closer to my experience. I believed in the domino theory for a lot longer than
Ron.''

''But I think the Vietnamese have put the war behind them,'' he said. ''Even
among the older people, there seems to be no bitterness.'' He described his
visit to Vietnam last fall with a group of American veterans doing volunteer
work there. The Vietnamese ''were smiling at us - they even cheered us,'' he
said. ''I went back to my old base camp, and it was so overgrown - it was
unrecognizable.''

He toyed with his empty coffee cup, then said: ''I felt as if we were ghosts
wandering through a landscape we'd inhabited a long time ago.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Oliver Stone, who is planning a film on the late rock star Jim
Morrison. (NYT/Fred R. Conrad)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 20, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Arthur J. Goldberg Dies at 81; Ex-Justice and Envoy to U.N.

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 2224 words


Arthur J. Goldberg, who rose from humble beginnings in Chicago to become
Secretary of Labor, an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court and then United
States representative to the United Nations, was found dead yesterday morning in
his apartment in Washington. He was 81 years old.

Dr. Michael Newman, Mr. Goldberg's physician, said the former Justice died late
Thursday or early Friday of cardiac arrest from coronary artery disease. A maid
found his body lying on a sofa.

Prof. Alan M. Dershowitz of Harvard Law School, who clerked for Justice Goldberg
and was a longtime associate, said Mr. Goldberg had been active until his death
on project to form a committee to monitor human rights developments in Eastern
Europe and China.

Turning Point in Life

Associate Justice William J. Brennan, a fellow liberal who served with Justice
Goldberg, said yesterday: ''The nation suffered a grevous loss in the death of
Justice Goldberg. He served his nation brillantly as Secretary of Labor,
Ambassador to the United Nations and Justice of the Supreme Court. Another great
contribution was his work as a lawyer in bringing together the major labor
organizations of the country.''

Warren E. Burger, the retired Chief Justice of the United States, said, ''As a
Justice of the Supreme Court, he was a balanced and thoughtful jurist.''

A wrenching decision that was a turning point in his life occurred in 1965, when
Mr. Goldberg gave up his lifetime appointment to the Supreme Court at President
Lyndon B. Johnson's urging to assume the U.N. post. It was a decision he later
said he regretted.

On the one hand, as Mr. Goldberg said years later, he believed that as U.N.
representative he could reverse the Johnson Administration's Vietnam policy and
bring about peace negotiations. On the other hand, it meant giving up a judicial
position in which Mr. Goldberg's admirers believed he would have made a greater
mark on American history.

''In all candor,'' Mr. Goldberg said on the day he was named to the United
Nations post, ''I would rather the President had not asked me to undertake this
duty.''

Mr. Dershowitz said the Justice had told him, ''Although I would love nothing
more than to live out my years on the Supreme Court, America has been too good
to me for me to turn down its President.''

Three years later he resigned, citing frustrations and disappointments,
including ''the limitations of the scope of my office'' in regard to getting the
United Nations involved in a Vietnam peace effort.

In 1970 Mr. Goldberg entered the race for Governor of New York as the
Liberal-Democratic candidate, but he was soundly defeated by the Republican
incumbent, Nelson A. Rockefeller.

Mr. Goldberg was an owlish, unimposing figure with remarkable energy and legal,
judicial and negotiating skills. Johnson praised him in his memoirs as ''a
skilled arbiter and a fair-minded man.''

It was in 1961 that the Chicago-born lawyer, then general counsel of the United
Steelworkers of America, was named Secretary of Labor by President John F.
Kennedy. In 1962, Kennedy named him to the Supreme Court.

A Mover in Historic Merger

The self-made son of an immigrant carter, Mr. Goldberg did much, as a union
lawyer, to bring about the historic merger in 1955 of the American Federation of
Labor and the Congress of Industrial Organizations.

His legal work plunged him repeatedly into important decisions involving labor
and management. Admirers recalled him as the leading labor lawyer of that day.
When he was named general counsel of the Congress of Industrial Organizations in
1948, he became the chief of the staff of lawyers working for its vast
membership.

He was involved on behalf of labor in various court cases testing the
Taft-Hartley Labor Act, which empowered the Government to obtain an 80-day
injunction against strikes that endangered national health or safety. He was
also the victor in an important 1949 court ruling affirming that pension issues
were a proper subject for collective bargaining.

After the A.F.L.-C.I.O. was formed, he became the main figure to draft rules on
ethics. In 1959, he represented the steelworkers in negotiations during a strike
that lasted more than 100 days and that led to a contract that was widely seen
as a major gain for labor.

As Labor Secretary, Mr. Goldberg was energetic in striving to settle labor
disputes. He played a role in the Kennedy Administration's celebrated
confrontation with the steel industry. Early in 1962 he helped bring about a
noninflationary settlement between the steelworkers and the industry. He prodded
the two sides by warning that a strike could seriously upset the nation's
economy.

But 10 days later the United States Steel Corporation decided on a price
increase, angering Mr. Goldberg and Kennedy. Other steel concerns followed suit.
Then, with Mr. Goldberg working behind the scenes, the Administration
successfully applied pressure to get steel executives to back down on the price
rise. He met with Roger M. Blough, chairman of U.S. Steel, on a day when another
steel company revoked its own price increase, and soon U.S. Steel also yielded.

Afterward, on the Supreme Court, Mr. Goldberg quickly became influential as an
innovative judicial thinker whose arrival, to replace the more conservative
Felix Frankfurter, tilted the Court toward liberal activism.

Authorities have offered different explanations of why Johnson chose Mr.
Goldberg for the U.N. The President emphasized his desire to name a
distinguished public figure to the post previously held by Adlai E. Stevenson.
Others noted Johnson's wish to name his friend Abe Fortas to the Court. Mr
Fortas was named to the seat after Mr. Goldberg stepped down.

A Reluctant Farewell

Mr. Goldberg said he was reluctant to leave the judiciary for the uncertain
world of diplomacy. In making the shift, he became one of the few Supreme Court
Justices to quit for reasons other than retirement. Professor Dershowitz said
Johnson strongly appealed to Mr. Goldberg's patriotism. ''My President has told
me that I can save American soldiers' lives'' by helping to work out a Vietnam
peace arrangement, the Justice told his former clerk.

He did make a contribution, largely through dextrous negotiations with Soviet
diplomats. But he achieved far less than he had hoped, which was to have a major
role in ending the Vietnam War.

After he left the United Nations, he served as president of the American Jewish
Committee, the nationwide human rights organization, in 1968 and 1969, and
became a member of the Manhattan law firm of Paul, Weiss, Goldberg, Rifkind,
Wharton & Garrison.

In 1970, after opinion polls suggested that he would be a strong candidate, he
entered the race for Governor of New York. But he proved to be a lackluster
campaigner and he was easily defeated by Mr. Rockefeller, a long-entrenched
power in state politics.

In 1971, Mr. Goldberg returned to Washington, where he resumed his career. He
was called in on international arbitration cases and served in 1977 and 1978 in
the Carter Administration as a United States Ambassador-at-large.

In that role he was chairman of the United States delegation to a follow-up
conference, in 1977 in Belgrade, on the 1975 Helsinki agreements on human
rights. At the 35-nation gathering, he voiced vigorous criticism of Eastern bloc
nations on human rights.

That advocacy echoed the lusty assertiveness of his early years, as Labor
Secretary, when the Federal Government played an interventionist role in some
labor-management matters. Mr. Goldberg felt the Government had an obligation to
affirm the importance to the nation of resolving crucial labor-management
contract talks with implications for the state of the economy.

With Kennedy's support he acted on his own conviction that the Government itself
should be vigorous in trying to settle labor-management conflicts that
jeopardize national interests.

Early in his tenure as Labor Secretary, he helped resolve a New York harbor
tugboat strike. He also intervened, and became a successful arbitrator, in a
dispute between the Metropolitan Opera and orchestra members.

The arrival of Mr. Goldberg - a liberal, though not a rigid one - on the Supreme
Court, then led by Earl Warren, proved to be a watershed. It led, in the opinion
of most constitutional experts at the time, to a change in the course of the
Court's rulings.

While Frankfurter was still on the Court, he was the leader of a five-Justice
majority that favored judicial restraint, including respect for states' rights
and deference to Capitol Hill.

But as an Associate Justice Mr. Goldberg became a member of a group, usually
constituting a cohesive majority of the nine Justices, that extended the Court's
writ into what had been deemed the spheres of the states or of Congress. This
majority group was often termed activist or liberal.

As a Justice, Mr. Goldberg was also innovative. In 1964, in perhaps his most
notable opinion, he wrote for the Court's majority in the case of Escobedo v.
Illinois, striking down a conviction in a murder case in which the defendant had
been denied the right to confer with his lawyer after his arrest.

Similar decisions ensued, and so did reappraisals of much of the nation's
criminal justice system. Many police executives and prosecutors complained that
the rulings had placed excessive restrictions on them.

Despite Mr. Goldberg's misgivings about leaving the Court for the United
Nations, he had some successes as the United States representative there. Some
admirers felt his most significant achievement was his role in drafting Security
Council Resolution 242, which was passed in November 1967 after the Middle East
war that year.

The resolution calls for ''a just and lasting peace in the Middle East,''
including ''withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from territories of recent
conflict'' and respect for the right of ''every state in the area to live in
peace within secure and recognized boundaries.'' The measure has been a
cornerstone ever since in diplomatic efforts to bring peace to the Middle East.

But he did not succeed in getting the United Nations involved in an attempt to
bring about an acceptable end to the confrontation in Vietnam. In addition,
behind the scenes, Mr. Goldberg had grave differences with Johnson over Vietnam
policies.

Exit From Vietnam

But Mr. Goldberg did figure modestly in the history of how the United States
came to get out of Vietnam. In mid-March 1968, a time when, as Mr. Johnson put
it in his book ''The Vantage Point,'' ''our total situation in Vietnam was under
comprehensive review,'' Mr. Goldberg sent Johnson a memorandum. It suggested
that the United States stop ''the aerial and naval bombardment of North Vietnam
for the limited time necessary to determine whether Hanoi will negotiate in good
faith'' in peace talks.

''I read the memo carefully,'' Johnson wrote. ''Goldberg made a strong case for
a total bombing halt, but not strong enough. I could not take the risk of such a
move at that time. I continued to believe that the North Vietnamese would
interpret it as a clear sign of weakness - an indication that we wanted to stop
fighting and come home.''

On March 20, 1968, Mr. Goldberg pressed his proposal at a meeting with Johnson
and Presidential advisers. He did so at a time when there was much talk within
the Administration of how to foster Vietnam peace talks. His suggestion was not
acted on at the time, but 11 days later Johnson announced an unconditional and
sweeping, but less than total, cutback in the bombing. Talks between the United
States and North Vietnam ensued in Paris, and Johnson eventually stopped all
bombing of the north.

Blind Horse and Wagon

The roles that Mr. Goldberg played in Presidential policy making and
international affairs were remote from the world of his boyhood. Arthur Joseph
Goldberg's was born Aug. 8, 1908, in Chicago, the youngest of eight children of
Joseph and Rebecca Goldberg, both of whom were born in Russia. The elder Mr.
Goldberg, a former peddler, owned a blind horse and a wagon and delivered
produce to hotels.

After studying at Crane Junior College and De Paul University, Arthur Goldberg
entered Northwestern University Law School, graduating at the head of its class
of 1929 and earning a doctorate, summa cum laude, in 1930.

He went on to practice labor law in Chicago until 1948, with time out for war
service from 1942 to 1944, serving with with the Office of Strategic Services
and as an Army officer.

From 1948 to 1961, Mr. Goldberg was the Washington-based general counsel of the
United Steelworkers and was active in negotiations toward settling major strikes
in the steel industry.

He was also general counsel of the Congress of Industrial Organizations from
1948 to 1955 and in that capacity worked toward its merger with the American
Federation of Labor, He was special counsel to the industrial union department
of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. from 1955 until 1961.

Mr. Goldberg was married in 1931 to Dorothy Kurgans. She died in 1988.

He is survived by a daughter, Barbara Cramer of Chicago; a son, Robert, of
Anchorage, and six grandchildren.

Funeral arrangements are incomplete, but Ralph DeStefano, director of Gawler's
Funeral Home, said Mr. Goldberg would be buried in Arlington National Cemetery.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Arthur J. Goldberg (The New York Times, 1964)(Pg1)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

G.I.'s Who Fought in Panama Are Counseled to Ease Stress

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1488 words


The Army, which has long denied that going into combat can cause long-term
psychological stress for some soldiers, is providing counseling to try to avert
such problems for troops who recently returned from Panama.

The sessions at Fort Bragg, N.C., conducted by specially trained teams of mental
health professionals and soldiers, are intended to prevent or detect symptoms of
post-traumatic stress disorder like nightmares, feelings of guilt, extreme
sensitivity to loud noises and irritability.

Psychiatrists and clinicians say such symptoms, normal reactions to combat
stress, can also be signals of more serious and lingering conditions.

'Pay Me Now or Pay Me Later'

''Our aim here is to take a pre-emptive strike against the impact that the
stress might have on our soldiers,'' said Maj. Scott Fairchild, director of
clinical psychology at Fort Bragg's Womack Army Community Hospital. ''We realize
that there will be the whole range of stresses and tolerance to the stresses and
that there will be those who stuff those emotions without dealing with them. But
our brains bring them back to us and, like the commercial says, 'Pay me now or
pay me later.' ''

The effort, which will eventually be offered to nearly 6,000 soldiers at Fort
Bragg and their families, has been applauded by psychiatrists and clinicians.

Dr. Harry Holloway, chairman of the psychiatry department at the Defense
Department's Uniformed Services University of Health Sciences in Bethesda, Md.,
said an effort like the one at Fort Bragg was long overdue.

Small Counseling Teams

''To those Vietnam-era vets who question doing this now because Panama seemed so
much milder, my answer to them is: 'So we screwed up with you guys. Why should
we continue to screw up?' '' said Dr. Holloway, who treated Vietnam combat
veterans.

Major Fairchild said the counseling at Fort Bragg involved small trained teams
that often included an enlisted man, an officer and a chaplain or mental health
specialist. When the troops returned to Fort Bragg after the invasion of Panama
on Dec. 20, team members joined them as they took part in routine activities on
the base, rather than meet them in hospitals or auditoriums. The team members
talked informally with the soldiers about what happened to them and what they
saw.

Major Fairchild said the hope was to get the soldiers to talk about their
experiences among themselves as well because ''the best healing goes on right
there in the unit and in small groups.''

Dr. Tom Williams, executive director of the Post Trauma Treatment Center at
Centennial Peaks Hospital in Boulder, Colo., who served as a consultant in Fort
Bragg's counseling program, said many soldiers at Fort Bragg told him of guilt
about the fate of civilians and of the powerlessness they felt as they watched
members of the Dignity Battalions loyal to Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega hack the
civilians with machetes when they tried to reach sectors controlled by the
Americans.

Twenty-three members of the armed forces and three American civilians were
killed, and 324 military members were wounded. Military spokesmen say 314
Panamanian military members were killed and 124 wounded. The count of Panamanian
civilians killed or injured in the invasion has not yet been officially
determined.

Soldier's Nightmare Recalled

One of the first counseling sessions, which focused on the wounded, alerted
Major Fairchild to a 19-year-old soldier with a leg wound who seemed sullen and
sad. The clinical psychologist said he looked in on the soldier one night and
found him in the midst of a nightmare. After gently waking him, Major Fairchild
said the soldier told him of dreaming of intense combat with the sounds of
explosions and helicopters and at first feeling invincible and then realizing
that he could not return fire because he could not see his adversaries.

''The idea was to bring him back to the present, let him know that this was
normal and it was all right to talk about,'' Major Fairchild said. ''As we were
talking we heard a helicopter taking off, and he realized that it was hearing
the sound of the helicopter's landing that helped trigger his dream. He saw that
it was normal and separated out what was real and what wasn't.''

Before the Vietnam War, what is now called post-traumatic stress disorder was
known as ''shell shock'' or ''battle fatigue.'' In 1921 Freud wrote about the
phenomenon, calling it ''war neurosis.''

Dr. Charles Marmar, associate professor of psychiatry at the University of
California at San Francisco, who is director of the stress disorder program at
that city's Veterans Affairs Medical Center, said that Incidence of Combat
Stress It was only in 1980 that the American Psychiatric Association recognized
the existence of a specific condition produced by combat and termed it post-
traumatic stress disorder, said Dr. Arthur Blank, director of Vietnam veterans'
outreach programs for the Department of Veterans Affairs.

At that time the Veterans Administration began offering counseling specifically
aimed at treating the disorder and was able to provide disability benefits for
those diagnosed as suffering from it. Before that, according to Dr. Emil Tanay,
professor of psychiatry at Wayne State University in Detroit and a former
consultant to the Veterans Administration, veterans had to be diagnosed as
schizophrenic to be eligible for benefits.

Until the program at Fort Bragg, the military has not offered counseling to
soldiers right after they engaged in combat.

Many experts on post-traumatic stress disorder said it was still too early to
tell whether debriefing approaches like those used at Fort Bragg worked well in
preventing more serious symptoms.

''I don't want to make too much of this because trauma and the potential of
trauma is not removed by this, nor are the memories turned into vanilla ice
cream,'' Dr. Holloway said. ''The horribleness of some experiences will still be
there, but they will become comprehensible for some and there is some good news
in that.''

Dr. Holloway, who was involved in approving the Fort Bragg effort, and others
said that there were no indications that soldiers who had gone to Panama were
any more susceptible to the disorder than other combat veterans. #27,000 Troops
Involved The military action in Panama, which involved 27,000 troops, was the
largest military action by the United States since the Vietnam War.

On the surface, the extent of casualties and the duration of combat in Panama
pale next to combat in Vietnam, the Korean War and World War II. Most soldiers
stationed at Fort Bragg were in Panama no longer than two weeks; the average
Vietnam veteran had 300 ''combat days,'' military officials say.

But Dr. Williams said studies showed that ''how long the shooting lasts'' made
little difference in the potential for post-traumatic stress syndrome in those
who had particularly ''horrendous experiences.'' Of course, the longer a soldier
serves in combat the more likely he is to encounter such an experience.

The Panama invasion provided other differences that would probably lower the
actual numbers and severity of ''psychological casualties,'' said Dr. Williams,
who served two tours of duty in Vietnam.

''For one thing this was, unlike Vietnam, a popular action,'' he said. ''That
makes a difference in how they feel about it afterward. It was a highly defined
operation with a clear objective, and they knew when they had won. That was not
the case in Vietnam, which was a jungle war where there were no clear lines.''

But he said, and others agreed, that some experiences had undoubtedly been so
horrible that they would necessarily lead to severe problems.

Dr. Blank said studies suggest that as many as 15 percent of the 3.1 million
American soldiers who served in Vietnam suffer from the disorder.

Support From Base Commander

The sessions at Fort Bragg have focused so far on medical units, personnel who
deal with the dead and some combat units. Major Fairchild said that because of
strong support for the effort from Lieut. Gen. Carl W. Stiner, the commanding
officer at Fort Bragg, requests for the sessions were coming in from scores of
commanders of other units involved in the fighting, as well as from support
units.

So far only a few sessions have been held as an option for the soldiers'
families, but they had been well attended, Major Fairchild said.

Commanders' sensitivity to the subtle psychology and issues involved in combat
stress was one of the keys to instituting the Fort Bragg program, both Dr.
Williams and Major Fairchild said.

''The process actually began with General Stiner's decision to have the
returning troops parachute triumphantly back to Fort Bragg,'' Dr. Williams said,
referring to a parachute jump by nearly 2,000 members of the 82d Airborne
Division on Jan. 12. ''They weren't coming in through the back door, and that
was important.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Army has been providing counseling at Fort Bragg, N.C., to
help troops who served in Panama handle stress. A soldier mourned last month at
a memorial service in Panama City. (Reuters) (pg. A22)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 29, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
Struggle With Conscience In an Almost Forgotten War

BYLINE: By WILBORN HAMPTON

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 807 words


In one of the early episodes of the television series M*A*S*H, Col. Henry Blake,
the Army surgeon played by McLean Stevenson, bitterly observes that there are
two rules of war. The first is that people die. The second is that there is
nothing that doctors, chaplains or field officers can do about Rule No. 1. Rod
Serling's teleplay ''The Strike,'' which is being given its first stage
production by the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company at the South Street
Theater, examines the agony of conscience of one Army major who must make a
battlefield decision that could end in the death of a score of men he himself
has sent out on a reconnaissance patrol.

''The Strike,'' which was originally presented as a ''Studio One'' television
production in 1954, represents something of a departure for the worthy Vietnam
Veterans company. First, it is a play about the Korean War, a conflict that has
almost been forgotten in the decades of our national turmoil over Vietnam.
Furthermore, it focuses on the soul-searching of an officer, Major Gaylord, as
he wrestles with a life-and-death decision. In all the plays, novels or movies
about Vietnam there has been little outpouring of sympathy for anyone in uniform
above the rank of corporal.

Thomas Bird, the founder of the Vietnam Veterans company and the director of
this production, opens the short, stark evening with a brisk staged reading of
passages from ''The Korean War: An Oral History - Pusan to Chosin'' by Donald
Knox. It is an imaginative and effective device that provides a quick survey
course on the Korean War and cleverly sets the scene for Serling's play.

A group of American G.I.'s recount in rapid, staccato bursts of speech the
events of the last six months of 1950 as personal reminiscences - being shipped
from the fleshpots of occupied Japan to wartime Korea, the retreat to Pusan, the
landing at Inchon, the early successes against the North Koreans, only to be met
at the Yalu River by the Chinese Army poised for an invasion of its own. There
are references to Gen. Douglas MacArthur's promises that American soldiers would
be home by Thanksgiving (a pledge quickly revised to being home for Christmas),
and to Bob Hope performing for the troops in Pyongyang.

This gripping tale ends abruptly in a barrage of incoming artillery fire that,
once the smoke clears, turns into a snowbound command post for a decimated
American battalion. The Americans are in a ''fluid situation,'' which, as Major
Gaylord explains, ''is what you call it when you're losing and don't want to
admit it.''

Despite some familiar dramatic military terrain - a lost patrol, broken
communications, wounded needing evacuation - ''The Strike'' is a well-crafted
play that creates a taut dramatic situation with an economy of action,
principally through characterization. That the tension in Serling's play is only
partly realized in the Vietnam Veterans production is due mostly to a rather
tentative, low-key performance by Tucker Smallwood in the pivotal role of Major
Gaylord that only occasionally penetrates much below the surface. ''I wish
someone with a star on his shoulder would tell me what's right and wrong,'' the
Major says, but there is little sense that the decision presents much of an
agonizing quandary. Mr. Smallwood is better in passages recalling his own days
before command. The actor delivers a moving account of being ordered to shoot a
soldier who refused to give a password only to learn the soldier sacrificed
himself for his platoon.

Anthony Chisholm is especially good as Chaplain Walker, whose job of listening
to battlefield confessions is like ''eavesdropping on death.'' Ray Robertson is
credible as Captain Chick. Matt Tomasino as Lieutenant Peters and Jim Tracy as
Captain Franks generate a sense of urgency about the lost patrol that
occasionally flags elsewhere onstage. And Brian Markinson delivers a small gem
of a performance as Richard Golden, a wounded soldier who can only say his name,
address and hometown over and over and over as a plea for help.

George A. Allison's set is simple yet evocative, complete with a 48-star flag,
an old hand generator and field phone, some empty ammo crates -all World War II
surplus, which is what the G.I.'s in Korea had to fight with.

Oh! That War!

THE STRIKE, by Rod Serling; directed by Thomas Bird; set design, George A.
Allison; costume design, Jim Buff; lighting design, Terry Wuthrich; sound
design, Scott Sanders; production stage manager, Jerry Bihm. Presented by
Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Company, Mr. Bird, artistic director. At the South
Street Theater, 424 West 42d Street.

WITH: David Adamson, Anthony Chisholm, Ralph DeMatthews, Russ Ericson, Stephen
Lee, Michael Manetta, Brian Markinson, Sean Michael Rice, Ray Robertson, Tucker
Smallwood, Matt Tomasino and Jim Tracy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
At Close Range, the Human Face of War

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1895 words


In recent years, we've seeN Sylvester Stallone's ''Rambo'' movies, which
re-fight (and win) the Vietnam War. There was Clint Eastwood's ''Heartbreak
Ridge,'' which exalts the United States' invasion of Grenada. We've also had the
phenomenally successful ''Top Gun,'' in which Tom Cruise comes very close to
starting World War III.

They are boys' adventure films, essentially, in which prowar attitudes are worn
like store-bought chevrons. Very few serious film makers have ever made a war
movie in peacetime that wasn't supposed to be, at heart, antiwar.

Antiwar is the way that Darryl F. Zanuck liked to describe ''The Longest Day,''
his rousing, all-star, hour-by-hour re-creation of the 1944 Allied invasion of
Normandy. Though the film acknowledged that a lot of men were killed, one has to
look closely to see any spilled blood. The film's carnage is seemly and the
ending is triumphant, clearly indicating that, though war is hell, it is
sometimes worth it.

Starting with ''The Birth of a Nation'' (1915), movie makers have always
professed to hate war, though the degree of their loathing hasn't always been
easy to detect. The spectacular action, the suspense, the sacrifices, the
heroism and, if the war was won, the victory seem always somehow to justify war.

In this historical context, three very different, exceptionally moving new films
stand out: ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' Oliver Stone's adaptation of Ron
Kovic's book, which may be the last word on Vietnam; Edward Zwick's ''Glory,''
about a black regiment that distinguished itself in the Civil War, and ''Henry
V,'' Kenneth Branagh's adaptation of the same Shakespearean text that Laurence
Olivier transformed in 1944 into a glorious paean to English patriotism.

Each film in its own way is so effective that it stands above the piety
associated with the label ''antiwar.'' Even ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' the
most furious of the three films, could scarcely be called anything more than
anti-Vietnam. It would be difficult to interpret ''Born on the Fourth of July''
beyond that. It is against recklessly bloody, shortsighted endeavors.

More important than the particular politics of the three films is something else
they share to a degree seldom encountered in war movies. That is, the manner in
which they successfully evoke not the abstract, ethical wrongness of war (which
might be debatable among all but certified conscientious objectors), but the
terrible toll of wars fought for whatever reasons.

As much as anything else, ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' ''Glory'' and Mr.
Branagh's small, tough ''Henry V'' rediscover some measure of the value of human
life, the galvanizing strength of idealism and the meaning of sacrifice. They
rediscover the seriousness of war.

It says something about the nature of our popular entertainment today, and about
the frivolous barbarism of so much of our culture, that such humanism appears to
be a revolutionary concept. Even more strange is the apparent popularity of the
three films. However, that probably has less to do with any backlash against
perfunctorily violent movies and television shows than with the exceptional
emotional impact of these films.

Seen back-to-back with the Olivier classic, Mr. Branagh's ''Henry V'' vividly
demonstrates how the times and fashion can shape the interpretation of a given
text. The Olivier version, made shortly after Dunkirk and during Britain's
battle for its life, is still an exquisite work. Beginning, as it does, with a
production of ''Henry V'' at the old Globe Theater, before moving out into the
world beyond the theater, it is an enchanted evocation of Britain's cultural as
well as political heritage.

Branagh's 'Henry V': War Without Romance

Olivier's Henry is young and godlike, his cause (the claim to the crown of
France) just and the battles so stylized (fought on emerald-green fields beneath
sunny azure skies) that no sense of vanity, cruelty or any other doomy reality
is allowed to impinge.

Eliminated from the text are any references to treason on the part of English
nobles. Also gone is the concluding speech in which the Chorus reminds the
audience that everything that Henry won at Agincourt was forever lost by his
successor.

Olivier's Henry is a man whose only doubts are kingly. One of the most highly
charged moments in the Branagh version comes when Henry, at Agincourt, so
exhausted that he might accept the notion of defeat, greets the French emissary,
''I tell thee truly, herald, I know not if the day be ours or no.'' Olivier's
Henry doesn't ask. He is perfectly aware that the field is his.

Olivier's ''Henry V'' is a pageant full of bright colors, broad vistas and
elevated thoughts. Mr. Branagh's film is dark and chill, its battle scenes
brutal and messy. His Henry is a man betrayed by his best friends, someone
trying desperately to convince himself of the justness of his cause, riddled
with guilts about his claim even to the throne of England.

It rains virtually from the moment he arrives in France until he staggers from
the muddy bog that is the field at Agincourt. Mr. Branagh's Henry is not a
heroic figure. He looks like the sort of kid who has a runny nose from late
October to early May. He is comparatively small and slight. Yet he has a steely
intelligence and a naked ambition that Olivier never openly acknowledges but
chooses to se as destiny. He is not a god but a fallible man.

Mr. Branagh's ''Henry V'' isn't antiwar, though it certainly would not make one
wish to have been at Agincourt. The movie doesn't inspire. There is no romance
to this war. The cost is too high. This ''Henry'' is a history play that accepts
certain facts and finds the humanity behind them.

'Glory' Depicts People at Their Best

Both ''Glory'' and ''Born on the Fourth of July'' are about the betrayal of
ideals, and if ''Glory'' is the more sorrowful, it's because the extent of the
betrayal remains largely unknown to the characters themselves.

The film, however, is scarcely antiwar. It believes in the righteousness of the
Civil War with the same passion with which Boston's abolitionists helped to
organize the 54th Massachusetts Regiment, one of the first black fighting units
to be enlisted in the Union cause.

''Glory'' is most admirable in the way in which it sticks to its subject, the
discipline and training of the 54th's black recruits who were not, at first,
expected to see combat. Based on the true story of Col. Robert Gould Shaw, the
25-year-old white Bostonian who was in charge of the regiment, the film gives
the impression of being virtually a day-by-day recollection of the 54th's
progress from parade grounds to battlefield.

Without superfluous incident, the film dramatizes not only Shaw's idealism but
also his success in communicating his passion to his troops. Though doing the
same job, the black soldiers were paid at a lower scale than their white
counterparts,who regarded them mostly as a joke. The movie is as brightly
colored as a recruiing poster (no Mathew Brady tonalities here), but it looks
absolutely authentic.

Especially awesome are the battle scenes that show, possibly for the first time
in an entertainment movie, the horrendous nature of a war in which men marched
in unbroken ranks into point-blank range. The lucky ones were killed outright.
Others were shot to pieces, to die later in long lingering infections and
fevers.

There is no romance in this war either. It is dirty and ill-paid and fought by
soldiers supported almost entirely by the belief that their performance on the
battlefield would lead to their acceptance as first-class citizens.

That it didn't is the almost overwhelmingly sad subtext to everything that is
seen on the screen. More than three-quarters of a century later, black soldiers
would still be fighting in segregated regiments in World War II. Not until the
Korean and Vietnam wars were they to be afforded equal opportunities to die.

There seems to be some question about who contributed what to the ''Glory''
screenplay. The screen credit goes to Kevin Jarre, though Patricia Broderick and
Shelby Foote also receive prominent screen credit for their help to the
production.

In whatever manner ''Glory'' was put together, it is a tremendously affecting
work about people behaving at their exceptional best. It is magnificently acted
by a large cast headed by Matthew Broderick as Shaw, Denzel Washington (as a
black soldier gifted with a 20th-century black sensibility), Morgan Freeman,
Jihmi Kennedy, Andre Braugher and Cliff DeYoung.

'Fourth of July': Shared Betrayal

''Born on the Fourth of July'' is about betrayal of a somewhat more obvious
sort, but it's also a betrayal shared by an entire generation of young
Americans. As the children of men and women who fought the good fight of World
War II, they grew up to ask not what their country could do for them, but what
they could do for their country.

In Mr. Kovic's case, the answer was just this side of death. In the course of
his second tour of Vietnam duty, his spinal column was severed, leaving him
paralyzed from midchest down.

The disillusionment of the movie's Ron Kovic (played by Tom Cruise in what may
turn out to be the role of his career) is the result of a peerless muddle of his
own lofty aspirations and the system's wrongheaded policies.

The movie's effectiveness comes not from exposing the foolishness of that war,
after the fact, but from its agonized portrayal of a man attempting to find his
bearings in a dark world for which he was totally unprepared.

Mr. Stone, never a subtle film maker, works on the audience's gut responses,
which, in this case, seems perfectly reasonable. Before Ron Kovic can get his
mind in order, he has to come to terms with never walking again, no longer
having a sex life, having no control over his bodily functions.

These clinical problems are explored by Mr. Stone in the kind of graphic detail
not easily accommodated by an entertainment film. Yet they are essential in a
movie whose real subject might be said to be a sort of national lassitude, and
the cost of that lassitude to one man.

There is no special responsibility to be fixed. In the 1960's America slipped
easily into a war, the cost of which it was not willing to bear. ''Born on the
Fourth of July'' is at its best in the manner in which it presents the system,
so efficient in the way it gets Ron into the war, alternately lazy and
overworked when it comes to his postwar therapy.

There are no real villains in the movie, only people attempting to cope in
situations for which they are not prepared. They include everyone from the
members of Ron's well-meaning family to the doctors and orderlies at the Bronx
veterans' hospital, where the patients feed the rats to keep them off the beds.

The anti-Vietnam message of ''Born on the Fourth of July'' is not exactly news,
though it clearly strikes a responsive chord in this post-Rambo era. That, too,
could be fashion. The movie works because in Ron Kovic, as represented by Mr.
Cruise, it dramatizes the destruction not only of a physical body but also of a
kind of mindless optimism that has, for too long, been takn to be an American
virtue.

Only when he comes to this understanding does the movie's Ron Kovic become a
man. As rites of passage go, his is terrible but not, unfortunately, unique.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A scene from ''Glory,'' about black volunteers who fought in the
Civil War-Like ''Henry V'' and ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' it rediscovers
some measure of the value of human life (pg. 1); Kenneth Branagh, left, as Henry
and Brian Blessed as Exeter in Mr. Branagh's film version of the Shakespeare
play (pg. 21)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

L.I. Relatives Seek Answers On Missing Servicemen's Fate

BYLINE: States News Service

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 1, Column 3; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1677 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Although it has been 17 years since Long Island's Matejov family got word that
21-year-old Joseph had been killed in an Air Force mission over Laos, Mary
Matejov says she knows that her son survived the crash and that the United
States Government knowingly lied to her about his status.

''The Government told me he was dead, that his plane had burned to a crisp and
there were no survivors,'' Mrs. Matejov said, ''and so we held a memorial
service. We had no reason not to believe them until five years later, when I
happened to see 'Good Morning America.' ''

It was that broadcast, which told how United States military intelligence
tracked four survivors from the 1973 crash as they were being marched north,
ostensibly to prison camps, that led the Matejovs to doubt the Government and
its efforts to bring home American prisoners of war.

Former East Meadow Resident

Mrs. Matejov, who lived in East Meadow for 28 years before moving to Virginia
last June, says she has yet to hear the truth about the fate of her son,
although she feels that the broadcast and other unofficial reports proves that
the United States Government knew he was still alive at least two months after
she was told he had been killed.

Last month, the conviction that her son was still alive in Southeast Asia
brought Mrs. Matejov to Capitol Hill, along with a half-dozen Long Island
residents and other activists from throughout the country. They were here to
show their support at a hearing on the first of several bills aimed at answering
lingering questions about wars that ended decades ago.

Charging government cover-ups, the activists say that what happened to the
Matejovs has been happening to families of missing servicemen since World War
II. They see the hearing, which opened discussion on the proposed Missing
Service Personnel Act and a similar bill, H.R. 3401, as a start in getting the
United States to reopen its records and account for the missing men.

Case Called a Strong One

Representative Norman F. Lent, Republican of Baldwin, a member of the House Task
Force on American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia, said that the Matejov
case was a strong one.

''She told me about the intercepted radio transmissions indicating that a plane
had crashed,'' he said, ''and my recollection was that live prisoners had been
taken, one of whom could have been her son.''

Although Mrs. Matejov says she has received numerous unofficial reports about
prisoners who might be her son, she has no conclusive proof that he is alive,
just enough information to cast doubt on the official verdict that he is dead.

Mr. Lent added that, although Mary and Steven Matejov, a career military officer
who died in 1984, had requested that their son's status be changed from dead to
missing, the Air Force would not rescind its decision despite his appeals on
their behalf.

According to the Department of Defense, 2,316 United States servicemen are still
missing in Southeast Asia. There are 78,750 listed as unaccounted for from World
War II and roughly 8,000 missing from the Korean War, 389 of whom were at one
time listed as prisoners.

Government Pursuing Leads

Lieut. Comdr. Edward Lundquist, a Pentagon spokesman, said that the Government
continued to pursue all leads in the case of missing prisoners.

''But I wouldn't want to be the one to tell the families they have no hope,'' he
said.

Although the Federal Government has officially declared as dead all American
servicemen missing from the Vietnam War - except for one who is kept on the
rolls as a symbolic gesture - the proposed Missing Service Personnel Act (H.R.
1730) would allow all family members to appeal that verdict and have the files
on their loved ones reopened.

''The government opposes this bill,'' Mrs. Matejov said, ''because it doesn't
want it to come out how it has not told the truth at all times. That's why they
don't want these cases reviewed by the families, why they don't want this
legislation and why they don't want us to reopen the files.''

With 132 co-sponsors, the Missing Service Personnel Act would forbid the
Government from declaring missing servicemen dead simply because of the passage
of time. In addition to outlining future combat zone procedures for finding men
on the field, the bill also extends to families the right to a retroactive
review of their relative's case, whether they be missing in Vietnam, Korea or
from World War II.

Hochbrueckner a Co-Sponsor

''It's just like the U.S.S. Stark situation, where there was only one body not
recovered, and that was Seaman Terrence Weldon from my district,'' said
Representative George J. Hochbrueckner, Democrat of Centereach, a co-sponsor of
the proposed Missing Service Personnel Act and a member of the House Armed
Services subcommittee that conducted the hearing.

''I know the pain that family is experiencing,'' he said. ''You spend your whole
life wondering.''

Introduced by Representative John G. Rowland, Republican of Connecticut, the
missing-personnel measure contains several sections that have drawn strong
opposition, including its provisions allowing reviews to be open to the public
and permitting any family member to request a case review, even if the
next-of-kin objects.

''Obviously, each family deals with the tragedy of a missing relative in a
different way, and requiring that each case inquiry be conducted in the
spotlight of public attention is both insensitive and irresponsible,'' said
Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, who is chairman of the
House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs.

Like Mr. Solarz, the National League of Families has thrown its support behind
H.R. 3401, the other Rowland bill addressed at the hearing. It calls for a more
deliberated Defense Department review of missing-personnel statutes as opposed
to a swift code change.

League Opposes Three Bills

''Importantly, it also protects the prerogatives of the primary next-of-kin and
avoids the sensitive issue of unwarranted public release,'' said Ann Mills
Griffith, executive director of the league, which opposes three of the four
prisoner of war-related bills that have been introduced in the current Congress.

''I think basically that the people of the nation feel that not enough has been
done,'' Mr. Hochbrueckner said. ''This hearing is worth having to show the
Pentagon that we mean business.''

H.R. 3401 is not what brought Danny DeMauro, a sales executive for the Woodbury
Automotive Warehouse, to Washington, but he says that even this less drastic
bill could not hurt his cause.

''This hearing is just the beginning,'' said Mr. DeMauro, a Vietnam veteran who
four years ago founded the Freedom Foundation, a small group whose mission is to
bring home all missing American servicemen. ''H.R. 1730 would really make a
world of difference, but that's not all we want out of Congress this year.''

Mr. DeMauro believes that another measure, H.R. 3603, which is also known as the
Truth Bill, will be the greatest boon toward freeing imprisoned servicemen. The
bill would force all Federal departments and agencies to disclose information,
including the estimated 10,000 ''live-sighting'' reports, concerning all United
States personnel classified as prisoners of war or missing in action since World
War II.

Mrazek Cites Government Role

Representative Robert J. Mrazek, Democrat of Huntington and a veteran of the
Vietnam War, said he would not support the Truth Bill.

''The underlying premise is that there has been a cover-up,'' said Mr. Mrazek,
adding that he believed the Government already was doing all it could to account
for the missing servicemen.

In addition, the National League of Families maintains that the Truth Bill is
unnecessary, since a family already has access to its relative's records. But
Mrs. Matejov, who is a member of the league, says that is not not the case.

''The Government makes you wait for information, they give you misinformation,
they give you everything but an answer,'' she said.

''If the 'Truth Bill' passes and the public gets a look at these records, there
would be a huge groundswell against the Department of Defense,'' said John
LeBoutillier, a former Representative ousted by Mr. Mrazek and currently head of
the Skyhook II Project, an organization that sends scouts to Southeast Asia in
an effort to locate prisoners of war.

Mr. LeBoutiller has endorsed the measure, as has John J. Molloy of Islip
Terrace, co-founder of the Release Foundation, a group established in 1984 to
bring American servicemen home.

The Domino Theory

''Once H.R. 1730 goes through, the dominoes should start to fall in favor of
these issues and for the 'Truth Bill,' '' he said. ''But then again, members of
Congress might think, 'That's enough on this issue.' We've got to show them that
more needs to be done.''

The Freedom Foundation, the Release Foundation and Skyhook II operate
individually, although all are national in scope and are headquartered on Long
Island - in Oakdale, Islip Terrace and Old Westbury, respectively. The fact that
they, together with other organizations having the same goal, have not banded
together, does not seem to concern Mr. LeBoutillier.

''Why don't all the airlines get together?'' he asked. ''Why don't all the
newspapers get together? They just all have a different way of getting the job
done.''

Meanwhile, another Congressional subcommittee is continuing its low-key
investigation into allegations of mail fraud by Skyhook II and the
California-based Operation Rescue.

Such allegations do not dissuade Mrs. Matejov, who says that, far from
exploiting her, many of these groups, like Mr. DeMauro's, are of great
assistance.

''With their help, I will fight this until the bitter end, for my son and for
any of those men who are still over there,'' said Mrs. Matejov, the mother of 10
children.

''In the last letter I got from Joseph, he said, 'The greatest day for me will
be to see the P.O.W.'s come home.' It meant so much to him, how could I give up
now?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 27, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Communist Laos Mixes Strict Political Dogma With Capitalist Economics

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1661 words

DATELINE: VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 21


Fifteen years after the Communist victory in this smallest of the three
countries of Indochina, Laotian leaders continue to profess rigorous political
dogma, but they have openly returned to capitalist economics.

After nearly a decade of ideological orthodoxy in all fields, the ruling party
has officially delayed the transition to socialism. Laotian peasant farmers once
again till lands that are their own, and commerce in this virtually
unindustrialized country has largely returned to private hands.

During a two-week stay in a country that has severely limited press access since
the Communist takeover, the bustling commercial life of this capital and the
major provincial towns of Savannakhet and Luang Prabang stood in sharp contrast
to the political monotony. Where a decade ago the markets were almost as bare of
variety as the political scene, they now look virtually as they did under the
old Government.

Bicycles, which then had the streets virtually to themselves, are contending
today with motorcycles. Cars have reappeared, and not all the European luxury
cars belong to diplomats or international officials, as they did earlier.
Gasoline is once again in adequate supply.

In his first interview with an American reporter, Kaysone Phomvihane, Prime
Minister and General Secretary of the Communist Party, expressed the guiding
policy.

He said the country was faced with the realities of an underdeveloped economy
and the heavy destruction of war. ''We could not afford to work subjectively and
in a rush to attain socialist goals, but must strive to surmount the
difficulties caused by this backwardness for several more decades,'' the Prime
Minister wrote in reply to questions submitted before the interview. Political
Freedom Is Not in the Cards Sisana Sisane, himself a longtime party leader, who
holds Cabinet rank as chairman of the Committee for Social Sciences, said
socialism might take a century to achieve. ''We don't have the basis for
building a socialist economy,'' he said.

Mr. Kaysone rejected any borrowing from present developments in the Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe, particularly tendencies to political pluralism or challenges
to the sole party's ''leading role.''

''The Laotian people have faith in and agree with the People's Revolutionary
Party's leadership, since the party belongs to the people, originates from the
people and serves the people,'' the General Secretary said. ''Our Laotian party
does not yet see any need for establishing other political parties.''

Acting President Phoumi Vongvichit explicitly condemned political freedom in an
interview. ''If everyone speaks in his own way, I consider that anarchy rather
than democracy,'' he said. ''We compare this to a cart drawn by several
buffaloes - one pulls to the right, one to the left, another remains standing.
Can that cart advance?''

A senior Communist diplomat said: ''I prefer not to talk about politics, because
anything I'd say would have to be critical. There is no true democracy in this
country.''

Laotian and foreign residents reported that after a gradual beginning in the
mid-1980's, commercial prosperity appeared to take a sharp upward turn only last
year. Since 1988, business freedom appears to have known no limits, and a new
foreign investment code was adopted to make Laos attractive to investors.

Almost no figures are available to document what an observer sees. ''There is no
hard information whatsoever,'' a Western Ambassador complained.

A senior international official said: ''No one knows anything. There's not a
single statistic that can be checked.'' Control of Economy Is Decentralized A
main reason is that in an exception to the practice in other Communist
countries, the central leadership has allowed considerable authority over
economic life to devolve to the provinces. They are free to conclude trading
agreements not only with private companies but also with neighboring countries.
Laotians with links to the power structure said Mr. Kaysone allowed this
decentralization to take the sting out of power rivalries that might otherwise
have weakened his rule.

As in the pre-Communist past, free trade in Laos amounts to an invitation to
Thai business to extend its markets and economic influence. The other neighbors
- China, Vietnam, Cambodia and Burma - are too hampered by poverty and
state-controlled economies to take advantage of the opportunity. Moreover,
Thailand has always been the main route of international access to this
landlocked country.

Thai consumer goods dominate retail trade, from foods, toiletries, medicines and
cheap textile goods to television and video sets, motorcycles and cars. What
mystifies foreign observers is how Laotian importers and consumers pay for these
goods. Exports of hydroelectric power and timber, overflight rights and
remittances from refugees abroad are this country's main sources of foreign
earnings. A factory producing toothpicks is believed to be the only source of
manufactured export goods.

Laotians and foreign residents suspect that considerable quantities of timber
are exported illegally. Even less verifiable is a widespread suspicion that the
smuggling of opium and heroin, of which Laotian mountain tribesmen are major
producers, also finances consumer imports.

Communist leaders concede that official corruption and profiteering are on the
rise. ''At the beginning, party workers served the interests of the people
well,'' Mr. Sisana said. ''Then errors were made. There are now many illnesses
among Communists - omissions and corruption.''

''Graft is growing and beginning to show,'' a United Nations official said.
''People are showing wealth.'' In a country where Government ministers earn less
than $50 a month and lower-level civil servants between $10 and $20,
moonlighting jobs and the small shops or market stands that supplement family
incomes are not sufficient to explain a recent spurt of home-building and
imports of new cars. The Mass Culture Comes From Thailand The flood of Thai
goods, and even more the far-reaching penetration of Laos by Thai television and
the pop culture that it transmits, have gone a long way to undo the puritanical
Communist ways that Laos sought to install when the revolution was young. Tight
jeans, which 15 years ago were cause enough to deport young people to harsh
labor camps, raise no eyebrows. The state has allowed restaurants that it owns
to be turned into discos.

The prevalence of Thai pop music, posters of Thai pop stars and similar signs of
an energetic mass culture spreading across its borders have aroused unhappiness
among educated Laotians. A Foreign Ministry official angrily insisted in a hotel
bar that the waitress replace a tape of Thai music with Laotian songs.

Mr. Kaysone said in the interview that the danger of Thai economic dominance
''creates many difficulties for us.'' He did not elaborate on the theme.

Speaking of the attitude of Laotians in general, a long-serving Western
Ambassador said, ''They would rather be robbed blind by the Thais than be a
colony of Vietnam.''

While Mr. Kaysone and other leaders interviewed affirmed that Vietnam, which
played a dominant role in achieving the Communist victory here, continues to
hold a special relationship, Vietnam's own economic and political difficulties
have clearly diminished its former role of tutellary power. The 50,000
Vietnamese troops stationed here since 1975 were withdrawn by 1987, the
Government asserts.

Vietnam's role as this frail country's ''senior partner,'' succeeding the United
States, which followed France, seems to have been assumed by a flourishing
international and bilateral aid community. The number of United Nations
agencies, national assistance projects - particularly Swedish, Japanese and
Australian - and private relief groups like the American Quakers and Mennonites
surpass, in the view of some of their representatives, this Government's
absorptive capacities.

''Laos is 'in,' '' said a visiting official of an international lending
institution. Diplomats and international officials fear that such pressure will
keep Laos from standing on its own feet. ''In the early 1980's there was a
greater feeling of a striving for self-reliance,'' a senior aid representative
said.

A Communist Ambassador estimated that Laos received about $130 million yearly in
foreign aid, of which $50 million comes from the Soviet Union. Most goes into
infrastructure projects in a country that lacks above all roads, transport and
communications. Consequently, little immediate effect is felt by the large rural
population, the vast majority in a country of less than four million people.

Basic Services Seen as Neglected Laotians and international officials said basic
human services, especially public health and education, were grossly neglected.
Many exist on paper only. A United Nations official who travels widely said most
of the village schools he sees in the mountain regions are unused, deteriorating
buildings. Low pay, often many months in arrears, obliges teachers to find other
ways of earning a living.

In the painfully underequipped province hospital of Savannakhet, the country's
second-largest town, the chief physician, Dr. Siheng Sayasene, said firmly that
patients were dying for lack of equipment and medicine. Furthermore, the limited
number of medical personnel in the country, as well as transport difficulties,
are thought to keep the majority of those requiring treatment from receiving it.

At a large party on Saturday night, at which President Phoumi was the guest of
honor to celebrate the birthday of a wealthy businessman from the pre-Communist
regime, a former Government official commented sadly that the gathering seemed
to sum up Laos today.

Once again, the official said, the political and business elites live privileged
lives, irrespective of what separated them in the past, and the bulk of the
Laotian people stand outside looking in.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Laos continues to profess Communist dogma, but has openly
returned to capitalist economics. A woman in Vientiane sells packages of
toothpicks, one of the country's few manufactured exports. (The New York
Times/Henry Kamm); Prime Minister Kaysone Phomvihane said the realities of an
underdeveloped country have postponed pursuit of socialist goals. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART OF WAR;
Other Times, Other Customs

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 167 words


To the Editor:

Roberta Smith's instructive survey of art of the Vietnam War might be extended
to include a comparison of art about other American wars.

A telling example is the work of the late Mitchell Jamieson, a combat artist for
the Navy in World War II who went to Vietnam (at his own expense) to depict the
fighting there.

At a Corcoran Gallery exhibit more than a decade ago the products of Jamieson's
two tours were shown side by side. In the early 1940's the mood heralded
victory. In the late 1960's, as the Times survey suggests, the art might have
illustrated hell.

To appreciate how the meaning of war may depend upon the times, we can compare
Laurence Olivier's ''Henry V'' (1944), filmed in the sunlight of wartime
patriotism, with Kenneth Branagh's current version, shot in unrelieved rain and
mud.

What is unusual about Jamieson's art is that it is the same artist who portrays
World War II so heroically and Vietnam so painfully.

CHARLES A. MILLER
New Market, Va.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

About New York;
For Paraplegic, Acting in a Film Is the Easy Part

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 785 words


Kenneth Osborne has known grave disappointment. When he was 19 years old and a
carefree college football player, his spine was severed in a car crash, leaving
him paralyzed from the chest down. It was hell to adjust. But he did. ''That
took some serious time,'' Mr. Osborne said.

Now 31, he has also known joys. One was appearing in the new film ''Born on the
Fourth of July,'' the first time he was ever in a movie. He had a small role as
a paraplegic Vietnam veteran. ''I was elated to be part of it,'' Mr. Osborne
said of a film praised for its portrayal of the disabled.

On Dec. 29, Mr. Osborne went to see the film with his wife, Tracy, and a friend,
Shelly Hall, at the Cineplex Odeon Ziegfeld Theater at 141 West 54th Street in
Manhattan. The Ziegfeld was one of five North American theaters showing the film
during its first two weeks of distribution. Yesterday it opened in 1,300 more
theaters, including seven in New York City.

Mr. Osborne, who lives in Willits, Calif., hadn't seen the film. Since he and
Tracy were visiting his parents in Sparta, N.J., they seized the opportunity to
have lunch in Manhattan and catch the 1 P.M. showing. They waited in line for 40
minutes in cold weather.

A theater employee was kind enough to open a side door with a ramp for
wheelchairs. Mr. Osborne and Ms. Hall waited inside while Mrs. Osborne bought
tickets. Then came the unpleasant surprise. First were four steps, then a choice
between 25 more steps or an escalator. The escalator is too narrow for a
wheelchair. Mr. Osborne is large - 6 feet 5 inches tall -and there was no way
the women could carry him up.

''It was absolutely impossible for me to get in,'' Mr. Osborne said. ''We were,
like, flabbergasted.''

Normally, Mr. Osborne calls ahead to check if a place is wheelchair accessible.
But because of the movie's focus on the challenges the disabled face, he assumed
there were would be no problems. He reasoned that when the movie was distributed
widely, there would of course be many theaters that were inaccessible.

But the first five? No chance.

The paradox here is obvious. The movie is based on the 1976 autobiography of Ron
Kovic, a veteran who returned from Vietnam paralyzed from the waist down. ''No
other Vietnam movie has so mercilessly evoked the casual, careless horrors of
the paraplegic's therapy,'' Vincent Canby wrote in his review in this newspaper.

Mr. Osborne's role is identified in the credits as Paraplegic 2, who, along with
another, protests against the war at the 1972 Republican convention at the side
of the Kovic character, played by Tom Cruise. Mr. Osborne is the one wearing
glasses. There is a lot of screaming. Acting subtleties aren't required. ''I'm
not an actor, man,'' Mr. Osborne said. ''I'm just a disabled guy.'' Mr. Osborne
moved to California last July, partly because more places are accessible there.
He devotes himself to ecological causes. In New Jersey, he worked as a volunteer
on issues involving the handicapped.

The question might thus arise as to whether he staged the visit to New York City
to highlight what disabled people face, especially considering that he called
this newspaper to report the situation at the Ziegfeld. He insisted that he just
wanted to see the film. ''This was the furthest thing from my mind - that the
theater would be inaccessible,'' he said.

Other disabled people knew of the picture and resented its being shown in a
theater inaccessible to them, said Carol Ann Roberson, director of the Mayor's
Office for the Handicapped. ''I've wanted to see the movie, but knew that I
couldn't because the Ziegfeld is not accessible,'' Ms. Roberson, a quadriplegic,
said. ''The whole disabled community would have liked to get in there and see
that film. It's outrageous.''

It must be stated that the Ziegfeld is not a lawbreaker. A city statute enacted
in 1987 required that any renovation of a building must make it accessible to
the disabled, but the last renovation to the theater was before then.

Universal Pictures, the film's distributor, had no comment on how or why the
Ziegfeld was chosen, and referred questions to Cineplex Odeon in Toronto.
Jo-Mira Clodman, a Cineplex spokeswoman, said that the decision was made jointly
by the two companies, adding that several New York theaters that started to show
the movie yesterday are accessible.

''Essentially, we're sorry that this situation arose,'' she said.

Mr. Osborne remains bitter. He remembers all the questions Mr. Cruise asked him
about being crippled while they were making the film in Dallas. He suspects that
the actor, as a result, did a good job. ''But he gets up and walks away,'' Mr.
Osborne said. ''We don't. That's the bottom line.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 11, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE U.S. AND PANAMA;
Doubt Raised on Noriega Prosecutor

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1314 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Jan. 10


When Dexter Lehtinen took charge of the United States Attorney's office here 18
months ago he pictured himself as a battlefield commander. At one meeting he
waved a replica of a Russian-made AK-47 assault rifle and circulated a
two-sentence message: ''No Guts. No Glory.''

The militaristic tone of the decorated Vietnam War veteran stunned some of Mr.
Lehtinen's staff members. Others said it was the mark of a determined
no-nonsense leader with perhaps a sense of theater.

Now, Mr. Lehtinen (pronounced LAY-teh-nin), a 43-year-old former Florida state
legislator who is widely regarded as brilliant but erratic with an explosive
temper, is preparing to try the case of Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, the fallen
Panamanian leader.

But already some people in the Justice Department are raising concern as to
whether Mr. Lehtinen, who colleagues say has not tried a case in years, will
continue to handle a trial of monumental importance to the Bush Administration,
laced with political and national security ramifications.

Discussions on Trial Team

Asked today about those concerns, David Runkel, the chief spokesman for the
Justice Department, refused to confirm that Mr. Lehtinen would remain in charge
of the case that he has led since General Noriega surrendered at the Vatican
Embassy in Panama a week ago and was flown to Florida by the United States
authorities.

''There have been and there will continue to be discussions between the U.S.
Attorney's office and the criminal division and people in Washington to insure
that we have the strongest prosectuion team available to us,'' Mr. Runkel said.

Mr. Lehtinen, who graduated first in his law school class at Stanford University
in 1975, was chosen United States Attorney in Miami in June 1988 by Edwin Meese
3d, President Ronald Reagan's Attorney General. A former Associate Attorney
General, Frank Keating, told The Miami Herald last November that Mr. Lehtinen
''appeared to be the brightest, toughest, meanest scrapper we could find.''

He was to have been formally nominated by Mr. Bush and then confirmed by the
Senate, Justice Department officials said. That will happen eventually, the
officials say. But in the meantime he is serving on the basis of an indefinite
appointment by the judges of the Southern District of Florida. And, Mr. Runkel
said, ''He has all the rights and privileges of a U.S. Attorney.''

'Like to Knock Him Out'

Samuel I. Burstyn, the lawyer for one of General Noriega's co-defendants, Lieut.
Col. Luis del Cid, filed a motion today challenging the right of Mr. Lehtinen to
prosecute the case because he has yet to be confirmed by the Senate.

''We'd like to knock him out because he is a tough attorney who has tremendous
local jury appeal,'' Mr. Burstyn said. ''It would certainly benefit us to have a
lesser attorney take over.''

Diane B. Cossin, a spokeswoman for Mr. Lehtinen, would not directly respond to
the motion, but said, ''Any response to any motion filed by defense counsel will
be done in the proper legal manner.''

Whether the Administration will chose to formally nominate Mr. Lehtinen and
obtain Senate endorsement in the midst of preparation for the Noriega case was
not clear.

A Choice of Jobs Reported

One Justice Department spokesman, Douglas Tillett, said he could not confirm
reports that the Justice Department was considering giving Mr. Lehtinen a choice
of prosecuting General Noriega, which is expected to take more than a year, or
to continue to run the United States Attorney's office in Miami, one of the
largest and busiest Federal prosecutor's offices in the country.

Asked if Mr. Lehtinen was ''a loose cannon or an Administration missile in the
Noriega case,'' Mr. Runkel resplied, ''No comment.''

Mr. Lehtinen has been the only prosecution lawyer to address the court in the
two appearances that General Noriega has made before Federal District Judge
William M. Hoeveler. Mr. Lehtinen's office has indicated that he inteneded to
lead the prosecution to the end.

Today, Ms. Cossin said that no one in her office had ever made that assertion.
Mr. Lehtinen, who had previously been quick to call news conferences, has
refused all requests for interviews since Mr. Noriega arrived in Miami, another
aide said this afternoon.

In response to a question about Mr. Lehtinen's role in the case, Ms. Cossin
offered no specifics. She said, ''In all cases the United States Attorney
assumes the responsibility for structuring litigation to best utilize our
resources and investigative material.''

As for reports about an explosive temper, which some lawyers say sometimes
manifests itself in shouting at subordinates and throwing ball point pens and
paper, Ms. Cossin said: ''Speculation about the United States Attorney is
something we deal with on a day-to-day basis. But the people of South Florida
have enormous confidence in his abilities. The public does not want a weak
leader. In other words, they do not want a wimp.''

Serious Questions Raised

Some lawyers in Miami said they believed Mr. Lehtinen's lack of trial experience
raised serious questions about his ability to prosecute General Noriega.

After graduation from Law school, Mr. Lehtinen served about three years as a
Federal prosecutor in California and Florida. He resigned in 1978 to run for the
State Legislature. He was unsuccessful then but won a seat two years later and
servied until 1988 when he resigned from the Senate to become the United States
Attorney. He was in private practice while serving in the Legislature.

Mr. Lehtinen's wife is Representive Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, Republican of Florida.

Jeffrey Weiner, a defense lawyer who regards himself as a civil libertarian and
has debated Mr. Lehtinen, had this to say of the United States Attorney: ''I
think he'll try the case very competently and in a responsible fashion. He will
have assistants with him which, of course, are absolutely necessary in a case
like Noriega. Both sides should have many lawyers on their teams.''

Charles V. Senatore, who left the United States Attorney's office three months
after Mr. Lehtinen's arrival to become a partner in a Miami firm, said, ''Dexter
is a bright man and very savvy.''

''Besides his own gifts, he has Myles Malman, his chief assistant, who has a lot
of experience, and I think that, between them, they'll do just fine,'' Mr.
Senatore said.

At the University of Miami, where he graduated Magna Cum Laude with a major in
Government in 1968, Mr. Lehtinen was commander of the Army Reserve Officers
Training Corps. He deferred taking his commission as a lieutenant for a year to
get the first of two master's degrees from Columbia University.

As an Army officer, he completed paratroop and Ranger training and served in
West Germany and Vietnam. After seven months in Vietnam he was wounded as
shrapnel shattered his face, leaving him permanently disfigured and with little
vision in his right eye.

He is now a detachment commander in a Special Forces unit of the Army reserves.

Raid Brings Criticism

After recovering from his wounds Mr. Lehtinen returned to Columbia University
and then went on to Stanford.

Last May Mr. Lehtinen was widely criticized for ordering a raid in which Federal
agents kicked in the door of the apartment of Ramon Cernuda, the director of the
Cuban Museum of Arts and Culture here, on suspicion that he had bought paintings
for his personal collection from artists in Cuba in violation of Federal
Treasury Department provisions that prohibit trade with the island.

Mr. Cernuda argued that he had purchased all his Cuban paintings from galleries
and individuals in the United States and said he believed the raid was a
political ploy to help Mr. Lehtinen's wife gain support from conservative Cuban
exiles in her successful bid for the House seat. Federal District Judge Kenneth
Ryskamp dismissed the case.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: United States Attorney Dexter Lehtinen, who is preparing to try
Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega. (AP)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Plan for Interim U.N. Rule in Cambodia Gains

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 685 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Jan. 13


On the eve of a new international effort to end the war in Cambodia, the United
States, the Soviet Union, China, France and Britain appear close to endorsing a
plan to install a temporary United Nations administration in Phnom Penh until
free elections can be organized.

But the warring parties in Cambodia are still at odds over their participation
in the interim government and over which of them might represent the country at
the United Nations in the transition period, diplomats said.

Cambodia's seat at the United Nations has been occupied since 1979 by an
opposition coalition that includes the Khmer Rouge, which ruled the country from
1975 to 1979 and presided over a brutal restructuring of society in which more
than a million people were killed. The Hanoi-backed Government in Phnom Penh has
demanded that the seat be vacated while the United Nations runs the country.

The plan to assign the United Nations major responsibility for both
administering the government and keeping the peace in Cambodia is expected to
dominate a two-day closed-door meeting of the five permanent members of the
United Nations Security Council that begins here on Monday.

The meeting, the first of its kind since an unsuccessful 19-nation peace
conference on Cambodia here in August, comes as intensified fighting is being
reported in Cambodia after a major attack by Khmer Rouge guerrillas on
Battambang, the country's second-largest city.

On Saturday, The Associated Press quoted the Khmer Rouge radio as saying the
Phnom Penh Government had declared a state of emergency and ordered a nighttime
curfew in three western provinces in the area of Battambang. There was no
independent confirmation of the guerrilla claim. Son Sann, prime minister of the
opposition coalition and leader of its smallest faction, said here on Friday
that he was hopeful that the five-power meeting would approve United Nations
involvement and reconvene the peace conference to work out details.

The plan for a United Nations role has been promoted in recent months by
Australia. Meetings have taken place in China, Cambodia, Thailand, France and
the United States in recent days to prepare for Monday's session.

The plan is broadly supported by the United States, the Soviet Union, France and
Britain, with some doubt remaining over China's position because of its previous
backing of a Khmer Rouge call for an interim government comprising only the four
warring parties. The idea was rejected by Phnom Penh. After a visit to Beijing
on Friday, however, a Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Igor A. Rogachev, was
quoted by Reuters as saying China now agreed that the United Nations should help
bring peace to Cambodia.

Since the Khmer Rouge were driven out of power by Vietnamese troops, China has
been the principal supplier of arms to the Cambodian opposition. The opposition
includes followers of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who was ousted in 1970 and now
lives in Beijing, as well as the Khmer Rouge and supporters of Mr. Son Sann.

Vietnam announced the completion of its withdrawal from Cambodia in September,
and the guerrillas have continued fighting what they call the puppet regime in
Phnom Penh, which is led by Prime Minister Hun Sen.

Diplomats said that even if the five powers agree to an enhanced United Nations
role in Cambodia, major problems would remain, including the disagreement over
the United Nations seat, the complexity of organizing free elections in a
war-torn country and the difficulties of securing a cease-fire and moving toward
disarmament.

In addition, they said, there is the question whether all four groups will be
given jobs in the temporary government. ''Hun Sen has always refused to have any
dealings with the Khmer Rouge,'' a Western diplomat said.

Nonetheless, the diplomats added, at a meeting with a special Australian envoy,
Michael Costello, in Cambodia last week, Mr. Hun Sen and Vietnam's Foreign
Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, said their Governments would be willing to attend a
new peace conference to discuss ''a variety of possible options'' for a United
Nations administration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

'Fourth of July' Unfair to Syracuse Police, Some Residents Say

BYLINE: By NICK RAVO

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 455 words


A group of Syracuse residents led by a State Senator and former anti-war
protester yesterday criticized the recently released film ''Born on the Fourth
of July'' for what they say is an unfair and inaccurate depiction of their city
police.

State Senator Nancy Larraine Hoffmann, a Democrat, said the Universal Pictures
film portrays the city's police officers as ''faceless people brutalizing
peaceful protesters'' during a 1970 student strike at Syracuse University
following the United States invasion of Cambodia.

''Imagine if you were a Syracuse police officer sitting in the audience watching
that film,'' she said. ''Police officers do not enjoy being called 'pigs.' ''

Ms. Hoffmann said that the strike, in which she took part, was never disrupted
by the police. She said the police showed remarkable restraint and sensitivity.

'The Police Understood'

''There was no use of force,'' she said. ''The police understood the
significance of the demonstration, and their right to demonstrate. And they did
not remove barricades. And they allowed the students to take over the university
buildings.''

Bernard L. Busch, the president of the Syracuse Police Retirees Association and
a member of the police department during the strike, said, ''We were never even
called on campus.''

A spokeswoman for the film, Andrea Jaffe, said she did not believe that the
police-student clash in the film was meant to depict the Syracuse strike. She
said she would have no further comment.

In the film, the high school sweetheart of the protagonist attends Syracuse
University and is a leader of the anti-war movement there. Mr. Busch said that
the police in the movie wear Syracuse Police Department shoulder patches.

'Misrepresenting a Real Incident'

''Young people today are seeing the film and coming up to policemen and saying,
'I thought you were an upstanding member of the community - I didn't know
policemen did things like that,' '' Mr. Busch said.

Ms. Hoffmann said that mixing a depiction of the Syracuse strike with fictional
violence slanders the city's police department. ''I don't think maligning a
particular police department and misrepresenting a real incident is acceptable
in artistic license,'' she said.

Both the Senator and the city's police department said they are considering
legal action against Universal. The film was directed by Oliver Stone and based
on Ron Kovic's book about his childhood on Long Island; his Vietnam War
experience, which left him a paraplegic, and his subsequent change of views on
the war.

''The irony is that in showing with sensitivity the injustices suffered by
Vietnam War veterans, it is equally insensitive in stereotyping police
officers,'' Ms. Hoffmann said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART OF WAR;
No Longer A Celebration

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 414 words


To the Editor:

With regard to the interesting issue Roberta Smith raises about the relative
lack of Vietnam War imagery until recently [''In the Galleries, a Delayed-Action
Explosion,'' Jan. 21], may I suggest that this should not be surprising. War as
a subject of painting and sculpture has traditionally been celebratory. One of
the earliest works in the art-historical canon is the panel from the Sumerian
Standard of Ur (c. 2700 B.C.), celebrating a victorious ruler's exploits.
Throughout history, ancient pharaohs, Roman emperors, medieval kings,
Renaissance and Baroque period rulers have commissioned works to celebrate their
victories.

In the 19th century, Goya's ''Shootings of May 3d'' was subsidized by the
Regency Council, when the artist proposed the subject ''to commemorate with my
brush the exploits, the most remarkable and heroic episodes of our glorious
insurrection against the tyrant of Europe.'' In American art, John Trumbull's
eight Revolutionary War paintings, including ''The Declaration of
Independence,'' celebrated the birth of the United States: of these, four were
eventually commissioned to be copied for the United States Capitol rotunda, and
it is significant that only two deal directly with the war, and depict not
scenes of battle but of victory, when the British surrendered at Saratoga and
Yorktown.

There was nothing about the Vietnam War for artists to celebrate, to say the
least.

With a very few exceptions, it was only in graphic art that war's carnage was
depicted, as in Jacques Callot's 17th-century engravings ''The Miseries of
War,'' or in Goya's etchings ''The Disasters of War.'' Scenes of war's horror
were not considered appropriate by the art academies that created the esthetic
mind-set of Western culture. Even Delacroix avoided blood in his ''Massacre at
Chios,'' and minimized death in ''Greece Expiring on the Ruins of Missolonghi''
and ''Liberty Leading the People.'' It must be kept in mind that appropriateness
is to this day a burning issue in art, as shown in the Mapplethorpe conflict.

In recent years painting and sculpture have moved closer to photography, film
and the graphic arts. Free of the constraints of traditional esthetics to
celebrate war, visual artists are now able to represent its infernal horror. I
believe that this accounts for the present emergence of war iamgery in serious
art.

IRMA B. JAFFE
New York

The writer is a professor emeritus of art history at Fordham University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Lieut. Gen. James Gavin, 82, Dies; Champion and Critic of Military

BYLINE: By GLENN FOWLER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 38, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 932 words


Lieut. Gen. James M. Gavin, a World War II commander who went on to become a top
Army administrator, a diplomat and a leading management consultant, died of
complications from Parkinson's disease on Friday at the Keswick Nursing Home in
Baltimore. He was 82 years old and had homes in Wianno, Mass., and Winter Park,
Fla.

When he retired abruptly from the service in 1958 after a dispute with the
Pentagon over what he considered a diminished role for the Army in missile
development, General Gavin was, at 51, the military's youngest general officer
of three-star rank.

James Maurice Gavin was a native of Brooklyn who was orphaned in childhood and
reared by adoptive parents in the coal country of Pennsylvania. He left school
after the eighth grade and worked at odd jobs until he joined the Army at 17.

Setting his sights on West Point, the young private took after-hours courses to
gain a high-school education and passed a competitive examination to win
appointment to the United States Military Academy.

War and Rapid Advancement

He was commissioned a second lieutenant in 1929 and was a captain when World War
II broke out. His military career was meteoric. He quickly became a paratrooper
and had risen to the rank of colonel by the time he commanded the parachute
combat team that spearheaded the invasion of Sicily in 1943.

A year later, when he landed at Normandy on D-Day, he was a brigadier general
and assistant commander of the 82d Airborne Division. He was soon given command
of the division and after leading the paratroop assault on Nijmegen, the
Netherlands, he was promoted to major general.

He was a ''hands-on'' commander who was constantly on the go. At the front, he
made a point of talking to soldiers of all ranks and questioning them closely on
their roles. He developed the habit, to which he clung the rest of his life, of
rising at 4 A.M. and starting his work day shortly afterward.

General Gavin's postwar assignments advanced him characteristically swiftly, and
by 1955 he had become the Army's chief of research and development. He was an
articulate, even zealous advocate of a strong military force adapted to mobile
warfare.

The Rise of the Helicopter

As such, he was instrumental in developing the helicopter-borne forces that were
to play a large role in the Vietnam War.

He was also the leader of a group of Army commanders who persuaded the Pentagon
to let that service develop long-range missiles, a mission that the Army later
lost to the Air Force and the Navy, though it retained control over tactical
missiles for the battlefield.

General Gavin was often at odds with the Administration of his former commander,
Dwight D. Eisenhower. He felt that conventional armed forces were being
neglected by excessive reliance on nuclear weapons as a deterrent to war.

Critical of the Joint Chiefs

He was also critical of the role played by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, urging
that it be limited to a planning role and that operations be directed by a
completely integrated ''unified command staff'' that would ease rather than
aggravate interservice rivalries.

Despite his attacks, General Gavin was marked for promotion to four-star rank.
But in 1958, on the eve of that promotion and assignment as commander of the
Seventh Army in Europe, he submitted his resignation, saying, ''I won't
compromise my principles, and I won't go along with the Pentagon system.''

In retirement, he became a vice president of Arthur D. Little Inc., the
industrial research and consulting concern based in Cambridge, Mass. He served
with Little until he retired as chairman in 1977, but he was never far from the
world military and political affairs in those years.

Ambassadorship and Vietnam

First he was called upon by President John F. Kennedy to serve as Ambassador to
France, a post normally reserved for wealthy members of the political party in
power.

And in 1967, he returned from a trip to the Vietnam battlefields convinced that
''we are in a tragedy.'' He argued that American involvement was distracting
attention from what he saw as a need to counter advances by the Soviet Union in
the Middle East, and that negotiatiuons to end the war should be aggressively
pursued.

That position, at loggerheads with that of President Lyndon B. Johnson, led some
influential Republicans to promote him as a dark-horse candidate for President
in 1968, but General Gavin asked his supporters to ''cease all activities'' on
his behalf.

Outspoken on Paper, Too

His outspokenness extended to several books he wrote. ''War and Peace in the
Space Age,'' published in 1958, was a distillation of his views on United States
foreign policy. Among his other books were ''Airborne Warfare'' (1947), ''Crisis
Now'' (1968) and his memoir, ''On to Berlin'' (1978).

General Gavin's decorations for wartime service included the Distinguished
Service Cross with oak leaf cluster, the Silver Cross and the Purple Heart.
France made him a grand officer of the Legion of Honor and gave him a Croix de
Guerre with palm. Britain named him to the Distinguished Service Order.

General Gavin is survived by his wife, the former Jean Emert; five daughters,
Barbara Fauntleroy of New Canaan, Conn., Caroline Gavin of Weston, Conn.,
Patricia Gavin of Towson, Md., Aileen Lewis of Baltimore and Chloe Beatty of
Riverside, Conn.; nine granchilldren and a great-grandson.

A funeral service will be held at 1:30 P.M. Wednesday at West Point. A memorial
service will be held at 2 P.M. Tuesday, March 6, at the Fort Myer Memorial
Chapel in Arlington, Va.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: James M. Gavin (Mary Cross, 1977); James M. Gavin as a Major
General in 1946 with 82d Airborne Division troops at Camp Shanks, N.Y.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Barry in Baltimore.

BYLINE: By Alex Ward; Alex Ward is articles editor of this magazine.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 47, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4508 words


Irv Levinson and Vi Krichinsky grew up on Appleton Street in southwest
Baltimore, where they met more than 50 years ago and, later, were married. Today
they're back for the first time in decades, along with Irv's younger brother
Herb and a few cousins, and they can hardly believe what they see. Lining
Appleton are 1940's vintage Cadillacs, Buicks, Chevrolets and Hudsons. The old
street lights with large bulbs and iron filigree are there, too, and the trees
have been clipped so they look as they did all those years ago.

As Vi poses for a photographer in front of 1725, the brick row house where she
was raised, the woman who now lives there comes out. They are chatting about how
nice the place looks when a voice on a bullhorn cuts them off. ''Quiet!
Everybody quiet, please.'' There's a hush. ''Ready? O.K. Cue the elephants!''
Barry Levinson, Irv and Vi's son the director, is making another movie.

At 47, Levinson fils has memories of Appleton Street, too. He had his first real
haircut in his paternal grandfather's barbershop on the corner, and he remembers
the sign that hung on the front porch of his other grandparents' house. It read:
S. Krichinsky, Paperhanger. He also recalls that when the circus came to town
there was a parade. That's the scene being recreated now, and though there are
the usual movie-location snafus - a truck carrying the lions is lost in New
Jersey, the camels are being obstinate and there's a threat of rain - the
atmosphere is festive.

When a signal is given, children jump up and down on the sidewalk while men in
baggy pants and wide ties and women in seamed stockings, their hair styled in
the way Ann Sheridan wore hers, clap. They're locals. ''Here's an angle you may
want to play up in your story,'' one of them says, seeing the notebook I'm
carrying. There was an ad in the paper for extras ''with Baltimore written all
over their face,'' he tells me. So he wrote ''Baltimore'' on his forehead and
sent in a picture.

Levinson, a bearish, silver-haired figure in jeans, black jacket, a T-shirt from
Obrycki's Crab House and an Orioles cap, consults with Allen Daviau, the
cinematographer, and the camera operator Freddie Cooper, and then watches on a
tape monitor the scene that is being shot. When it's done, he smiles. ''Nice.
Print it.''

''Hey Barry, come over here.'' It's Irv Levinson. ''Say hello to your cousin
Abe.''

That his mother and father are present for the first day of shooting on
Levinson's latest project is fitting. After all, the movie - titled ''Avalon''
and scheduled for release this fall - is really about them and their parents,
who migrated from Eastern Europe in the early years of the century. Levinson
wrote the script, as he did for his two earlier Baltimore films - ''Diner'' in
1982 and ''Tin Men'' in 1987 - dictating scenes to an assistant during a
three-week burst last spring, with a few days off in the middle to accept an
Oscar for his direction of ''Rain Man,'' which was named 1988's best film.

The success of ''Rain Man,'' which has grossed an estimated $500 million, and,
before that, ''Good Morning, Vietnam,'' which has earned about $200 million, has
made Levinson a hot ticket in Tinseltown, where he has lived for more than 20
years. He and Mark Johnson, his producer and partner, now have their own
company, Baltimore Pictures, financed by Tri-Star Pictures, that will be
producing movies by Levinson and others. ''Avalon'' is the first.

His status in Hollywood is something of an anomaly, however, because in this era
of blockbuster, action-adventure extravaganzas, Levinson makes movies in which
extravagant things rarely occur. No gratuitous violence, no car chases, not even
much sex. He remembers years ago showing the script of ''Diner'' to a studio
executive who said, ''It's just a bunch of guys sitting around talking. Where's
the story?'' He shrugs. ''That was the story.''

Indeed, guys sitting around talking is the quintessential Barry Levinson scene.
In ''Tin Men,'' set in the early 60's, four aluminum-siding salesmen arguing
with a waitress over the freshness of their coffee, then take up another touchy
subject. ''I want to tell you something, 'Bonanza' is not an accurate depiction
of the West,'' one of them declares. ''Ever see the show? There's a 50-year-old
father with three 47-year-old sons.''

Even when working in other locales from another writer's script - as he did in
directing ''Young Sherlock Holmes'' and ''The Natural,'' as well as ''Rain Man''
and ''Good Morning, Vietnam'' - Levinson seeks out ''what's real,'' those
smaller moments in life that can, without embellishment, without what he calls
''plot contrivance,'' be compelling and, as often as not, funny. But it's a
sensibility that has been especially well served by his hometown, and that
inevitably keeps bringing him back to Baltimore.

On the day before shooting on ''Avalon'' starts, we are riding to the Tremont
Plaza Hotel in downtown Baltimore, where production headquarters have been set
up on two top floors, and I've just asked Levinson what his new movie is about.

''Five brothers - immigrants, wallpaper hangers, weekend musicians -their
offspring, post-World War II, the rise of television, the move to suburbia, the
closeness of a family and how that family starts to come apart without one
particular thing creating the conflict,'' he says.

As we drive along, he points out a few places of interest: Memorial Stadium,
home of the Orioles, to be replaced in 1992 by a new, bigger ball park; an old
Art Deco movie house that's now a furniture store. Not far away is Forest Park,
the neighborhood where he grew up. Some of the exterior scenes in ''Diner'' were
shot there. So was the one in ''Tin Men'' where two salesmen con a hapless
housewife by pretending to be Life magazine photographers taking pictures for a
before-and-after story on the wonders of aluminum siding. ''Can't mah house be
the after pitcher? . . . Is that possible hons?'' she implores. The Levinsons
used to live in that house.

Avalon, a fictional name, refers to the section of town where his grandparents
first lived, and forever after spoke of with great warmth. It's now an
industrial section and hardly a trace of the old neighborhood remains. (The name
came from a sign Levinson spotted while scouting locations.) So much of the city
has changed, yet for Levinson there is an undiminished clarity about it. ''Some
things may not be here anymore but I see them very specifically in my mind's
eye,'' he says. ''I grew up in the same house with my grandparents, in real life
my mother's parents; in the script they're the father's.''

Sam Krichinsky and his brothers started out as paperhangers. Later some of them
went into other lines of work, as did their sons and sons-in-law, and some
became more successful than others. Irv Levinson opened the first appliance
warehouse store in Baltimore and did very well for himself. In the movie, this
leads to unintended slights, to small hurts and misperceptions and jealousies
that magnify with time. Slowly but inevitably the family's cohesiveness gives
way. It wasn't unusual, Levinson says, that he and his parents lived with his
grandparents. ''It's only in the last 30 or 40 years that the extended family
has come apart,'' he says, ''and I think that a lot of the ills we face as a
society today are directly attributable to that. Years ago you'd hear people say
you can't do this or that because of the shame of it to your family. You had
someone to answer to. When the extended family broke up, nothing replaced it.
We're just these individual people out there, and nothing is holding the center
together.''

On a morning three weeks later, the crew is at work in the Flite Three studio,
where the film's interior scenes will be shot. A front porch and first floor of
a row house have been constructed, with movable walls to allow for the cameras.

Though most of ''Avalon'' is set in the late 1940's and early 50's, it spans
five decades, beginning in 1914 when Sam Krichinsky steps off the boat from
Russia. The ensemble cast, which Levinson has spent months assembling, includes
Elizabeth Perkins and Aidan Quinn as Ann and Jules Krichinsky, who are based on
Barry's parents; Joan Plowright and the German actor Armin Mueller-Stahl as the
grandparents, and 9-year-old Elijah Wood as Michael - the Barry character.

In the midst of a good deal of bustling about - carpenters are hammering away,
the prop woman is counting out china place settings - Levinson sits quietly,
occasionally chatting with a technician or joking with Elijah Wood, who is
wearing a bow tie that blinks on and off. ''The first few days you go, 'Why is
this man so calm?' '' Elizabeth Perkins says. ''Then you realize it's one of the
things he demands, and he hires certain people for that feeling.''

There is the atmosphere of a reunion here; the set designer Norman Reynolds and
the costume designer Gloria Gresham have worked on previous Levinson movies. Stu
Linder, the editor, has worked on all of them, and so has Mark Johnson, the
producer.

Johnson and Levinson, who first met on the set of Mel Brooks's ''High Anxiety''
in the late 1970's, have been together for almost a decade, since ''Diner,'' and
by now work almost instinctually. It's a rare thing in Hollywood, a
producer-director team. ''The day-to-day stuff he leaves to me; if Barry never
had to go to another preproduction meeting it would be fine with him,'' says
Johnson, a meticulous list-keeper who rarely forgets a detail or lets a movie go
over budget. (''Rain Man'' came in at $2.5 million under.) ''But once he's on
the set he knows exactly what he wants.''

This is Allen Daviau's first movie with Levinson and he seems to be busier than
anyone else. Most directors will shoot a wide shot, or ''master,'' of each
scene, and then film the close-ups. Levinson prefers to use two cameras for
virtually every scene, to shoot the master and the reaction shot simultaneously.
Because the two shots often come from opposite directions, the lighting is
trickier; Daviau has to make certain it works from both angles. He also has to
keep the cameras out of each other's way, particularly difficult on such a
small, intimate set. ''Barry doesn't like to pin his actors down, he'd rather
see what they're going to do,'' explains Daviau, whose cinematography credits
include ''Empire of the Sun'' and ''E.T.'' ''If he gets a good response he
doesn't like to have to reshoot the reaction and perhaps lose that
spontaneity.''

The scene to be shot this day takes place on Thanksgiving 1948. Sam -
Mueller-Stahl - sits in his easy chair, surrounded by children, telling them
stories about his first days in America. It will take the next three days to
shoot the entire Thanksgiving celebration, the scenes building gradually with
more and more people added to them, until, finally, there will be 26 actors,
adult and child, around the family dinner table.

Levinson doesn't care for rehearsals, which he believes inhibit spontaneity. So
there have been no run-throughs. During the first days of shooting, Perkins
says, some of the cast were uneasy about this, ''but the way Barry structured
the shooting schedule we're all getting to know each other's character at the
right time, so there's not this panic of 'Oh, do I know this person?' - it's
just letting things happen as they happen.''

''These actors have been here for a while,'' says Levinson. ''So O.K., now we're
going to have to go and just let all the imperfections of it color the work.
Sometimes they'll do things that are great and sometimes they'll make mistakes,
and the mistakes we'll redo. But you may find that rough edge to things. That's
what I like.''

Levinson is fond of stand-up comics - he had a brief career as one himself - and
he likes to cast them in his movies: Paul Reiser in ''Diner,'' Jackie Gayle in
''Tin Men.'' In ''Avalon'' it's Kevin Pollak, who plays Izzy, Jules's cousin.
''My agent wanted me to go to an acting coach after I got this part,'' Pollak
had told me on the first day of shooting. ''Barry said forget it. He said, 'I
wrote the character of Izzy and you're it. You don't need acting lessons, just
go with your instincts.' ''

Now when I see him waiting to go into makeup, I ask Pollak how it's going. ''He
keeps throwing me things, little things, but they're perfect,'' he says.
''There's a scene where I'm getting into the car with Aidan and our sons to go
to a big Fourth of July celebration. When I'm about to start the car I say to
the kids, 'You guys O.K. back there?'

''It wasn't in the script but I thought I should say something. Barry agreed,
but he said it seems like people show too much concern for their children in
movies and television, more so than in normal life. He suggested I tell them,
'Don't kick the seat.' It's a small moment, but much more real. So the next time
I took it a step further. I said, 'Don't kick the seat.' Then I said, 'If you
kick the seat again, you're walking.' ''

How did you all get to be wallpaper hangers?'' asks one of the children at Sam's
feet. The cameras are rolling. Levinson is watching through a video monitor in
the dining room as the scene unfolds, quietly reciting the dialogue along with
the actors, smiling to himself.

''Who knew what to be?'' Sam answers. ''You make money wallpaper hanging, so you
become wallpaper hangers. But on the weekend, we made music. What music it
was!''

Between takes, Levinson bends over the easy chair to talk with Mueller-Stahl. He
tells him, ''Emphasize 'Who knew what you wanted to be?' with a shrug. 'You make
money wallpaper hanging, so you become wallpaper hangers . . . but on the
weekend, we made music.' And with a sigh almost, 'What music it was!' ''

''He rarely doesn't say anything between takes,'' Elizabeth Perkins says of
Levinson. ''He'll start you out in one place and then gradually move you to
another place in a series of takes. At the same time, not everything is spelled
out for you. He sort of says, well, I want to see what you come up with. And
that makes me feel like an actor, that's what I think I've been hired for.''

During the dinner break I chat briefly with Mueller-Stahl. ''Barry gives you a
lot of freedom as an actor, and he loves to take a risk in his work by
encouraging improvisation,'' he says. ''Many French and German directors, they
are always 'cleaning' their work, saying 'less, less, less.' Barry says 'more,
more, more.' ''

''I never think of myself as a writer,'' Levinson is saying during a Chinese
lunch. ''I've never had this desire to, you know, have people say, 'Hey, he's
one of those writer-directors.' It's simply that there are times when I want to
tell something and then I'll do it, like this movie. But I want to go in and
out, directing movies with a lot of different styles, a lot of different
subjects. I don't like other people directing what I write, but I don't mind
directing something somebody else wrote.''

While ''Rain Man'', with Dustin Hoffman and Tom Cruise, and ''Good Morning,
Vietnam,'' with Robin Williams, were unquestionably vehicles for their stars,
both movies clearly bear Levinson's imprints - quirky casting, arresting music
and a narrative line that never misses a chance to veer off-center.

Levinson came to Ronald Bass's script of ''Rain Man'' after several other
directors had passed. Despite the involvement of Hoffman and Cruise, who were
already signed on, they felt a road movie about an autistic man and the brother
who kidnaps him, would be a turnoff. But shortly after being introduced to
Hoffman by Michael Ovitz, the agent who represents both men, Levinson
enthusiastically took it on. ''I saw real potential there,'' he says. ''I said
to Dustin, 'Let's not be gun-shy and say, well, I don't know if an audience
really wants to deal with an autistic person. Let's go for that.' ''

To Levinson, the plot of any movie is incidental to its characters, and he felt
that the conflict in ''Rain Man'' should grow out of the relationship between
the brothers rather than from their cross-country mishaps, which the script
emphasized. He also believed that there is inherent humor when ''normal'' people
are confronted with any kind of aberrant behavior, and he seized on it. Indeed
Levinson recalls one instance in the movie as pivotal.

It's the scene in which Hoffman, as the autistic Raymond, realizes he is not
wearing any underwear and refuses to let up about it (''I'm definitely not
wearing my underwear. . . . Mine are boxer shorts. I get my boxer shorts at K
mart Cincinnati''). Encouraged by Levinson to improvise, the two actors expanded
the dialogue as if it were a comedy routine; it got funnier with each take.
''Dustin loosened up after that,'' says Levinson, ''and really started to nail
the character.''

For the role of Cruise's girl friend, he chose the Italian actress Valeria
Golino because he thought a foreigner would soften the melodrama built into the
story. ''If an American girl had said, 'Don't you understand, Charlie, you've
kidnapped this man?' it would be too melodramatic,'' Levinson says. ''When a
foreigner says it, it's more . . . peculiar. She could say things that had to
support the story without it's being as dead-on. Also, since this was a movie
about lack of communication it seemed to make sense that everybody was talking
in a different language.''

At one point, Charlie takes Raymond to a small-town doctor for help. ''He's
artistic?'' asks the nurse. In the meantime, an old fellow in the waiting room
talks about the pony express. ''Young man, go west, go west. . . . I love to
tell the story. . . .'' It's a moment, part Mark Twain, part Fellini, that never
could have been planned.

The scene was shot in Oklahoma, and the man was an 89-year-old whose wife warned
that once he started talking it wasn't likely he would soon stop. Levinson was
happy to let the camera run. ''Later, all Barry would say was, 'The old guy sure
liked to talk,' '' recalls Marie Rowe, his assistant and associate producer on
''Avalon''. ''But when I saw the rushes, he just stole the scene.''

In ''Good Morning, Vietnam,'' Robin Williams, as Adrian Cronauer, gives English
classes to a group of Vietnamese. They were actually Thai - the movie was filmed
in Bangkok - but their inability to speak English was genuine. Before shooting,
Rowe would brief them as best she could, and then everybody would stand back and
let Williams work his spell. Those scenes, Williams recalls, ''were total
fume.''

''But the wonderful thing Barry did was use long lenses,'' Williams continues,
''so for the first time I had the freedom of not having the camera right in my
face. He would sneak in a roll and not say anything. He'd just start shooting.
He loves doing that - putting regular people in a situation and just letting
them react. And it works, you don't get that tension of now I'm acting.''

The movie that brought Levinson his first acclaim was ''Diner.'' Before that, he
had co-written with his first wife, the actress Valerie Curtin, a number of
movies, including ''Best Friends,'' ''. . .And Justice for All'' and ''Inside
Moves. '' Even earlier he had helped write, and briefly appeared in, two Mel
Brooks films, ''Silent Movie'' and ''High Anxiety.''

''Diner,'' Levinson's directorial debut, was about his pals from Forest Park
High School, who hung out at Brice's Hilltop Diner in northwest Baltimore,
drinking coffee, eating french fries and gravy, smoking cigarettes and talking
for hours on end - about the Colts, the Orioles, rock-and-roll, gambling and,
most of all, girls.

For years Mel Brooks encouraged Levinson to write the screenplay, after hearing
him recount those days. ''Mel thought some of these stories were very funny,''
Levinson says. ''But I didn't want it to turn into a full-out comedy, it just
wasn't motivating me that way. The trouble was, I had all these things, these
male-oriented stories, the guys and the guys, but I couldn't really make sense
of them.'' Then one day the lightbulb came on and he saw clearly the thread that
tied the anecdotes together - the realization that for all their talk on the
subject, the guys at the diner never did understand women, never even came
close. In the movie, Shrevie, the lone married member in the group, played by
Daniel Stern, berates his wife (Ellen Barkin) for misfiling his records. Another
character, Eddie, is on the brink of marriage, but won't succumb until his
fiancee passes a quiz on the Baltimore Colts. These are not the acts of
liberated men.

''I thought about how we dealt with girls, with dating, with our attitudes, how
difficult it was for us to understand male-female relationships,'' Levinson
says. ''That's what it was really all about.'' ''Diner'' is frequently referred
to as the ultimate male-bonding movie. But, Levinson says, ''Every scene in it
is about women in a way.''

In one representative bit of dialogue, Eddie, played by Steve Guttenberg, admits
to Boogie (Mickey Rourke), that he's never fooled around much. Boogie stares at
his friend. ''You're a virgin, aren't you.'' ''Technically,'' says Eddie.
Levinson's old pal Chip Silverman and I are having dinner at Sabatino's, in
Baltimore's Little Italy. Frank Sinatra eats here whenever he's in town, Chip
tells me. We start with a bookmaker salad. ''The bookies used to come in here
and they always wanted a salad with a little of this and a little of that, so
they named this one after them,'' Silverman says. He tells the waitress to cut
up the salami in the salad, and to serve us the hot peppers on the side. He
sounds like he's right out of ''Diner.''

He is, in real life and in the movie. Levinson gave him a small part as the guy
who sells clothes out of the trunk of his car. Silverman had one scene, and of
course he remembers it vividly. ''We were ready to shoot and Barry says, very
casually, 'O.K. Chip, start talking.' I didn't even realize I had a speaking
part. I said, 'What? What do I say?' And he said, 'Just talk. It should be easy,
you've been doing it all your life.' ''

Levinson and Silverman, who is the special adviser to the Governor of Maryland
for substance-abuse policy, and author of the book ''Diner Guys,'' were
classmates at Forest Park High School, whose former students, in addition to
Spiro T. Agnew and the novelist Leon Uris, include Jay Tarses, creator of the
television comedies ''Buffalo Bill,'' ''The 'Slap' Maxwell Story'' and ''The
Days and Nights of Molly Dodd''; and Ellen Cohen, who later became Cass Elliot
of the Mamas and the Papas.

But it was at Brice's that they really got to know one another, hanging out,
telling stories, listening to the aluminum-siding salesmen who congregated at
one end of the diner when they weren't out separating home owners from their
money. Though the characters in ''Diner'' and ''Tin Men'' were composites, there
really was a Boogie, a Fenwick and a legendary eater named Earl who could
consume in one sitting every dish on the left side of Brice's menu. There was
also an Eddie, Levinson's cousin Eddie Kirk, whose fiancee took a Colts quiz.

''There were some pretty funny people there,'' Silverman recalls of the Brice's
regulars. ''But you never laughed at the other guy's stories, that was a sign of
weakness. We'd sit there biting our lips till they bled.'' Levinson, he says,
was the hardest one of all to make laugh.

After high school, Levinson took a stab at college, two actually, the Community
College of Baltimore and then American University, spent a couple of years as a
floor director at a television station in Washington, and left to try his
fortunes in California. Irv Levinson predicted he would be back working for his
appliance business within a month.

In Los Angeles, Levinson formed an act with a couple of aspiring comedians, Rudy
DeLuca and Craig Nelson. Michael Ovitz saw them on a local television variety
program and hired them for ''The Tim Conway Show.'' Levinson and DeLuca later
wrote for Carol Burnett (receiving two Emmys) and then Mel Brooks, who signed
them to help with the screenplay for ''Silent Movie.''

Brooks liked them enough to give them small parts in the movie, and then used
them again in ''High Anxiety,'' where Levinson played Dennis the bellboy, who
attacks Brooks in the shower with a rolled-up newspaper - a spoof of the classic
murder scene in Hitchcock's ''Psycho.'' (Levinson also reluctantly appeared as a
psychiatrist in ''Rain Man'' when the actor J. T. Walsh had a scheduling
conflict.) ''Barry was a good actor,'' Brooks recalls. ''And he was a very good
character writer. He wrote characters that were self-assured and very positive -
they had sort of a positive ignorance. They were idiots, in fact, they were
absurd, but they acted quite normally. They were just metaphors for society as
he saw it, especially authority figures.''

For a while, Brooks and his writers held their story conferences at Factor's
Famous Deli on Pico Boulevard. Over corned beef sandwiches and seltzer, they'd
spin out their scenes. Laughs from Levinson still didn't come easy. ''He has
this great, unique high-spasmed laugh,'' Brooks says. ''We called it The Insane
Barry Levinson Scream-Laugh. To us, it was a barometer of whether something was
over-the-top funny.''

Brice's Diner is now a package store. Another old haunt, the Crest Movie Theater
across the street, is boarded up. Chip Silverman says the action now is at
Miller's Deli, a couple of miles north on Reisterstown Road. Irv Levinson is
known as the ''Mayor of Miller's,'' even though he and Vi spend much of each
year in Florida.

Barry's life, of course, is largely in California. He and his second wife,
Diana, whom he met in Baltimore while making ''Diner'' (her daughter, Michele,
played the flower girl in Eddie's wedding) have two sons, Sam, 5, and Jack, 2,
and a house in Bel-Air, where Levinson has built a film-editing facility in the
back. Since shooting was completed in Baltimore, he and Stu Linder have been
cutting ''Avalon'' there.

''For me, it's nice,'' he says of his life in Los Angeles. ''I work at the
house, I write here, I edit here,'' he says. ''When I get out, it's to run down
to Westwood in the afternoons to catch a movie. I'm not a big partygoer.''

Last summer, though, he and Diana purchased a house in Annapolis, where they
stayed while he scouted locations in Baltimore for ''Avalon'' and commuted to
New York to cast. They are renovating it now and plan to spend part of each year
there. That way he can keep a closer eye on the Orioles, and, of course, there
will be other Baltimore movies. ''I've got a hundred of them in my head,''
Levinson says.

But the main reason for buying the place, he says, is so his children can see
their cousins and their grandparents. ''What does your dad think of all this?''
I asked one day during shooting. Irv Levinson had just visited the set of an
appliance store modeled after the one he used to own. ''He said, 'You've got the
television sets in the wrong place. They'll never sell unless they're up front.'
''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos: The director, left, in Los Angeles and, above, in Baltimore.
He's holding his son, Jack, and is flanked by his wife, Diana, and their other
son, Sam. In the rear, from left: Patrick, his stepson, and his parents, Irv and
Vi. (MICHAEL O'NEILL); Right: Levinson on the set of ''Avalon,'' his new film
that recreates the Baltimore of his parents and grandparents. (KEVIN HESLIN);

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Two Memoirs of Changes in Journalism

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 998 words



How Many Words Do You Want?
An Insider's Story of Print and Television Journalism
By Leslie Midgley
Illustrated. 344 pages. Birch Lane Press. $19.95.
Right Places, Right Times
Forty Years in Journalism Not Counting My Paper Route
By Hedley Donovan
Illustrated. 463 pages. Henry Holt & Company. $27.95.

The independent memoirs of Leslie Midgley and Hedley Donovan - two seasoned
journalists who played central roles in what people read or saw during the last
half-century - illustrate the great changes that have occurred, not always for
the better, in newspapers, magazines and broadcasting in the United States.

For at the end of his lively and informal autobiography, Mr. Midgley, modestly
calling himself ''an old rewrite man'' - though he was a major producer of news
broadcasts and documentaries for CBS and NBC -concludes that ''news programs
offered to the public through the three large commercial networks are not
getting better in editorial quality, despite dazzling technical advances.''

And in an epilogue, Mr. Donovan, who became Henry Luce's successor as editor in
chief of Time Inc., deplores last year's merger of the magazine empire with
Warner Communications. From his perch in retirement, Mr. Donovan writes: ''And
week by week the 'old' Time Inc. was disappearing, its magazines and books to
become, at best, an important sideline in an entertainment company. Would Time
Inc. journalism still flourish? My constitutional optimism was being sorely
tried.''

Mr. Midgley's career embraced the era of the itinerant journalist who, as the
spirit moved him, could go from town to town or from one newspaper to another in
the same big city to land a job. He makes it all sound like fun. After early
stints as a reporter, makeup editor or rewrite person on papers in Salt Lake
City, Denver, Louisville, Washington and Chicago, one day in 1940 he hopped the
20th Century Limited to New York.

''It seems almost unbelievable now,'' he recalls, ''but when I arrived, nine
newspapers carrying world, national and local news were published in the city.
The Herald Tribune, Times, Daily News and Mirror appeared in the morning and The
Journal-American, World-Telegram, Post, Sun and Brooklyn Eagle in the
afternoon.''

The title of his book, ''How Many Words Do You Want?,'' derives from his first
news story as a rewrite person on The World-Telegram when he displayed his
professionalism to the city editor by asking him: ''How long do you want this
story? And what do you want it to say?'' That didn't mean slanting a story; in
verbal shorthand, it meant the length desired and the points to be covered.

Similar questions guided Mr. Midgley in his 15 years on newspapers, including
The Herald Tribune in New York and Paris, as managing editor of Look magazine,
and in 28 years as an executive producer of the nightly news and of special
broadcasts at CBS and NBC News. Mr. Midgley and Burton Benjamin (author of
''Fair Play,'' another pioneering television memoir) both worked closely with
the correspondents Walter Cronkite, Charles Collingwood, Alexander Kendrick and
Eric Sevareid, all of whom also started out in print.

''How Many Words Do You Want?'' includes portraits of two bizarre friends of the
author, the gangster Frank Costello and the movie mogul Howard Hughes. Both are
far more interesting to read about than the network executives at whom Mr.
Midgley finds it necessary to toss bouquets, impeding his narrative. Otherwise,
he has a way with a good story, especially when recalling his nights holding up
the bar with such writing and drawing pals as John Lardner, Walt Kelly, A. J.
Liebling, Wolcott Gibbs and James Thurber at The Herald Tribune hangout, Jack
Bleeck's Artist & Writers Restaurant.

Hedley Donovan, a onetime Washington Post reporter, joined Fortune magazine as a
writer after World War II and moved up to gain the top editorial post at Time
Inc. between 1964 and 1979. As excerpts from his magazine editorials and memos
to the staff indicate, his polished language, down-the-middle caution and
cheerleader optimism coincided with the American Century philosophy of Henry R.
Luce, the polemicist with missionary zeal who founded the magazines.

''So who elected me?'' the author asks. ''Well, Harry Luce elected me, and he
felt that in a sense God had elected him.''

Mr. Donovan was no old rewrite man; he brought the credentials of a Rhodes
scholar to journalism. His memoir offers a topside view of ''the mysteries of
managing those Time Inc. editorial people, members of a difficult and glorious
breed, the intellectuals.'' He decided to pay intellectuals well: ''I always
felt I had ample resources from the company to reward the deserving.'' The
obverse of the coin, unmentioned by the author, is that many a journalist,
including closet intellectuals, went to Time Inc. more for the lucre than the
Luce.

The most revealing parts of Mr. Donovan's book concern Time and Life's position
on the Vietnam War. At the beginning he (and his magazines) bought and sold the
hawkish domino theory - that if Vietnam fell, a half-dozen other countries in
Southeast Asia would also tumble. He rather brushes off an incident in which
Time's Saigon bureau chief quit because of the magazine's policies, simply
calling the ex-bureau chief ''excitable, not inconsistent with being a good
reporter.''

While visiting Vietnam to see for himself, he once stayed at the American
Ambassador's residence, not exactly an objective observation post in wartime
Saigon. But gradually Mr. Donovan began to turn around. By the time President
Richard M. Nixon and Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger had widened the war
and the casualties had mounted, he was firmly opposed to it and wrote in a Time
essay, ''We must all begin by recapturing some sense of astonishment that the U.
S. is still engaged in this war.''

''Right Places, Right Times'' is notable for Mr. Donovan's modesty and
self-criticism and for some of its tales of Time Inc.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Leslie Midgley and Hedley Donovan

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Correction

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 34 words


An article on Dec. 17 about ''Born on the Fourth of July'' misstated the branch
of the military that Oliver Stone, the film's director, served with during the
Vietnam War. Mr. Stone was in the Army.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: CORRECTION

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 8, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The U.S. and Panama: The Toll;
Deaths of 23 Americans in Panama: Their Dreams Cut Short

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2420 words


Late last month Sheree Nelson Manrique got a strange, hurried telephone call
from her husband, Alejandro, an Army paratrooper. ''Watch the news,'' he said.
''I love you.''

The next morning the news was full of the American military assault on Panama.
And the next she heard of her husband came when two soldiers appeared at her
door to tell her that Alejandro, not yet even an American citizen, had been
killed in action.

Twenty-two other families across the United States received similar news after
the largest American military action since the Vietnam War. Some families knew
their sons were in Panama on assignments and anxiously scanned television
footage for views of their loved one. Some picked up on the anxiety or personal
codes their offspring used in hasty phone conversations before the flight into
that final battle, which for most was also the first.

Still others, typically relatives of career military men, some of them commandos
frequently absent on clandestine assignments, thought their military men were
thousands of miles away from the fighting, for once.

The Connors family of Arlington, Mass., thought their son John, a naval
commando, was safe and sound in a Washington hospital bed recovering from an
unusual skin infection until they were informed his body would be returning soon
from a Panamanian airfield where a .50-caliber machine gun had cut him down.

But who were the private men behind these public deaths on foreign soil? What,
if anything, did they have in common? What do these families think of the entire
operation, now that one of the prime objectives, the capture of the Panamanian
leader Manuel Antonio Noriega, has been accomplished? did these men from
different backgrounds in 16 states end up in a country not quite the size of
South Carolina?

They died in the deadly chaos of battle - in a grenade explosion, like Sgt.
Michael DeBlois, a radio operator; while sitting in a machine gun turret, like
Cpl. Ivan Perez of Pawtucket, R.I.; walking through a door, like Cpl. Garreth
Isaak, a native of Greenville, S.C., who was the first American killed in
Panama, or in a helicopter, like Chief Warrant Officer Wilson B. Owens of Myrtle
Beach., S.C., and First Lieut. John Hunter of Libby, Mont.

The Attractions
Drawn to the Challenge Of Military Life

From scores of interviews with friends, teachers and members of most every
stricken family in recent days since the funerals, some striking patterns
emerge.

These young men - the youngest was 18, the oldest 32 - were all volunteers,
largely drawn to the military by the excitement, challenges and organization
they saw there, by its competitive, combative and physical life and by a rigid
patriotism often spawned by relatives who themselves were veterans. Sergeant
DeBlois had two brothers in the military. Pfc. Jerry Daves had been in the
Reserve Officers Training Corps in high school.

Several victims were fleeing troubled early lives, either divided homes or
teen-age troubles, and seeking opportunities for travel, training and education
beyond their smaller communities. Some simply had no better place to go than the
military at this point in their short lives.

A few were young and inexperienced soldiers, barely a few months out of high
school and only weeks out of basic training. Pvt. James Markwell, a medic and
native of Cincinnati, had been in the Army about 10 months. For Pvt. James A.
Tabor, a paratrooper, his leap out the airplane door into real-life combat in
the midnight darkness over Panama was but the seventh jump he had ever made.
After each of the first six he telephoned his mother full of excitement.

The Past
Cars and Girlfriends Are Left Behind

These young men left at home favored cars, fiancees and girlfriends, closets of
clothes, walls of photographs and posters of football and rock heroes, dressers
of high school trophies and brothers and sisters who have fallen into
uncharacteristic silences in recent days.

The men also left pets, including one cat named Michelob, to be cared for by
parents who did not understand all the military terms that suddenly filled their
sons' conversations.

But all these parents were delighted with their offspring's unaccustomed
enthusiasm for their work in the military that had somehow given form and
meaning to their lives.

Other casualties were newlyweds, or about to be. Specialist Phillip Lear from
Westminster, S.C., was engaged. And in at least two cases, the new widows are
also about to become single parents. One new widow, Patricia McFaul, went into
labor six days after her husband's funeral; now she has a baby girl. Another new
wife, Kimberly Gibbs, scolded her husband for peeking early at the Christmas
presents she sent him at his Panama base.

Today she is glad he did. Death came before Christmas, too.

One mother got a letter from her dead son, days after his funeral. ''If you're
reading this letter,'' said Roy Dennis Brown Jr., ''then you already know that I
am dead.''

''Whatever happened,'' the infantryman added, ''there was a reason. Tell
everybody in the family and my friends that my death was for a good cause.''

Private Brown's death brought his parents, Roy and Julie, together for the first
time in many years since their divorce 17 years ago. Their son, blond and
blue-eyed, was into surfing, girl watching at the beach and music, but not so
much the classes at Magnolia High in Anaheim, Calif.

''School was a struggle,'' his mother said. ''Band was his real love.'' The
trombone was his instrument. ''He wanted to go to college eventually,'' said
John Hausey, his band director. ''He was using the military as a means to an
end. Unfortunately, it became the end.''

The Army, which he entered in October 1988, seemed to give shape to his life. He
began talking about a college degree so that he could become a Ranger helicopter
pilot. And after many years of silence he re-established contact with his
father.

''Roy was really against drugs,'' his mother said. ''He would have felt that
going to oust Noriega was the right thing to do. His life was not sacrificed in
vain. It was for a major cause.''

For 20-year-old Kenneth D. Scott, the product of a broken and often violent home
in Princeton, W.Va., the Army was his family, especially after his sister was
killed by her husband. ''This place held nothing but bad things for him,'' said
Darrell Henderson, a cousin. ''The Army was the easiest way to get away.''

James Tabor Jr. fell in love with the Army as a high school sophomore in
Montrose, Colo. An idolized uncle had been a paratrooper. ''He wanted to do it
so badly,'' recalled his mother, Norma Tabor. ''That's all he talked about the
rest of high school.''

Eighteen months ago he enlisted on the delayed entry program and left for
training in May 1989, immediately after graduation. ''I didn't worry about him
so much as a soldier,'' his mother said, ''as I did his jumping out of
airplanes. But he was so happy and so excited.''

She last saw him in October when he came home to go elk hunting with his father.
''I have three sons and, uh, well, I had three sons, and Jimmy was trying to
talk the others into joining, too,'' she said. Someday he planned to go into
drug enforcement.

The family does not know how Jim died. ''In a convoy or something,'' his mother
said. She noticed that he matured in those few months in the Army. Last fall he
wrote a younger brother, Jeff, and apologized ''for being such a jerk to you
sometimes. Please forgive me.''

''We buried him next to his grandfather,'' Mrs. Tabor added. ''They were very
close in life, too. But that was a week ago. And I still feel so empty.''

She did want to correct something about her oldest son, who would have been 19
last Saturday. ''They keep saying he was 5 foot 8,'' she said. ''But he was
really 5 foot 9. Print that for me.''

The Goals
For Some, a Way To Get Away

Martin (Doug) Denson, who was 21 and a native of Abilene, Tex., also left home
to do some growing up. He told his father, Jerry, a Vietnam veteran, he wanted
to be a police officer eventually but first a soldier, ''one of the first ones''
into a battle.

''I won't say he was even-tempered,'' Mr. Denson recalled. ''He would fight you
if you made him mad. But I'm proud he stood up for what was right. My only
regret is I don't have him anymore.''

Remembering the lack of public support for soldiers in his war, Mr. Denson made
a large cardboard sign with the Airborne emblem on the day of the Panama
invasion and placed it on his lawn. Fifteen minutes later a chaplain arrived
with the news of Doug's death.

Scott Roth, who grew up in Texas and Illinois after his parents divorced and his
mother died of cancer, married a farm girl and his high school sweetheart, Mary
Ziegenhorn. They both enlisted in the Army for the future education benefits and
to travel together.

''He was more like a son than a son-in-law,'' said Donald Ziegenhorn. The
21-year-old had been sent to Panama in August and was scheduled to return in
mid-December. But some weeks ago he told the family he would not be home for
Christmas.

Vance Troy Coats, a physical fitness buff, played war games nonstop as a child,
shooting friends and being shot in pretend battles behind his house in Great
Falls, Mont. ''He always wanted to be in the Army,'' said James Stone, his
stepfather. On Dec. 20 he was killed by a hand grenade.  ''The Army was his
life,'' said Melissa Eitzen, his girlfriend. ''That's all he talked about. He
tried to teach me about weapons. He drew Army scenes and helicopters. But after
he went to Panama that all changed. Then, he just wanted to finish his term and
come back to Great Falls and be a cop.''

''Now,'' Mr. Stone said, ''the only thing we have to do is put a headstone in
place. It's a pretty weird situation. I'm glad they caught Noriega. It would
have seemed fruitless without that.''

After a less than stellar high school career in Modesto, Calif., William Delaney
Gibbs, whose family will always remember him wearing the hat of his beloved St.
Louis Cardinals and riding around on a bicycle, had turned his life around, his
father, Patrick, said.

''He was always cutting classes,'' Mr. Gibbs said. ''I wanted him to go the
college route, but he couldn't settle down and study. He was too antsy.'' He
tried a job at Taco Bell and saw little future in minimum-wage work so he
enlisted and relished basic training, especially the physical conditioning.

''He ate it up,'' his father said. His father warned him about the dangers of
military life. ''He didn't seem real concerned,'' Mr. Gibbs said. ''A young guy
like that never thought it could happen to him.''

His son was posthumously promoted to sergeant. ''It's too bad he didn't get to
know that,'' Mr. Gibbs said. ''He'd been looking forward to it.''

Mrs. Manrique remembers her husband's fascination with the Army ''and the power
of it all.'' An athletic man, he immigrated to the United States five years ago.
''He was amazed at what this country could offer,'' she said. And he hoped to
graduate from college later. ''I plan to remember the fun times,'' she added.

John Mark Price, one of three Price boys in the military from the tiny town of
Conover, Wis., also relished Army life, but had decided to go to law school when
his enlistment expired. ''He was so proud to be a Ranger,'' said his sister,
Ruth Ann. ''But this is not something you get over. It's something you get
through.''

But some victims were career military men, men like Andrew Porter of St. Clair,
Mich., a lifelong flying buff who entered the Army in 1982 with the dream of
becoming a helicopter pilot. ''His Uncle Bill was a B-17 pilot during World War
II,'' said John Porter, Andrew's father. ''Andrew loved to listen to him talk.''
Even as a youngster, he collected recruiting literature on flying. ''But it
never, ever, entered our mind that Andrew would ever see combat,'' his father
said.

Andrew Porter died in the predawn darkness on Dec. 20 when small-arms fire
brought his chopper down into water and it sank. In that same darkness four of
the Navy's elite commandos called SEALS - Donald L. McFaul, Isaac G. Rodriguez,
John P. Connors and Christopher Tilghman - died on Paitilla, a Panamanian
airfield where General Noriega was believed to be keeping his escape plane.

Armed only with light weapons, they unexpectedly encountered 300 Panamanian
Defense Force members with .50-caliber machine guns mounted on armored cars.

''He knew exactly what he was doing,'' said John Sheehan, a family friend of the
Connors. in East Arlington, Mass. ''He made a choice to go to Panama.''

The Memories
The Little Things Mean So Much

Torpedoman's Mate 2d Class Rodriguez was tall, ''a little on the thin side,''
said his mother, Sarita Rodriguez, and fond of drawing. When he returned from
boot camp, family members agreed, he had obviously found what he was looking
for. ''He felt military service was part of being an American,'' Mrs. Rodriguez
said. ''You serve your country.''

Michael McFaul said his brother, an avid cross-country runner at Bend High
School in Oregon, loved the demanding physical activity of a frogman's life but
had recently been anticipating a quieter life closer to home and his new baby.

Before he left for Panama, he secretly set up the nursery.

For 29-year-old Larry R. Barnard, Panama was his second military action after
Grenada, not counting other clandestine Ranger jobs that his family did not
inquire about.

The second of three sons, Sergeant Barnard was the quiet one, preferring to glue
model planes together by himself. ''It didn't seem as if his personality fit,''
recalled his mother Marilyn, a Methodist pastor. ''He had to be tough, yet he
cared deeply for other people. As a young boy, he was always bringing home some
child who had problems.''

He leaves his wife, Tammy, a son and two daughters.

The dead men also left behind a number of minor but treasured memories. Taylor
Tilghman, a Navy and Coast Guard veteran, remembers his son saying, ''Dad, I
would not do anything else.'' Erika Gibbs remembers her son's last powerful hug.

And Private Brown's mother clings to her son's last prescient letter. At the end
he wrote, ''It hurts like hell to know how you'll take it, but live your life to
the fullest and get over my death.''

Then her only child added a postscript; he thanked his mom for the cookies and
asked her to pet his cat.

''See,'' she said, ''he was still a little boy up until the end.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of the 23 Americans killed in Panama (AP; NYT;NYT/Peter Yates;
Honolulu Advertiser)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 11, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Don't Despair of the World the Young Will Build;
Wrong on 60's and 80's

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 392 words


To the Editor:

It's not hard to discern that Christopher Lasch is another frustrated
unfulfilled 1960's protester who agonizes over the economic and political
successes that our country has experienced in the 80's. In speaking of today's
youth he states: ''They do not find it easy to think that things are going to
get any better. The dream of a better world collapsed in the late 60's, and
nothing has taken its place.''

Professor Lasch is wrong on both counts: he doesn't understand today's youth,
and he doesn't understand the 60's. I was a college student from 1966 to 1970,
and I can assure today's youth that the spirit of the 60's was full of hypocrisy
and a false perception of the outside world. Doing drugs was the popular
culture; it was safe to drop acid and get in touch with yourself. Today's youth
would find this shocking, but in the 60's Communism was in.

It was chic to have a copy of Mao Zedong's little red book, and some chanted in
protest ''Ho, Ho, Ho Chi Minh, N.L.F. is going to win.'' They wanted the United
States out of Vietnam, so that peace could come. We got out, and the boat people
let us know what it was like living under ''peaceful'' Communist tyranny. The
youth of the 1960's have come to understand their immature babble, and that's
why they have become the entrepreneurs of the 1980's, and most assuredly today's
youth will follow right in our tracks.

Nor does Professor Lasch portray today's youth accurately. He says: ''they doubt
the existence of the future . . . it is no wonder that young people long ago
ceased to trust their elders.'' Excuse the bluntness, but this tired, unoriginal
language is liberal claptrap.

I have 20 nieces and nephews, 6 have recently graduated from college, another is
in college, and 2 more are in high school. Not one, among them or all their
friends I've met, comes nearly close to the negative social character Professor
Lasch portrays. Indeed, I am struck by how optimistic and, dare it be said,
patriotic these young people are. They even translated Bruce Springsteen's
antiwar, anti-Vietnam ''Born in the U.S.A.'' into a star-spangled patriotic
anthem.

Professor Lasch seems to like malaise and just hopes that the sky will fall.
It's sad, because it won't, and all the joy of life will pass him and his ilk
by.

PAUL ATANASIO
  New York, Dec. 28, 1989

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 13, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
A Politician Indicted By His Associates' Wit

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 910 words



The Lone Star
The Life of John Connally
By James Reston Jr.
Illustrated. 691 pages. Edward Burlingame Book/Harper & Row. $25.

John B. Connally's political life intersected the careers of five American
Presidents: Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon and, to a lesser degree, Ford and Bush. Even
after serving as Secretary of the Navy in the Kennedy Administration, Secretary
of the Treasury in the first Nixon Administration and in between as Governor of
Texas, he proved to be only a 5-gallon figure who couldn't fit his 10-gallon-hat
personality.

The Texas beau ideal and businessman, who had once been entrusted with the
national Treasury, wound up bankrupt in 1988, with $93 million in personal
debts, watching his family's possessions be auctioned off. This humiliation, his
1974 indictment (and eventual acquittal) on bribery charges and questions about
his business associates and campaign funds raised serious doubts about his
financial acumen.

Furthermore, Mr. Connally's public and private remarks, recorded by James Reston
Jr. in his full-scale biography ''The Lone Star,'' revealed authoritarian
tendencies, a tremendous ego and a general lack of sympathy for Americans who
did not inhabit the corporate board rooms he revered.

By the force of its cumulative material, Mr. Reston's book shows Mr. Connally as
a highly intelligent and talented politician who, at the same time, was a
cold-blooded wheeler-dealer, looking out only for No. 1, devoid of allegiance to
the Democratic Party, which had made him.

In 1952, he abandoned the Democrats and campaigned for Dwight D. Eisenhower
against Adlai E. Stevenson for President. Twenty years later, he resigned his
Cabinet post and cast his political fate once again with the Republicans as the
big name behind Democrats for Nixon. Then, after a decent interval of three
months following the death of his mentor, Lyndon B. Johnson, in 1973, he went
all the way and switched to the Republicans. The author notes that Mr. Connally
said at a Houston press conference that the Republican Party was ''his true
philosophical home'' because it ''best expressed the broad views of most
Americans, whatever their official party affiliation.''

In one of the many anecdotal touches that add to the narrative flow - between
the frequent heavy patches of this overlong book - the author describes the
reaction of loyal Democrats to Governor Connally's chameleon character. Frank
Mankiewicz said, ''Connally's switch raises the intelligence level of both
parties.'' Liz Carpenter said: ''It's a good thing John Connally wasn't at the
Alamo. He'd be organizing Texans for Santa Anna now.'' Mr. Reston says the gag
circulated that this was ''the only known instance in recorded history of a rat
swimming toward a sinking ship.''

Because the Connally papers were sealed for five years after being donated to
the Lyndon B. Johnson Library in 1987, the author did not have the Governor's
version of some of the controversial aspects of his life -business dealings,
political obligations, relationships with the Presidents he campaigned for or
served. Nevertheless, Mr. Reston has assembled a good deal of valuable
information through interviews that provide inside accounts of Governor
Connally's private methods and thoughts, and some of these are indeed scary.

An interview with Paul A. Volcker, who was Under Secretary for Monetary Affairs
when Mr. Connally was at the Treasury, reveals that at his private lunch table
the Secretary would frighten his subcabinet with talk of ''holocaust and
humiliation'' in Vietnam. The author writes: ''He sometimes proposed that the
United States employ nuclear weapons from the stem of North Vietnam to the stern
of South Vietnam, to win the war. Those present were not sure whether this
hair-raising bellicosity was entirely sincere, but it was serious enough to
deeply trouble Paul Volcker, for example, about the prospect of Connally as a
national leader.''

Several chapters are devoted to the Kennedy assassination, much of it a replay
of facts and theories that have already appeared in dozens of other books.
Governor Connally held to the belief that he was the target, not the President,
and that he was struck by a second bullet. Lee Harvey Oswald had written to Navy
Secretary Connally asking for a change in his Marine Corps undesirable discharge
classification. But nothing had been done, under this theory, and this caused
Oswald to take aim at Governor Connally. The author further argues that Oswald
also thought of Governor Connally as a right-winger and suggests this was
another reason for the claim that he was the real target.

Almost inevitably, Lyndon Johnson bestrides the main stage and steals many
scenes in ''The Lone Star.'' Johnson's assessment of his onetime protege (in a
conversation with Under Secretary of State George W. Ball) is the most astute in
the book. After calling Mr. Connally ''an awful quick study,'' Johnson added,
''Too bad he lacks just one thing, or he could go clear to the top.'' When asked
what that was, Johnson replied, ''John Connally doesn't have even the tiniest
trace of compassion. He can leave more dead bodies in the field with less
remorse than any politician I ever knew.''

Then, in this marvelously revealing tale about both Texans, Johnson said: ''You
know George, I can use raw power - I can use raw power as well as anyone. You've
seen me do it. But the difference between John and me is, he loves it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John B. Connally (Black Star/Shelly Katz)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A JAILBIRD'S SCHEME

BYLINE: By HILMA WOLITZER; Hilma Wolitzer's most recent novel is ''Silver.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 790 words



TRUST
By George V. Higgins.
230 pp. New York:
Henry Holt & Company. $18.95.

Although my husband, among others, has been touting George V. Higgins's books
for years, I didn't get around to reading him, somehow, until now. This
oversight may have been due to certain preconceptions I had about so-called
''crime/adventure'' novels. But after finishing ''Trust'' - with its tight
little plot that unfurls like a bolt of satin, and its tone-perfect dialogue - I
became an instant fan, eager to make up for missed opportunities. Like Georges
Simenon, whose novels are equally difficult to categorize, Mr. Higgins has been
prodigiously prolific, producing 20 books in about 18 years. Working backward
(but hardly comprehensively), I've now also read ''Wonderful Years, Wonderful
Years,'' ''Outlaws'' and ''The Friends of Eddie Coyle.'' Much of the action in
these novels takes place in Boston and its environs, but the dominant characters
are not Henry James's proper Bostonians. They come from the underside of New
England life, and the ''trust'' of the current title is deeply ironic.

As the book opens, an ex-con named Earl Beale is on his way from Boston to a
small town in Rhode Island to perform a service he knows nothing about for a man
named Jimmy Battaglia (a k a Battles) he's never met. This is Earl's way of
settling a debt to his brother, Don, who, it turns out, owes a favor to someone
else. Earl explains to Battles, ''He called my brother because he trusts him,
and my brother sent me down. So you trust him, he trusts my brother, my brother
must trust me.''

But that's scarcely the case, as Don explains later to a friend. ''I know my
brother pretty well. I'm sorry his life's in the sewer, and also his girl has to
hook. But I still tell him no more'n I think's absolutely necessary. Earl's not
trustworthy.'' Battles's wariness is less personal and far more encompassing. He
tells Earl, ''I don't trust one son of a bitch under thirty, and that includes
you, pal, and that includes him, too. And I don't trust no bastard over thirty,
neither.''

''Trust'' takes place in the 1960's, during the Vietnam War, which Earl has
managed to avoid, first by being a college athlete (a basketball player who
shaves points for minor compensation) and then by being in prison until he's
past the draft age. But a sense of the war going on offstage pervades the novel,
and like prison, Vietnam provides a plausible, terrible destination for some of
its directionless characters.

Earl himself is the ultimate recidivist. Although he's beaten the draft and even
had his served prison time erased from the books, he's hardly led a charmed life
or, for that matter, an extensively examined one. He's constantly setting up
criminal schemes without much concern for morality or consequences. Even his
girlfriend, Penny, a call girl currently involved with Earl in a blackmail scam,
questions his lack of common sense. ''What's the matter with you?'' she asks.
''You get dropped on your head, you're a kid? . . . Didn't you ever start to
think: 'How did I get here?' '' If Earl isn't moved to think about it, the
reader certainly is, and how Earl finally gets to where he must inevitably go is
the substance of George V. Higgins's beautifully calculated short novel. There
are some fine set pieces along the way: like Earl's brilliant sales pitch for a
used car to two women who can't afford it. And Earl waiting out Penny's delayed
return on Thanksgiving from a trip with her john, while the turkey thaws, then
rots, in the kitchen sink.

Mr. Higgins, who has worked in criminal law, exercises admirable restraint; he
neither moralizes by judging his corrupt characters nor becomes their apologist
by explaining them. Instead he allows them, quite literally, to speak for
themselves, to be hung by their own amorality, their petty schemes and
misadventures. His reputation for impeccable dialogue is clearly deserved. On
careful reading, one sees that it's largely done with skewed syntax and unusual
punctuation. But that's like saying Thelonious Monk worked his jazz magic by a
mere rearrangement of notes.

Mr. Higgins listens with a keen and selective ear to the way people speak, and
his characters often reveal themselves in only a few words. A wistful,
working-class customer on a used-car lot in ''Trust'' says, ''I'd like a radio
and a heater - well, I'd like a lot of things, but I really do need those.'' In
another scene Earl, whose life is an ongoing struggle to beat the system before
it beats him, refuses to go to the movies with Penny. ''Nah,'' he says, ''for
something that costs money, it's too much like TV.''

The general effect of Mr. Higgins's writing is dazzling, as if it's all really
done with mirrors.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

In the Galleries, a Delayed-Action Explosion

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 74 words


Even though American movies have scrutinized the Vietnam War, art about the
conflict has been scarce, perhaps because it has taken many years for artists to
come to terms with what happened there. But such art exists, and some of it
movingly incorporates the contradictions that permeated that era. Roberta Smith
appraises some of these works, which are increasingly visible both at the center
and the margins of the art world. Page 31.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 24, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about the release of
an American hostage in Lebanon rendered President Bush's reaction incorrectly in
some editions.

Alluding to the American desire to free all the hostages, Mr. Bush said, ''This
is a mission uncompleted.''

GRAPHIC: Photo

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 22, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Tilford E. Dudley, 82, Dies; New Deal Labor Aide

BYLINE: By JASON DePARLE

SECTION: Section D; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 427 words


Tilford E. Dudley, a labor lawyer who served in President Franklin D.
Roosevelt's New Deal era, who clashed with President Lyndon B. Johnson over the
Vietnam War and who continued to help social causes in the 1980's, died Thursday
at the family home in Bellingham, Wash. He was 82 years old.

Mr. Dudley achieved prominence for his work as a trial examiner for the National
Labor Relations Board in the late 1930's and as a union official from the 1940's
to the late 1960's. But his advocacy work began even before he was graduated
from Harvard Law School when, as a second-year student in 1930, he championed
the case of 20 Widener Library scrubwomen dismissed by the university.

After graduating from law school, Mr. Dudley practiced law in Aurora, Ill., for
three years before coming to Washington to work for Roosevelt. From 1934 to 1944
he held five positions in the Roosevelt Administration.

His most controversial post was that of a trial examiner with the National Labor
Relations Board. He issued findings on charges of unfair labor practices in
cases that involved the Ford Motor Company, Fansteel and The New York Times.
#25-Year Labor Career In 1938 he found that Ford had refused to engage in
collective bargaining and ordered the company to reinstate 192 workers who had
engaged in a strike. Two years later, he ordered the reinstatement of three
Times employees he said had been punished for union activities.

When he left the Government in 1944, Mr. Dudley went to work for the United
Packinghouse Workers of America and for the political action committee of the
Congress of Industrial Organizations. He was involved in organized labor for the
next 25 years, first with the C.I.O. and, after its merger with the American
Federation of Labor, as head of the joint federation's speakers bureau.

In 1954 he joined with a group of prominent Protestants, headed by the Rev.
Reinhold Niebuhr, in denouncing the investigations of Senator Joseph McCarthy.

In 1968, as head of the Democratic Party in the District of Columbia, Mr. Dudley
spoke out against the Vietnam War and refused to support President Johnson. He
moved to Bellingham in November after becoming too ill to live by himself.

Mr. Dudley, who had been married to the late Martha Fairchild Ward, is survived
by two daughters, Donica Ward Dudley of Davis, Calif., and Martha Fairchild
Dudley of Augusta, Mont.; a son, Gerric Ward Dudley of Bellingham; two sisters,
Dorothy Ann Zentmeyer of Riverside, Calif., and Esther Elizabeth Swern of
Hinsdale, Ill., and five grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Tilford E. Dudley (AP)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 26, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Upheaval in the East: European Community;
Britain Proposes Closer U.S. Ties

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 629 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Jan. 25


Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd today proposed a stepped-up schedule of
consultations between ministers of the 12 European Community countries and
United States officials as part of what he called ''a new consultative
partnership'' to deal with rapid change in Eastern and Western Europe.

Mr. Hurd, who will begin a three-day visit to Washington on Sunday, told a group
of American correspondents here that his proposal was an answer to a speech by
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d in West Berlin on Dec. 12 that called for
''a significantly strengthened set of institutional and consultative links''
between the United States and the European Community.

''I'm not authorized to make a response for the E.C.,'' he said, ''but it's a
British contribution to the debate, and I think it's a practical option.'' A
European Community official in Brussels said the proposals would probably be
received favorably by the organization's executive commission and member
countries. Mr. Hurd said he would discuss them with President Bush, Mr. Baker
and other American officials next week.

Mr. Hurd proposed a series of regular and formal meetings between European
Community foreign ministers and the United States Secretary of State beginning
this summer to discuss ''our common Western response to the developments in the
East.''

Hong Kong on Agenda

He also proposed having meetings between the community's executive commissioners
and members of the United States Cabinet twice a year instead of just once.
Topics of discussion would be trade and the community's move toward a single
European market by the end of 1992, with regular, frequent meetings and
briefings by both sides at lower levels.

Also on the British agenda in Washington will be Britain's wish to begin
repatriating some of the 56,000 people from Vietnam who have sought asylum in
the colony of Hong Kong. At an international conference in Geneva this week, the
United States opposed Britain's desire to resume mandatory repatriation July 1.
The United States held out, almost alone, for a one-year moratorium until the
end of the year, and Vietnam wanted a delay until October in the repatriation,
which began last month with a single flight of 51 men, women and children.

''We have quite a large problem ahead of us this summer,'' Mr. Hurd said,
''which is when people come to Hong Kong by sea. The international community
needs to recognize the possibility of quite a large emergency.''

British officials say that most of those arriving in Hong Kong do not qualify as
refugees from political persecution and has placed them in guarded camps pending
their return, voluntarily or involuntarily, to Vietnam.

Legislation Planned

Mr. Hurd was in Hong Kong earlier this week, also trying to encourage officials
and business leaders of the colony to stay there rather than seek to emigrate
before 1997, when Britain will turn back the territory to Communist China.

The British Government plans to introduce legislation here to grant the right to
live in Britain to 50,000 of Hong Kong's 3.5 million British passport holders
and their families, hoping they will stay on there with a greater sense of
security, but faces a revolt among Government supporters in Parliament who
oppose any further immigration here.

Mr. Hurd said he was encouraged by recent signs that the opposition Labor Party
may break ranks in opposition to the measure because some of them fear
accusations of racism from their constituents, and thus make its passage easier
even if some Conservatives vote against it.

''That particular struggle hasn't gone too badly,'' he said, but conceded that
defeat of the bill, which is not expected to be introduced in the House of
Commons before April, would be ''fairly disastrous.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DIPLOMACY VS. DEMOCRACY

BYLINE: By ALAN TONELSON; Alan Tonelson is completing a book for the Twentieth
Century Fund on redefining United States foreign policy interests.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1209 words



THE ROCKETS' RED GLARE
When America Goes to War:
The Presidents and the People.
By Richard J. Barnet.
476 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $24.95.

If anything has united American foreign policy makers and thinkers throughout
our history, it's their contempt for the people. And the view that their
countrymen are (depending on the accuser) too bellicose, xenophobic, selfish,
naive or just plain stupid to know their true interests has driven American
leaders to try to conduct foreign policy on the sly for more than 200 years.

As Richard J. Barnet, a well-known leftist critic of contemporary American
foreign policy and the author of ''Real Security'' and other books, argues in
''The Rockets' Red Glare,'' there are at least three things wrong with this
approach: first, the United States is supposed to be a democracy; second, many
of these secret policies have concerned paramount questions of war and peace;
and third, the record compiled by our statesmen and experts is nothing to brag
about.

His study of public opinion and American diplomacy contains ample evidence to
document the gap between democratic rhetoric and the reality of foreign policy
making since the Revolutionary era and the problems repeatedly created by it.
What is largely missing, however, is the theoretical and philosophical
discussion needed to figure out the proper role of public opinion in American
foreign policy, let alone to support his grand conclusion that ''popular
participation [in foreign policy making] is becoming more necessary but also
more possible.''

Despite Mr. Barnet's plain sympathies and the string of official foul-ups and
disasters stretching back to the War of 1812 that he colorfully recounts, few
will finish ''The Rockets' Red Glare'' confident that the public's preferred
foreign policies would have served American interests better - that is, when
clear preferences could be discerned at all. The first four Presidents, for
example, spent much of their terms desperately trying to restrain or defuse
public demands to attack one or another European power for all manner of real
and imagined insults, despite the young republic's military weakness. The
elitists, in other words, tended to be peaceniks. And even in 1968, Mr. Barnet
acknowledges, more Americans wanted to end the Vietnam War by escalation than by
unilateral withdrawal.

Ironically, the author scores his most telling points in favor of more power to
the people while examining the period in which public irresponsibility allegedly
peaked: the 1920's and 30's. As Mr. Barnet astutely observes, the divine right
still claimed today by foreign policy and public opinion elites even after
Vietnam rests on the view that the public permanently disqualified itself from a
lead foreign policy role by pigheadedly ignoring the fascist threat. But Mr.
Barnet builds a credible case that ''the American people were ready to be
educated by events and to follow the president whenever he chose to lead.''
Tragically, President Franklin D. Roosevelt sold his own powers of persuasion
short.

Still, the debate over democratizing our foreign policy ultimately turns on
questions that are not empirical. How, for example, can the public's desires be
determined in the first place? Do we want government by Gallup poll? Even if
some foolproof way of sampling public opinion were found, who would decide which
alternatives should be presented? What if only small minorities register strong
opinions? What if no clear winner emerges? How would the tie-breaker work? More
broadly, must all decisions require explicit public approval? If not, when
should official discretion be permitted? And should leaders ever rely on their
consciences or their expertise? These issues, whose centrality Mr. Barnet
recognizes, are hardly insuperable. But they are practically ignored. His
overemphasis on the narrative flow of history makes for a book that is fun to
read but also inconsequential for anyone interested in changing policy.

More troubling is the fact that part of his failure to address such questions
clearly reflects a belief that the stunning international changes of the late
80's have rendered most of them moot. After all, the built-in conflict between
foreign policy needs and democratic processes assumes a world of nations
unavoidably locked in a struggle for security and advantage. Nations that cannot
act secretly and speedily may have two strikes against them.

Mr. Barnet is obviously correct in suggesting that if traditional international
power politics is rapidly fading in importance, and if true security now
requires greatly expanded international cooperation, then speed and stealth
count for much less. Indeed, in such a world, the openness, adaptability and
unchallengeable legitimacy of genuine democracies could be foreign policy
assets, not liabilities. But if, as is equally plausible, power politics is also
simply taking new forms - for even global problems such as environmental
destruction can affect different states in different ways, and the quick and the
strong are still likeliest to see their preferred solutions chosen - the tension
between democracy and foreign policy effectiveness will resurface.

The only way out of this bind may be to take a cue from the Founding Fathers.
They confronted a choice between national security and the intrinsic
inefficiencies of democracy. But rather than bow to national security (as the
architects of our cold war strategy were to do a century and a half later) or
pretend that the competition between the two concerns could be wished away (a la
Mr. Barnet), they chose democracy - or, more precisely, republican government.
They determinedly divided political power and produced a Constitution that, as
Clement Attlee once ruefully observed, was designed for an ''isolationist
state.'' Either the Framers were hopelessly naive or they knew something about
America's latent strength, natural wealth and potential geopolitical security
that indicated the new nation could afford a thoroughly democratic foreign
policy much more than most other countries if it took advantage of its good
fortune.

Two hundred years later, the possibilities for detachment from foreign conflicts
are narrower, but they have by no means vanished completely. If Americans truly
want to regain firm control over their foreign policy, they may well have to
shift away from the broad internationalist approach followed since Pearl Harbor.

This change would rule out many policies that Mr. Barnet does not like, chiefly
the focus on ''traditional war planning and war-prevention strategies,'' the
maintenance of military alliances and reflexive opposition to third-world
revolution. But it would also rule out many policies that he has long supported
- e.g., massive aid for the third world and deep United States involvement in a
new set of global economic planning agencies. In this post-cold war era, Mr.
Barnet's call for democratizing American foreign policy is worth heeding and
might be feasible. But he may well find himself just as unhappy with the
resulting new priorities - chiefly, a vigorous search for opportunities to
enhance our freedom of action and self-reliance - as he has been with the old
ones.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Cambodia Will Talk Again, But Listeners Are Scarce

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1029 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


THE last time the warring factions in Cambodia sat down together at an
international peace conference, in Paris last August, they seemed incapable even
of holding a civil conversation. The world's diplomats concluded that the
conference had been premature and that flexibility toward a solution, let alone
its shape, would have to come after the warring sides had done some more
fighting in the absence of Vietnamese troops. This process was rather callously
but nearly universally termed ''the test on the battlefield.''

Now, after the killing and wounding of yet more Cambodians, new talks are
beginning on Monday in Indonesia. Some answers are available about the balance
of forces in a conflict that most of the world regards with fatigue and
exasperation. Almost inevitably, though, the answers are incomplete.

The Jakarta talks are part of the process begun in Paris, and are an effort to
see whether a full-scale conference can be resumed. The main issues are how the
United Nations might run or supervise an interim administration to oversee new
elections and what parts will be played by the four warring factions; the Phnom
Penh Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen, the Khmer Rouge, the followers of
Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front. Last
August, what so frustrated everyone was the obstinacy of the Cambodians
themselves, who were clearly not ready to deal. The implications of the
Vietnamese troop withdrawal, completed in September, could not be divined in
advance.

Could Mr. Hun Sen and his Government, installed by the Vietnamese after they
expelled the murderous Khmer Rouge in 1979, survive on their own?

Just how strong were the Khmer Rouge, who during their period in power in the
1970's were responsible for the deaths of more than a million Cambodians? They
had been revived as an anti-Vietnamese instrument by China, with the
acquiescence of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the United States
itself.

Washington, in fact, preferred the two non-Communist factions allied to the
Khmer Rouge, but led by an irritatingly changeable Prince Sihanouk and by a weak
and aged conservative, Son Sann. But could these factions finally demonstrate
any battlefield prowess or credibility to repay Washington's diplomatic support
and $24 million a year in secret aid?

Now, six months later, the worst has not happened. Mr. Hun Sen's Government and
army have not disintegrated, allowing the Khmer Rouge to return to power.

The initial performance of Mr. Hun Sen's army was ragged, with ill-trained
troops and officers fleeing positions along the Thai border and allowing the
combined resistance to take about 10 percent of the country. The offensive then
bogged down, but it now appears that was not all Mr. Hun Sen's doing.

Help From Hanoi

It turns out that after his troops abandoned the gem-mining town of Pailin on
Oct. 24, a shaken Mr. Hun Sen asked Hanoi to send some troops back to Cambodia.
Senior East European diplomats here say the Vietnamese were not happy, but
agreed to send several thousand elite special forces to help defend two
Cambodian provincial capitals, Battambang and Sisophon.

The Vietnamese strengthened the defenses of the two capitals, and while they are
said to have done relatively little fighting, ''the important thing,'' a
diplomat said, ''is that the Khmer Rouge knew that between them and Battambang,
there were Vietnamese.'' A result is that Mr. Hun Sen can still claim to have
lost no big population center. The Vietnamese also sent military advisers to
Phnom Penh as trainers, strategic planners and repairmen. While two senior East
European diplomats say Vietnamese troops remain in Cambodia, another believes
they may have returned home this month because Vietnam wanted to be ''clean''
for the Jakarta talks.

In any event, the Vietnamese provided Mr. Hun Sen some breathing room. The
Cambodian Army has been reorganized and is battle-tested; last week, it began a
counteroffensive in the northwest that had been long delayed and retook a key
crossroads town, Svay Chek.

But the Khmer Rouge have hardly been idle. Having apparently suspended any
frontal assault on Battambang, the Khmer Rouge have dispersed their gathered
troops, re-infiltrating fighters deep inside the country, where they have been
active for many years. Their guerrilla strategy of economic and moral
destabilization continues at a higher level than before.

Yet however costly and debilitating to Phnom Penh, the fighting has not proved
sufficient to bring down the Government, and as a result Mr. Hun Sen's status
has been reinforced. Still, there are some ways in which the exhaustion
engendered by six months of struggle may be bringing a solution nearer.

It has made Mr. Hun Sen considerably more flexible, given at least a small
amount of credibility back to the non-Communist factions, and made even indirect
support for the Khmer Rouge more obnoxious to Western public opinion, and hence
to their governments. France and Britain have issued strong statements opposing
the Khmer Rouge and the United States has dropped its support for a role for the
Khmer Rouge in a coalition government. China's support for that proposal also
seems to be weakening.

This shift in international opinion, in turn, has driven Prince Sihanouk to
break, yet again, with the Khmer Rouge, even if his troops sometimes fight in
coordination with them.

Last week, meeting in Bangkok, Mr. Hun Sen and the Prince signed their first
joint statement; they agreed to press for an enhanced role for the United
Nations in a transitional administration in Cambodia, elections supervised by
the United Nations and the reposing of Cambodian sovereignty in a supreme
council, which would by agreement contain representatives of the warring
factions, until the elections can be held.

The Khmer Rouge, however, remain China's chosen instrument and continue to
reject every idea that might lead to a settlement, apparently preferring to
continue the guerrilla war.

But every other faction is being flexible, China is unlikely to enjoy its
isolation, and the rest of the world is running out of patience.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Prince Norodom Sihanouk (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WORKS IN PROGRESS;
Presenting Arms

BYLINE: By Bruce Weber

SECTION: Section 6; Page 94, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 311 words


The Army's standard combat weapon, the M-16, in use since the Vietnam War, is
still considered the finest extant assault rifle. Nonetheless, since 1982, when
six weapons manufacturers were asked to develop new technologies, the Army has
been seeking to improve on it. Four companies have produced prototypes -
including the Steyr-Mannlicher from Austria (above) - that are now being tested
at Fort Benning, Ga., and at Aberdeen Proving Ground, Md.

According to William T. Harris 3d, a spokesman for Picatinny Arsenal, the Army's
armament research center in New Jersey, the average marksman using an M-16 has a
60 to 70 percent chance of hitting a test target at 300 meters. ''But in a
combat situation, where a soldier is taking fire, the target moving, the
probability is only 10 percent,'' he says. ''We'd like a technology that will
double that.''

To that end, the prototypes are easier to carry than the M-16, take
lighter-weight ammunition, and can fire multiple rounds with one trigger pull.
The Steyr, for example, fires a metal dart, known as a flechette, that's lighter
than a bullet but propelled at a higher speed. ''We consider the impact equal,''
says Harris, adding that the speed means a soldier firing at long range doesn't
need to lead his target as much or compensate for trajectory. The working
mechanism of the Steyr is in the stock, behind the trigger rather than above it.
The configuration, known as a ''bullpup'' design, allows a shorter barrel and
faster feeding of rounds. But the stock is under great pressure during firing;
above, it's wired for a pressure test.

The Army paid $40 million for the new technologies and hopes to select one next
year, with the possibility of a re-armed Army by 1995. Asked how many rifles
that means, Harris acknowledges politics: ''Based on current requirements, we're
talking a million or more.'' -

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Army's standard combat weapon, the M-16, in use since the
Vietnam War (Dan Borris/Outline) (pg. 94)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Chronicle

BYLINE: By SUSAN HELLER ANDERSON

SECTION: Section B; Page 24, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 213 words


In his book on the Vietnam War, MORLEY SAFER delivers an unflattering picture of
BILL MOYERS, then press secretary to President Lyndon B. Johnson. A chapter in
''Flashbacks'' recalls a high point in Mr. Safer's career as a CBS News
correspondent, when in 1965 he filmed Marines setting a village aflame with
Zippo lighters.

The reaction to the report was as incendiary as the act. Mr. Johnson summoned
FRANK STANTON, then president of CBS, to the White House. In Mr. Moyers's
presence, ''Johnson threatened that, unless CBS got rid of me and 'cleaned up
its act,' the White House would 'go public' with information about Safer's
'Communist ties,' '' Mr. Safer wrote. That charge is still being circulated by
former Johnson Administration officials, he wrote.

''That's absolutely true,'' said FRED W. FRIENDLY, who was president of CBS News
in 1965. ''I had a lot of phone calls from people in the military telling me
that Morley Safer was a Communist. Those accusations were false.''

''Bill Moyers, the sometimes overly pious public defender of liberal virtue, the
First Amendment and rights of minorities, playing the role of Iago,'' Mr. Safer
wrote. A spokeswoman for Mr. Moyers said, ''He'd rather not react.'' The Random
House book is to be published on April 23.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Morley Safer

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 952 words



CONNECTIONS TO THE WORLD: The Basic Concepts of Philosophy, by Arthur C. Danto.
(Perennial/Harper & Row, $7.95.) In a recasting of his book ''What Philosophy
Is,'' Arthur C. Danto now proposes that it can be thought of as ''the effort to
understand the relationships between subjects, representations, and reality.''
Last year our reviewer, Julia Annas, said he has written ''an elegant, unifying
overview.''

THE NEXT NEW WORLD, by Bob Shacochis. (Penguin, $7.95.) ''Easy in the Islands,''
Bob Shacochis' 1985JU collection of short fiction about life in the Caribbean,
won an American Book Award in 1985. In his later stories he has turned to new
locales, including Elizabethan England, where Shakespeare plays the ghost in a
production of ''Hamlet.'' ''These marvelously constructed stories show him to be
capable of visiting any time, any place, any heart or mind,'' Richard Bausch
said here last year. ''And the sureness with which he imbues his people and
places with life - the virtuosity with which he moves from theme to theme,
subject to subject, character to character - is impressive.''

MORE LIKE US: Making America Great Again, by James Fallows. (Houghton Mifflin,
$8.95) After living in Asia for a few years, the Washington editor of The
Atlantic Monthly warns that the United States should not try to imitate Japan -
unless it wants to become a xenophobic, homogeneous society where the interests
of the individual are subordinated to the corporate good. Last year our
reviewer, Dennis H. Wrong, praised the book for its ''firm but low-keyed
affirmation of American values, 'traditional' in their very repudiation of fixed
traditions.'' In INSIDE THE ROBOT KINGDOM (Kodansha, $12.95), Frederik L. Schodt
argues that Japan's strong cultural identity has equipped its citizens to
embrace robots as helpers without feeling threatened. One reviewer called this a
''sharp, singular book,'' and Library Journal named it one of the best science
and technology books of 1988.

HENCE, by Brad Leithauser. (Penguin, $8.95.) In a novel embedded within a novel,
a young chess prodigy tries to outwit the country's smartest game-playing
computer. Last year our reviewer, Laura Shapiro, said that Brad Leithauser's
literary tricks were dazzling enough to be distracting but that they allowed him
''a remarkable degree of control over our reading, the sort of control any
author would love to exert.''

VIRGINIA WOOLF: The Impact of Childhood Sexual Abuse on Her Life and Work, by
Louise DeSalvo. (Ballantine, $10.95.) In this revisionist biography, the author
argues that Virginia Woolf's writings, her madness and her eventual suicide were
all attempts to extinguish the memories of childhood incest and abuse. Last year
one reviewer called this ''an original and courageous work.''

LABRADOR, by Kathryn Davis. (Anchor/Doubleday, $8.95.) Kitty, a girl who is
obsessed with her older sister, retreats deeper and deeper into a dark fantasy
world. In 1988 our reviewer, John Crowley, said this novel ''generates, despite
the unintelligibility of certain of its narrative turns and the skein of
metaphoric doubling they are bound in, an undoubted urgency, driving toward an
ending that, although we are not allowed to imagine what sort of ever-after it
points to, is apparently a happy one.''

ANNA FREUD: A Biography, by Elisabeth Young-Bruehl. (Summit, $12.95.) Cast in
the language of psychoanalysis, this biography tells how Freud's daughter took
over her father's profession and became the staunch guardian of his memory. In
1988 our reviewer, Walter Kendrick, called this ''a convincing portrait of a
remarkable woman.''

LATECOMERS, by Anita Brookner. (Vintage, $8.95.) Hartmann and Fibich, who
escaped to London from Nazi Germany, couldn't be more different in temperament,
but they manage to build a lifelong friendship. '' 'Latecomers' is an
extraordinarily eloquent novel, full of pleasures as well as lessons,'' David
Leavitt said here in 1989. ''Miss Brookner, so adept at articulating discomfort,
maintains all her familiar masteries here, yet seems to have reached an
apotheosis of her own.''

THE ELEVENTH SUMMER, by Carlo Gebler. (Fireside/Simon & Schuster, $7.95.) An
11-year-old boy becomes convinced that he accidentally started the fire that
killed his grandfather. In 1985 our reviewer, Robert O'Meally, called this novel
''a fine debut by a skillful young writer with much eloquence.'' Fireside has
also republished WORK AND PLAY ($7.95), Carlo Gebler's 1987 story about Fergus,
a dropout in London. In 1988 our reviewer, Roger D. Friedman, said the author
creates ''a portrait of London's class violence that stings with the evidence of
a good writer at work.''

HOMECOMING: When the Soldiers Returned From Vietnam, by Bob Greene. (Ballantine,
$4.95.) The Chicago Tribune columnist asked Vietnam veterans to write to him
about the humiliations they suffered coming home. ''Vietnam veterans as
represented in this excellent selection of letters are a national resource,''
Doug Anderson said here in 1989. ''Our country's loss of innocence was
experienced most acutely by them.''

LAST NOTES FROM HOME, by Frederick Exley. (Vintage, $8.95.) In the last book of
the trilogy that began two decades ago with ''A Fan's Notes,'' Frederick Exley's
drunken fictional counterpart tries to deal with the possibility that his dying
brother helped plan the My Lai massacre. In 1988 The Times's Christopher
Lehmann-Haupt said that Mr. Exley's writing had deteriorated along with his
chemically crazed protagonist, but that ''his music of angry contempt and
self-loathing, for all its obscene sentimentality, still holds its quavering
melody.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bob Shacochis (Jim Curley)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
Blue Collars, Both Fashionable and Frayed

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 16, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2100 words


With enough money, ingenuity and chutzpah, movie makers can do anything. They
are able to re-create 19th-century Africa, the battles of the Civil War,
volcanic eruptions and the new Dark Ages that will follow World War III. In
movies, fetuses can talk and horses fly. Movies make the impossible look
ordinary. What they can't do with any ease is imagine the time and place we live
in now.

When, by chance, they present this world in some relation to its reality, the
result looks strange, almost exotic, like the wasteland of Flint, Mich., seen by
Michael Moore in ''Roger and Me,'' and Spike Lee's vision of Bedford-Stuyvesant
in ''Do the Right Thing.''

The sight has the effect of being a major discovery. Take Martin Ritt's
otherwise scrupulously commonplace ''Stanley and Iris.''

Shortly after a thief makes off with her purse and her weekly paycheck, Iris
King, a cake icer on the assembly line at the Nevins & Davis Bakery, arrives
home to receive the latest unemployment reports from her sister Sharon and
brother-in-law Joe. They've been staying with Iris until they get back on their
feet and, on this night, tempers are short.

Neither Sharon nor Joe has had any luck finding a job. Sharon is belligerent
about it. ''Don't expect anything from us this week,'' she tells Iris, the only
breadwinner in the family at the moment. Iris is a widow who is also raising two
children.

''I wouldn't be here if I didn't have to,'' says Sharon. ''I'd be in my own
house with my own Drexel furniture and air-conditioning.''

A few minutes later, Sharon blows up when she sees Joe go the fridge and take
out a can of beer. ''Where'd you get the money for the beer?'' Joe, feeling no
pain, doesn't answer. Sharon finds that Joe has spent the cash she had hidden in
a cupboard. ''You stole my money!''

Now Iris is interested, since everyone is supposed to be contributing to the
household expenses. Sharon becomes defensive. ''Well,'' she says, ''it's not as
if I was going to go out and get a face lift. I was saving that money for my
teeth.''

Joe swats her on the side of the head. Sharon screams, Joe swears and Iris sends
her children out of the kitchen.

Though it is sad and desperate, this scene, which comes near the beginning of
''Stanley and Iris,'' is also funny and exhilarating.

''Stanley and Iris'' is not about teeth. Teeth are mentioned only once. The
audience never does find out whether Sharon is saving for fillings, extractions
or root canal work. But that one line is important.

It establishes the particularity of characters who live in a recognizable world
where teeth are a fact of ordinary life. They are neither the joke they are in
W. C. Fields's ''Dentist'' nor an excuse for torture, as in ''Marathon Man.''

Because the line is so specific, it identifies the social and economic setting.
In this way, it helps to certify the film's real subject, which is worthy but
not immediately riveting. ''Stanley and Iris'' is about illiteracy, but anybody
who goes to see the movie will be ahead of it on that score: they will have read
the ads. Yet ''Stanley and Iris'' is something quite uncommon.  Here is a
big-budget American movie, with big-budget American actors (Jane Fonda and
Robert De Niro), in which characters worry about jobs, money and how to pay the
bills. When they work, they work in any jobs they can find, rather than at those
designed to realize innermost spiritual or artistic needs.

The innermost needs of the people in ''Stanley and Iris'' are rent, food,
clothes and electricity. They are back to basics. So, too, are the unemployed in
''Roger and Me,'' and the colliding temperaments in ''Do the Right Thing.''

''Stanley and Iris,'' ''Roger and Me'' and ''Do the Right Thing'' are each, in
one way and another, about the quality of life of that endangered species that
used to be called the working stiff, even when out of work.

Movies about working stiffs have never been numerous or particularly popular in
this country. In England, where class still counts, they constitute a genre to
themselves. The most memorable being Lindsay Anderson's ''This Sporting Life,''
Karel Reisz's ''Saturday Night and Sunday Morning,'' Tony Richardson's ''Look
Back in Anger'' (based on John Osborne's seminal play) and, most recently, Mike
Leigh's ''High Hopes.'' No such tradition exists in America.

There have been exceptions, such as ''Joe,'' in which the working stiff turns
out to be a paranoid, homicidal maniac, and ''The Deer Hunter,'' in which the
working stiffs go off to fight in Vietnam. ''Marty'' found the highly romantized
nobility of a Bronx butcher. Such movies are even more rare today. For one
thing, the members of the American blue-collar or working class are no longer
immediately categorized as such. Many blue-collar workers earn more than those
in the so-called white-collar market. If income defines class, as it seems to do
in this country, the most easily identifiable members of the working class would
seem to be those who are at the poverty level, or who aren't working at all.

Oliver Stone's ''Born on the Fourth of July'' has so much on its mind that it
doesn't depend on a single scene to give it credibility. Yet neither the
harrowing Vietnam War sequences nor those in the Bronx Veterans Hospital, where
the wounded Ron Kovic is sent for therapy, would have the impact they do if the
film didn't so clearly establish the nature of Ron's background.

It's only against this background that the character's evolution into an antiwar
activist has emotional weight.

Ron's initial optimism seems as much a result of how his large working-class
family lives, with everyone squeezed into a small house that allows little
privacy, as of the strict Roman Catholicism in which he was raised. The family
isn't badly off. Ron's father works in a supermarket. Nobody is starving. But
life is lived largely in terms of future opportunities, when things will be
better.

The Kovics' house in Massapequa, L.I., the way it is laid out, where the
bedrooms are in relation to the kitchen, living room and bathroom, is as
important to the film as the locations that stand in for Vietnam.

At the beginning of the film, the house meets the family needs. After Ron
returns from the war, paralyzed from midchest down, confined to a wheelchair,
the house doesn't function any better than he does. He has grown up but not
away. When he comes wheeling home one night, drunk again after being out with
his pals, the truth of his condition overwhelms him.

Ron is fed up with everything, including the loss of all sexual power. His
father tries to get him into his room. His mother screams that he has become a
drunk. Ron pulls out his catheter and bluntly describes his problem. His mother
is beside herself. ''I will not have the word penis spoken in this house!'' For
Ron, childhood ends. It's time to move on.  When movies blur class distinctions,
it's because those distinctions are blurred in life. There's nothing wrong with
movies about people who exist in a timeless present where the only worries are
emotional and psychological. That is, as long as they don't effectively deny the
other pressures with which most of us contend, including work, income and future
solvency.

The difference between Nancy Savoca's ''True Love,'' a comedy about a probably
doomed lower-middle-class marriage in the Bronx, and Herbert Ross's ''Steel
Magnolias,'' which also has to do with marriage, among other things, is a matter
of acuteness of observation in details of character, behavior, setting and
speech.

Nobody in ''True Love'' worries much about the high cost of the wedding or
future finances, but the way in which the characters talk and act is so accurate
that one understands that, off-screen, there are other aspects to their lives.

The one-liners by which ''Steel Magnolia's'' proceeds from one dramatic moment
to the next are so removed from recognizable character, except the playwright's,
that the comedy seems thin and artificial.

What is reassuring in ''Stanley and Iris,'' ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' ''Do
the Right Thing'' and ''True Love'' is not any so-called important theme but the
manner in which each film recognizes the world in which it exists. Sometimes
this recognition happens only in passing.  Reginald Hudlin's ''House Party'' is
a teen-age rap movie designed for the teen-agers. It doesn't mean to be a slice
of life. It doesn't have any goal other than to keep its audience enraptured by
comedy routines and music.

Yet ''House Party'' appreciates the quirky subtleties of these kids' social
lives. It offers, seemingly offhand, details that give unexpected substance to
froth. One fellow looks down on girls who live in ''the projects,'' not because
of any nonsense about class, but because there's no possibility of getting a
girl alone in a small apartment.

In the 1930's, 1940's, 1950's and into the 1960's, it used to be that movies
were judged to be important or not, serious or not, by what they were about, not
how good they were. For years John Ford's westerns were thought to be inferior
to his melodrama about the Irish troubles, ''The Informer.''

Only later was it possible to admit that movies that tackle large social
subjects tend to be clumsy. They stumble over their own important feet. Such
films as ''The Ox-Bow Incident'' (anti-lynching), ''Gentleman's Agreement''
(anti-discrimination), ''On the Beach'' (anti-nuclear war) have always been seen
by people who couldn't agree more, even before they enter the theater.

Ford did his best with his screen adaptation of John Steinbeck's ''Grapes of
Wrath'' (anti-societal indifference to poverty), but it's still not the equal of
''She Wore a Yellow Ribbon.'' The movie is so elegantly photographed in
high-contrast black-and-white that the images embalm in poetic feelings what
should be primal outrage.

Hollywood once felt obligated to make the occasional socially conscious film.
Darryl F. Zanuck, Jack Warner and the other great studio chiefs earned their
brownie points by these considerations of the less fortunate. Today such
relevant, or timely, movies are made more often for television than theaters,
which have yet to receive one major movie that acknowledges the existence of
AIDS.

A few stubborn film makers persist. Martin Ritt did not chance upon ''Stanley
and Iris.'' It was written by his two longtime collaborators, Harriet Frank Jr.
and Irving Ravetch, with whom he made the even more successful ''Hud'' and the
Oscar-winning ''Norma Rae.''

Today nobody wants to see a string of what Zanuck might have called ''problem
pictures.'' It isn't the problems that one misses on the screen. It is, rather,
a kind of fiction that is not totally self-referential, to the extent that the
world we inhabit seems not to exist, or to exist only in a kind of negative way.

The war on drugs is seen almost entirely in terms of enforcement, never in terms
of the social conditions that make the taking of drugs so pervasive. It is
fiction's equivalent to a policy that puts more emphasis on interdiction than on
the treatment of root causes.

Most of these films seem lazy. Knee-jerk cynicism passes for healthy skepticism,
which might ask the same kind of embarrassing questions about drugs that Mr.
Moore raises about unemployment.

These days days when working stiffs go to movies, the working stiffs they see on
the screen are mostly policemen or members of some other branch of the
law-and-order business.

''Tango and Cash,'' ''Hard to Kill,'' ''Internal Affairs,'' ''Blue Steel,''
''The Last of the Finest,'' to name a few.  You might well get the impression
from our movies that we live in a police state. In that context, a small
reference to teeth is rejuvenating.

In the Feb. 18 Film View on the Oscar nominations, I gave the mistaken
impression that members of Hollywood's various talent guilds are automatically
members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. The fact is that
guild members must be invited by the academy to join the appropriate academy
branch. Of the many called by their profession, only a small percentage are
chosen by the academy.

Examples: Of the 9,000 members of the Directors Guild of America, 250 are
members of the academy's directors' branch; of the 11,000 members of the Writers
Guild of America, 381 are academy members; of the 72,000 members of the Screen
Actors Guild, just over 1,000 belong to the academy.

The members of these academy branches vote for the nominees in their particular
fields. The entire academy membership then votes in all categories for the final
awards.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jane Fonda working as a cake icer in ''Stanley and Iris''-The
characters worry about jobs, money and how to pay the bills (pg. 1); Annabella
Sciorra and Ron Eldard in ''True Love''-acutely observed details of behavior and
speech; Sally Field, the textile worker in ''Norma Rae,'' made by Martin Ritt,
director of ''Stanley and Iris''; In ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' Tom Cruise
as the paraplegic Ron Kovic has a clearly established working-class background.
(pg. 16)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT;
FICTION

BYLINE: By JOSEPH A. CINCOTTI

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 294 words



LOOSE JAM. By Wayne Wilson. (Delacorte, $17.95.) Poor Henry Brown. Standing on
his redwood porch in yuppified Morro Bay, Calif., this Vietnam veteran, sometime
guitarist, record-store manager and reluctant hero of Wayne Wilson's ''Loose
Jam'' sees his old Army buddy Miles Duckworth coming right for him. Miles, a
one-legged casualty of the war and the 60's, is ''humping along between those
crutches like some strung-out apostle with a load of bad news that just couldn't
wait.'' The news is that a maniacal veteran, nursing a grudge from the war, has
found Miles and wants his blood - and maybe Henry's too. Miles, who once played
a mean piano (''the voice of a generation,'' said the album notes), is disgusted
by the new life Henry has made for himself in their 15 years apart. So he helps
Henry lose his job as ''a flunky for a bunch of . . . suits'' and nearly
destroys his house. Henry and Martha, his beloved, are compelled to help Miles
escape to Ventura, but the wrathful veteran, known for more than half the book
only as the Policy Man, tracks them down for the novel's predictably violent
denouement. And, in the process, what might have been a series of bluesy riffs
on redemption or reconciliation, or the inevitability of retribution, turns into
a plodding arpeggio. In this first novel, the characters mouth cliches that
recall the worst excesses of Kerouac, and there is very little that is
evocative, insightful or sympathetic. The fractured plot cuts between the
here-and-now, the way-back-when and the just-a-few-hours-ago, and coincidences
wait in ambush like snipers. But the brief excursions back to Vietnam are
diverting, if only because they distract us from the dreariness of Mr. Wilson's
boozy, dope-filled New Age California.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NO LONG-TERM PLAN ON MILITARY SAVING

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1610 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 24


At a time when receding Soviet military power suggests that hundreds of billions
of dollars will be cut from the Pentagon budget in this decade, the Bush
Administration and Congress are so absorbed in the politics of the moment that
neither has begun to develop a strategy for using the money.

White House officials say no one in the Administration has been specifically
assigned to examine how the military savings should be allocated in the last
half of the decade, when by the Administration's own accounting the amount will
be sizable.

This worries many scholars and some politicians, who fear that without
forethought, the windfall will be frittered away. After the Vietnam War,
unplanned and unrestrained social spending gobbled up the dollars saved by the
American withdrawal. More Than a Mirage?  ''The so-called peace dividend,'' said
Felix G. Rohatyn, the investment banker, ''is not something that will magically
appear like Athena fully armed from the brow of Zeus. The peace dividend will
become reality when it is decided upon, planned for and managed over a period of
years, as a matter of national policy.''

President Bush takes the position that the peace dividend is largely a mirage
and that the small sums that may prove real in the next few years must be used
entirely to reduce the Federal deficit. Some critics argue that the President is
ducking the issue.

Others maintain that Mr. Bush is playing a cagy political game, avoiding policy
decisions that might dent his popularity.

In any case, without forceful leadership from the White House, Congress is
unlikely to act.

The Democrats, who control Congress, are riven by ideological and jurisdictional
disputes, and they seem to be splitting into several camps over the issue of how
to allocate domestic spending. So far this year, they have been unable to agree
on the size and shape of next year's military budget, much less on a long-range
view.

''The word 'plan' has gone out of style,'' said James David Barber, a political
scientist at Duke University who is an expert on the Presidency. ''What has
happened in American politics is its drift to sentimentality and emotion, which
substitute for looking at the facts that face you at the moment.''

Uncertainties in world affairs and the national economy mean that the eventual
size of the peace dividend cannot be precisely forecast. But it is clear that at
least 40 percent of this year's $300 billion Pentagon budget is aimed at
fighting a land war in Europe, a prospect that now seems remote, and that the
military expansion the Bush Administration was planning as recently as last
summer is no longer necessary.

If military spending is reduced by an average of only $10 billion a year, or 3
percent, for the next 10 years, the Pentagon budget in the year 2000 will be
$100 billion lower than it is now (in 1990 dollars), and the cumulative saving
over the decade will be $550 billion.

The money could be used to cut taxes, to reduce the budget deficit and begin
paying off the $3 trillion national debt or to increase spending on domestic
programs and international assistance. Or it could be used for some combination
of the three. Critics say the Government should now begin a broad debate over
these alternatives.

After the Vietnam War, the savings were spent without a plan or much public
debate.

From 1968 to 1976, the military budget fell to $195 billion, in 1990 dollars,
from $302 billion. Most of the money was used to increase Social Security and
Medicare payments. Those expenditures were popular at the time, but they are one
of the causes of the large deficit the country now faces.

If Mr. Bush has reflected on the matter, it is not apparent from his public
statements. ''I think the American people want a cautious approach on this,'' he
said at a news conference last month. ''I don't think any of us can see with
clairvoyance what's going to happen the day after tomorrow.''

Ostriches and Unknowns

Mr. Bush's position has reinforced the conviction of some Administration
officials that long-range planning is futile.

''Surprises tend to be negative, and we cannot plan for the things that will
come up and bite us,'' said a top adviser to the President.

But others agree with an under secretary who said he was frustrated by what he
called ''the ostrich response'' and added: ''We know we're going to be wrong. We
know unknowns will occur. Nonetheless, if you don't think through what the
possibilities are, you're liable to have such a narrow focus that you're unable
to respond to the possibilities when some of them turn out to be true.''

Politicians outside the Administration say Mr. Bush's unwillingness to address
the situation is based on two political factors: his reluctance to risk his
popularity by taking positions that could generate opposition, and his feeling
that discussion of a large peace dividend over a decade would lead to more
demands now for spending on social programs.

Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York, a potential challenger in the 1992 Presidential
race, said that Mr. Bush was ''the best politician I've ever seen in the White
House'' and that ''as a politician, he wouldn't do anything risky or
controversial unless he had to.''

To that view, which is widely held in political circles, the Governor added an
extra twist. ''Why should he fool with the peace dividend now,'' Mr. Cuomo
asked, ''when he can save it till 1991, just before the election,'' and
distribute it then for popular domestic programs?

Senator Warren B. Rudman of New Hampshire, a leading Republican on budget
issues, said Mr. Bush's reluctance to discuss the long-range implications of
military savings probably resulted from ''a deep concern that advocates of every
social program people have been scheming about, from child care to health
benefits,'' would lay claim to the money and ''spend it three times over.''

Like many other lawmakers of both parties, Mr. Rudman said authority in Congress
was too diffuse to develop a coherent strategy. ''The leadership on this must
come from the White House,'' he said.

Congress has been further hampered by its peculiar rules for writing a budget.
The Bush Administration has proposed spending $292 billion at the Pentagon next
year, about $5 billion more than in the current fiscal year but about $6 billion
less than what would be needed to keep pace with inflation.

Budget First, Then Plan

Congress is sure to lower that figure, the question being by how much. Some
Administration officials suggest they could accept a modest reduction.

Logically, Congress would first address the position it thought the United
States should occupy in the new world order, then decide what kind of military
would be needed to protect that position and how much it would cost. Finally the
legislators would draft a budget for the Pentagon and the rest of the
Government. But the rules require the lawmakers to approve next year's budget by
next month, long before the foundation has been laid.

Senator Jim Sasser, the Tennessee Democrat who heads the Budget Committee,
complained that he could not begin to take a long-term view because he was
''under great pressure to meet budgetary deadlines.'' He said he would like to
be able to prepare a military budget based on an ''overall strategic look from
the Armed Services Committee, but we're not getting it.''

The chairman of the armed services panel, Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia,
maintained in a speech on the floor Thursday that he could not provide detailed
advice to the budget writers because the Pentagon had not developed a military
strategy that took account of changes in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.

Defense Secretary Dick Cheney rejected Mr. Nunn's criticism and said the
Democratic lawmakers were offering ''complaints instead of solutions.''

Mr. Cheney complicated the political situation by publishing a list of military
bases that might be closed to save money. A study released this weekend by the
Democratic Study Group, an organization of liberal Democrats in the House,
concluded that 99 percent of the jobs lost under that plan would be in
Congressional districts represented by Democrats.

A Pentagon spokesman said Mr. Cheney's plan was not grounded in politics, but
Republican lawmakers acknowledged that there had been much chortling in their
cloakroom over the discomfort the base list had caused Democrats.

Democrats in the House have such a large majority that if they are united, they
can afford to ignore their Republican colleagues. Various Democratic factions
got together last week and agreed on small cuts in military spending next year
and larger ones in the years ahead.

'A Whole New Global Struggle'

Because of institutional jealousies, senators and representatives rarely work in
tandem. Representative Les AuCoin, an Oregon Democrat on the military
appropriations subcommittee, said the agreement of the House Democrats
represented ''a recognition that it is suicidal politically and dumb in terms of
policy for Democrats to simply be looking at the maximum number of cookies that
can be taken out of the Defense cookie jar.''

Senator Sasser said he thought the Democrats in the House were merely postponing
the tough choices. But in separate interviews, both he and Mr. AuCoin agreed
that the budget problems this year paled next to the need for a long-term
strategy. ''The global struggle we've been laboring in for my political
lifetime,'' said Mr. AuCoin, ''is being replaced with a whole new global
struggle, an economic struggle, and I wonder every day how we, how the United
States, is going to figure in it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: ''The peace dividend will become reality when it is decided
upon, planned for and managed,'' said Felix G. Rohatyn, the New York investment
banker. (The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 27, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

'Driving Miss Daisy' Wins 4 Oscars, Including One for Jessica Tandy

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1467 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, March 26


''Driving Miss Daisy,'' a sentimental film about the relationship between an
elderly Southern Jewish widow and her black chauffeur, won four Oscars tonight,
including best picture of 1989 and best actress, in an Academy Awards
presentation that offered many surprises and odd contradictions but few clear
clues to trends in film.

No single film dominated the 62d annual awards, as has often happened in past
years. And the film considered one of the heavy favorites to win best picture,
''Born on the Fourth of July,'' the story of a paraplegic Vietnam veteran's
passage into the antiwar movement, won only two Oscars, for best director for
Oliver Stone and for film editing.

Bruce Beresford, the director of ''Miss Daisy,'' was not even nominated. But the
film gave Jessica Tandy, the 80-year-old stage actress, the chance to win her
first Oscar in six decades as a performer. There was also an Oscar for Alfred
Uhry for his screenplay for ''Miss Daisy,'' which he adapted from his Pulitzer
Prise-winning Off-Broadway play.

It was also a satisfying night for the makers of ''My Left Foot,'' the wrenching
film about the Irish painter and writer Christy Brown, who suffered from
cerebral palsy. The award for best actor went to the British actor Daniel
Day-Lewis, for his performance as Brown. Brenda Fricker, the Irish actress, won
the Oscar for best supporting actress for her portrayal of Brown's mother.

And there was glory, too, for ''Glory,'' the Civil War epic about a black
regiment fighting on the Union side. It won three awards, including best
supporting actor for Denzel Washington, his first Oscar.

It was thus a diffused and surprising evening with no clearly dominant winners.
Mr. Day-Lewis, who beat out the early favorite for best actor, Tom Cruise, in
''Born on the Fourth of July,'' used his victory to issue a plea for better
treatment of the disabled and acknowledged that some disabled actors resented
his taking the role. ''But due to the hypocrisy of financing, this film could
never be made with a disabled actor,'' he said backstage after the awards. ''I
very selfishly decided to put my name on it.''

In accepting, the actor said that when the artist was alive he needed very
little encouragement to make his voice heard. ''I'm truly grateful to you for
honoring me with this award,'' he said.

None were more delighted than Richard D. Zanuck and Lili Fini Zanuck, producers
of ''Driving Miss Daisy,'' which was rejected by all major studios at first.

Mis Tandy, the 80-year-old stage actress, had never been nominated for an Oscar
before.

''I never expected in a million years I'd ever be in this position,'' Miss Tandy
said. She was the oldest person ever to win an Oscar. The film, adapted from
Alfred Uhry's Pulitzer Prize-winning play, portrayed the slowly evolving
relationship between the widow and her black chauffeur, played by Morgan
Freeman.

In accepting, Miss Tandy thanked the Zanucks, the producers of the film, which
had repeatedly been rejected by major studios. In an especially pointed mention,
she gave special thanks to her director, Bruce Beresford, who was not nominated
for best director even though ''Miss Daisy'' received nine nominations,
including one for best picture.

Washington for 'Glory'

For his powerful performance as a mistreated runaway slave serving in a black
Civil War regiment in the film ''Glory,'' Mr. Washington won his first Oscar, as
best supporting actor.

The award to the young black actor came as something of a surprise in a category
that included strong performances by Danny Aiello as the white owner of a pizza
parlor in a black neighborhood of Brooklyn in ''Do the Right Thing'' and Dan
Aykroyd as Miss Tandy's son in ''Driving Miss Daisy.''

In accepting the award, Mr. Washington cited with pride the role of black
soldiers who fought, largely unsung, on the Union side. ''I'd like to pay homage
to the 54th, the black soldiers who helped to make this country free,'' he said.

Even he, he conceded backstage, had been ignorant of this page of American
history. ''I was stunned this history was not taught,''he said.

Ms. Fricker, who had never been nominated for an Oscar before, won over strong
performances by Anjelica Huston in ''Enemies: A Love Story'' and Julia Roberts
in ''Steel Magnolias.''

She seemed flustered by the award. ''I'd like to thank Christy Brown just for
being alive,'' she said in accepting, telling reporters later backstage that
''I'm the only person in the world who claims never to have met him.''

Tonight's event, held at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion at the Los Angeles Music
Center, was broadcast either live or delayed to nearly 100 countries. In an
innovation this year, six awards were presented in five foreign film capitals:
London, Moscow, Tokyo, Buenos Aires and Sydney, Australia. For example, Jack
Lemmon and the Russian actress Natalya Negoda presented the award for best
foreign film from Moscow. But all the recipients were in Los Angeles.

Movie-House Dreams

That award went to the film considered the front-runner, Italy's ''Cinema
Paradiso,'' directed by Guiseppee Tornatore, a story of a young boy and his
fascination with the films he sees in his small village movie house.

The award for art direction went to Warner Brothers's ''Batman,'' the box-office
smash that received no other nominations. Anton Furst was cited for art
direction and Peter Young for the film's set decoration.

Phyllis Dalton won an Oscar for her elaborate costumes in ''Henry V,'' starring
Kenneth Branagh. And the underwater scenes in 20th Century Fox's ''The Abyss''
brought an Oscar for visual effects. The makeup award went to ''Driving Miss
Daisy.''

The song ''Under the Sea'' from ''The Little Mermaid'' was named the best
original song, and Alan Menken's score for the Walt Disney animated feature won
the Oscar for best score.

The award for film editing went to David Brenning and Joe Hutsching for ''Born
on the Fourth of July,'' the story of a paraplegic veteran's passage from
Vietnam patriot to antiwar activist.

The battle scenes in ''Glory'' won the Oscar for achievement in sound, and the
chase scenes in ''Indiana Jones aand the Last Crusade'' won for sound effects
editing. Both sound awards were presented from the Sydney Opera House.

''Glory'' also won an Oscar for Freddie Francis for his cinematography.

Kurosawa and Koch Honored

Several special awards were announced in advance.

The Academy conferred a special honorary award on Akira Kurosawa, the
79-year-old Japanese director best known for his 1951 film ''Rashomon.'' He was
cited for ''cinematic accomplishments that have inspired, delighted, enriched
and entertained worldwide audiences and influenced film makers throughout the
world.''

The Gordon E. Sawyer Award, which honors contributions to motion-picture
technology, went to Pierre Angenieux, an 82-year-old French optical designer.
Now retired, he was a pioneer in lens design, particularly zoom and wide-angle
lenses.

The Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award, which is given only in some years to honor
humanitarian efforts by an individual in the movie industry, went to Howard W.
Koch. The veteran film maker was cited for his charitable work for the industry
and for health and community organizations. He was the 25th recipient of the
award.

Nominations were made by members of each of the academy's 13 branches. In all,
4,799 members were eligible to vote this year. Apart from the foreign-film
category, 217 feature-length films were eligible. To be eligible, a film had to
be in English or with English subtitles and must have played for seven
consecutive days in a theater in the Los Angeles area starting no later than
Dec. 31, 1989.

The Oscar Winners

PICTURE: ''Driving Miss Daisy''
ACTOR: Daniel Day-Lewis, ''My Left Foot''
ACTRESS: Jessica Tandy, ''Driving Miss Daisy''
SUPPORTING ACTOR: Denzel Washington, ''Glory''
SUPPORTING ACTRESS: Brenda Fricker, ''My Left Foot''
DIRECTOR: Oliver Stone, ''Born on the Fourth of July''
ORIGINAL SCREENPLAY: Tom Schulman, ''Dead Poets Society''
ADAPTED SCREENPLAY: Alfred Uhry, ''Driving Miss Daisy''
FOREIGN FILM: ''Cinema Paradiso,''

Italy
ART DIRECTION: ''Batman''
CINEMATOGRAPHY: ''Glory''
COSTUME DESIGN: ''Henry V''
DOCUMENTARY FEATURE: ''Common Threads: Stories From the Quilt''
DOCUMENTARY SHORT SUBJECT:

''The Johnstown Flood''
FILM EDITING: ''Born on the Fourth of July''
MAKEUP: ''Driving Miss Daisy''
ORIGINAL SCORE: Alan Menken, ''The Little Mermaid''
ORIGINAL SONG: ''Under the Sea'' from ''The Little Mermaid''
ANIMATED SHORT FILM: ''Balance''
LIVE ACTION SHORT FILM: ''Work Experience''
SOUND: ''Glory''
SOUND EFFECTS EDITING: ''Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade''
VISUAL EFFECTS: ''The Abyss''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Daniel Day-Lewis, left, holding the Academy Award he won last
night for best actor in the film ''My Left Foot.'' ''Driving Miss Daisy,'' with
Jessica Tandy, who won for best actress, and Morgan Freeman, was the winner for
the best picture. Denzel Washington, far right, won the award for the best
supporting actor for his role in ''Glory.'' (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 5, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

City Bar Association Long Enlightened

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 218 words


To the Editor:

While the expected nomination of Conrad K. Harper as president of the
Association of the Bar of the City of New York is certainly newsworthy because
he would be the association's first black president, his nomination is not quite
the break with the ''old boy'' network that you imply (news article, Dec. 12).

It is the City Bar Association, after all, that was responsible for the
elimination of the requirement that a photograph be attached to membership
applications for the American Bar Association.

Moreover, there have been in recent times at least two Jewish presidents of this
''white shoe'' association. It was one of the establishment figures, Francis T.
P. Plimpton, who as president of the association led a large delegation of
members to Washington to protest the Vietnam War. A more recent president,
Robert McKay, former dean of New York University Law School, is one of the bar's
most selfless and constructive members of official commissions, not-for-profit
civic associations and the like.

Thus, while the selection of Mr. Harper as president of the City Bar Association
is a first, his nomination and expected election will be consistent with the
enlightened tradition of the association over the last few decades.

ROBERT CONRAD
  New York, Dec. 12, 1989

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SPECIAL SECTION: Science Under Scrutiny;
Where the Talent Goes

BYLINE: By Dennis Hevesi

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 24, Column 1; Education Life

LENGTH: 4335 words


THEIR stories are inspiring - of children who experienced a calling, of
teen-agers clasped in the exhilarating grip of curiosity, of adults still driven
by the delicious joy of discovery.

In no way do they constitute a scientific sample. They are nine winners of the
Westinghouse Science Talent Search - the Nobel Prize of high school science -
their names plucked from among the 1,920 cited since 1942, when the program
started, and supplied by Science Service, the agency that administers the
annual, nationwide talent search.

Most were nurtured in family cultures that supported their scientific urgings.
Some had parents who were scientists themselves. Almost all had a mentor,
usually a teacher wise enough to see some spark that set apart one bright face
from the blur of too many students in too many classes.

They have gone on to great things - doctorates, medical degrees, professorships,
MacArthur Foundation ''genius awards,'' Nobel Prizes. Some have made discoveries
that heal the sick or redefine the way the universe works. Others are in the
midst of making such discoveries.

At the same time, their success and the elements that fostered it raise
troubling questions about the focus and efficacy of science education in the
United States.

They themselves raise the questions:

Has the collection of facts -the ''vast vat of knowledge,'' as one of them calls
it - expanded so rapidly that students are forced into mere mechanical
memorization?

Has the ability to apply quantitative reasoning been programmed into oblivion by
computers and calculators and prepackaged software?

More profoundly, does the nation's scientific survival rest with a few novas,
bright new stars, with the self-propelling will to fuel their quest?

Can the United States retain its intellectual rigor and economic vitality by
depending on the students who hear their own call while, as some contend, the
system ceases to issue that call?

NINA SCHOR
Assistant professor of neurology

THERE were the medicine-cabinet experiments - ''take Mercurochrome and alcohol
and mix'' - at age 5.

A year later, the chemistry set appeared. ''My folks bought it, but I was deemed
too young to use it,'' said Nina Schor. ''So my dad showed me the experiment
with the baking soda fizzling.''

At 9, she asked for the microscope. ''That definitely caught my imagination,''
said Dr. Schor, now 34 and an assistant professor of neurology at Children's
Hospital in Pittsburgh.

The intellectual soil in which a future scientist could set down roots had been
cultivated by her family. ''My father is a physicist, and that was my
introduction to science,'' Dr. Schor said.

In such surroundings, it wasn't long before a young girl came to realize that it
wasn't just fizzle and squiggly things under a lens that offered a deeper
satisfaction. ''It was the way of thinking, the scientific approach to
problems,'' she said.

And so in 1972 Nina Schor, who was about to graduate from Benjamin Cardozo High
School in Bayside, Queens, became the first woman to win the top prize in the
Westinghouse Science Talent Search. ''I did an experiment showing that
aldehydes, chemicals which are common pollutants in the atmosphere, affect the
chlorophyll in a one-celled plant called euglena,'' Dr. Schor said.

''The notion was that many of these common pollutants were poisoning our food
and oxygen sources,'' she said. ''In fact, under fairly low concentrations,
these organisms did lose their chlorophyll, basically got bleached.''

From there, it was a dual major in molecular biophysics and biochemistry at
Yale; a medical degree from Cornell and a Ph.D. from Rockefeller University, all
eventually leading to Dr. Schor's current search for chemotherapeutic methods to
battle tumors in the nervous systems of children.

Dr. Shor said there was no single person or ''eureka moment'' that turned her on
to science. Family support aside, she said she was fortunate that ''we had a
research course where you spent the first half doing science literature searches
and designing experiments and then, in the second half, did the experiment.''

Such courses are ''very uncommon, unfortunately,'' she said. ''I think that part
of the problem with science education is that we tend to teach children
collections of fact, rather than how to think. I teach a lot of graduate
students and medical students. There's been progressive decline in their ability
to reason out things having to do with quantity, to derive relationships without
a memorized formula.''

Dr. Schor believes that, ''on the one hand, the body of facts that we consider
useful has grown so that students spend too much time memorizing. On the other,
I wonder whether the wholesale use of calculators, computers, prepackaged
software, makes students no longer able to think.

''Maybe we give those things to people too early.''

THERON STANFORD
Graduate student

THE SUN was going down that day when Theron Stanford's mother finally came to
school, looking for her son.

''See, there was this new teacher who had just graduated from M.I.T. I was
picking his brain, and we forgot about the clock,'' Mr. Stanford said recently
with the enthusiasm of the 12-year-old he was then.

When he was 5, Theron was already so good at numbers that he beat teachers at
math games. While in junior high he mastered high school algebra, geometry and
trigonometry. So when he got to San Marino (Calif.) High School they sent him to
the California Institute of Technology to take calculus.

''I would not be detoured,'' said Mr. Stanford, who now, at 25, is a graduate
student in math at the University of California at Berkeley. ''I loved math so
much that when I was 10 I realized I wasn't getting enough out of the school
system,'' he said. ''So I went to the library and checked out books on number
theory.''

It was, not surprisingly, a math project that earned Mr. Stanford Westinghouse
honors in 1982. ''Suppose I look at all numbers between 1 and 100,'' he said in
concluding a complicated explanation of his research, ''What kind of patterns
could I see?''

But what's the point? ''There's not necessarily a point,'' he confessed. ''It's
searching for some knowledge. My project might not have had an application to
business or technology, but it did increase the vast vat of knowledge.''

All through school, there have been teachers willing to help Mr. Stanford fill
his vat of knowledge. Some were not particularly grounded in science. ''If the
teacher is wise, that can be enough,'' he said. ''For example, there was a
junior high teacher who noticed that I took the tests too fast and spent half
the period napping,'' he said. That was the teacher who arranged for Mr.
Stanford to jump ahead to high school courses.

ROBERT AXELROD
Political scientist

IT WAS like the 'Millionaire' show'' - the 1950's television drama in which an
unsuspecting citizen is suddenly handed a check for $1 million by an anonymous
stranger.

That is the way Robert Axelrod describes the day two years ago when, out of the
blue, the call came that he had been chosen for a MacArthur fellowship, in which
unsuspecting experts in a variety of fields are granted up to $375,000 over a
five-year period to do whatever work they want.

It was not his first award. In 1961, when he was a senior at Evanston Township
High School in Illinois, Dr. Axelrod's computer simulation of evolution earned
him Westinghouse honors.

Today, Dr. Axelrod is a political scientist - which some might consider a
contradiction in terms. ''In college, the University of Chicago, I earned a
bachelor's in math,'' he said. ''I was looking around for some science to apply
it to. Political science seemed the most interesting.'' Now, Dr. Axelrod is
Distinguished Professor of Political Science at the University of Michigan.

In choosing him for the fellowship, the MacArthur Foundation cited work Dr.
Axelrod had done on what he calls ''the evolution of cooperation.''

''This was a study,'' he explained, ''of what strategies can get egoists,
self-interested people, to cooperate. A strategy of 'tit for tat' works well. If
you get them to cooperate on the first move, they tend to always do what the
other guy did on subsequent moves. If both are selfish neither does very well.''

Dr. Axelrod sees applications for such a strategy in superpower relations. ''One
of my main interests is the arms race, and 'tit for tat' has this sort of
flavor,'' he said. ''If both sides are selfish, they buy a lot of weapons but
don't gain any advantage.''

Political science, Dr. Axelrod contends, is becoming more scientific. ''One way
in which that happens is computer simulation,'' he said.

In his case, Dr. Axelrod said, interest in math preceded interest in science.
''I had some wonderful teachers at Evanston who helped me see the joys of
science. Especially helpful was a class set up to encourage individual projects.
The first semester, students picked subjects. The second semester they did
individual research or experiments. And the teacher was only present the first
day of class. He was next door for private, individual advice, but he made it
clear that it was our responsibility.''

''A lot depends on the teacher's ability to make it exciting,'' Dr. Axelrod
said. ''It is often the case that teachers want to be inspiring but are up
against so many handicaps, such as discipline, class size, lack of quality
resources. If some of those burdens were lightened the teachers could begin to
shine.''

ATOM SARKAR
Cancer researcher

BASEBALL camp or lab work - that was the choice facing Atom Sarkar 10 years ago.
The Philadelphia Phillies lost a budding second-baseman.

Mr. Sarkar, now 23 and researching breast cancer at the Medical College of
Georgia in Augusta, emigrated with his family from India at age 10 months. He
considers himself as American as baseball.

''Up until ninth grade, I had great designs to be a second baseman for the
Phillies,'' Mr. Sarkar said, noting that his family first settled near
Pennsylvania in New Jersey. ''Then in ninth grade, Dad felt I should decide
whether to go to baseball camp or do research in a laboratory to see if I would
like science.'' Atom chose the molecular virology lab at the Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, where his father was the chief
scientist.

When he was born, said Mr. Sarkar, explaining how he got his unusual first name,
his father was writing a dissertation in biophysics, ''and my mother's
grandfather - a very learned gentleman who was Speaker of the West Bengali
Parliament - felt their child should be named Atom, whether it was a boy or a
girl.''

Mr. Sarkar loves the name. ''No one usually forgets it,'' he said. ''There
aren't many of me around.''

Soon after starting work in his father's lab, the boy was hooked. ''I opened up
my first mouse and it was amazing, overwhelming. I was in awe at how beautiful
nature is.''

When the family moved to Manhattan, Atom was accepted into Stuyvesant High
School, which specializes in science and math. There, in 1984, under the
tutelage of a Rockefeller University professor, Michael Wallach, he began
studying malaria parasites. ''I did a genetic analysis of a particular parasite
protein that is involved in the attaching, or attacking, process into the red
blood cell.''

Mr. Sarkar's research was overtaken by progress. ''That year a group from N.Y.U.
came out with a vaccine for malaria, and that blew the wind out of our sails,''
he said. Still, the work earned him a Westinghouse scholarship.

''At Stuyvesant,'' he said, ''the teachers instilled a sense of curiosity.
That's what makes the school so great. My calculus teacher was really not the
greatest expert, and he would be the first to admit it. But there was just a
magic about the way he taught. He made me want to learn.'' And that was true for
''a whole host of teachers,'' Mr. Sarkar said.

''You need somebody who doesn't turn you off. There are so many monotone
teachers, the same lecture year after year. You need someone who instills that
vibrant spirit that makes you realize that this is such a wonderful endeavor.''

And, Mr. Sarkar contends, ''It could be replicated in regular schools. Great
people, people who can motivate you, are everywhere.''

PAUL TESCHAN
Medical researcher

IT WAS 1942, the middle of World War II, and the first year of the Westinghouse
Science Talent Search. Paul Teschan was one of the contest's two top winners.

No one was more surprised than he, and no one's life could have been more
affected by it.

The contestants were asked to write an essay: ''How can science help win the
war?'' ''It was an upbeat notion,'' said Dr. Teschan, now 65, ''that brains and
analytic capacity and a sense of serving a higher cause would not only be
motivating but enabling for scientists to get with the war effort.''

Dr. Teschan, then a teen-ager, had served a stint as chemistry supply room
monitor at Shorewood High School in Shorewood, Wis. But in no way was he certain
that science was his path. ''It came as a total surprise, really, that I even
should have been among the 40 finalists,'' he said. ''At the banquet, when they
awarded me the top scholarship, I was floored. It affirmed that I had some of
the ingredients necessary for success in science.''

The boy had the ingredients, but - as with many other Westinghouse winners - his
family had set the pot on the burner and a teacher had stirred. ''As long ago as
I can remember, our family, at the dinner table, was interested in geological,
astronomical developments,'' Dr. Teschan said. ''Before I was around, my
grandfather used to gather the family and narrate the story of evolution. The
fascination, the aliveness with which he told this, imprinted my uncles and
aunts and my dad,'' who was a mechanical engineer. ''At the dinner table, they
recalled this.''

At the time he won the Westinghouse award, Dr. Teschan said, ''Our family was
just coming out of surviving the Great Depression. Dad was in the Army. The
award gave me the financial backing to go to college'' - Carleton College in
Northfield, Minn.

Later Dr. Teschan earned a medical degree from the University of Minnesota, and
spent 21 years as an Army medical officer, during which he specialized in
research on acute kidney failure among combat casualties. He retired in 1969 as
a colonel, and is now doing kidney research at Vanderbilt University in
Nashville.

''The impetus for science came from my chemistry teacher, Harold Wierks,'' Dr.
Teschan said. ''He asked me to serve in the chemistry supply room. When I had
questions, he and I could get together. He's the one who said, 'Why don't you
try for the science talent search?'

''One can have an interior sense of one's role or mission. But it's an enormous
boost to have that interior sense confirmed by people who know their way around.
And it's important that all of my interests in scholarship were supported, but I
wouldn't say pushed, by my parents.''

Dr. Teschan gives much of the credit for his success, however, to ''the whole
school system in that town,'' Shorewood, ''of something like 15,000 people. We
had a superb faculty. It has something to do with teaching the students rather
than just the subject.''

ROGER CUFFEY
Paleontologist

WHEN HE was a high school freshman in Indiana, Roger Cuffey circulated a
petition calling for the establishment of a one-semester course in earth
science. It was 1953, four years before the Soviet Union launched Sputnik, the
first manmade satellite.

''The principal said he would like to do it, but he just couldn't,'' said Dr.
Cuffey. ''He didn't know where to find teachers; there wasn't room in the
curriculum.''

How many would-be scientists, in schools across the nation, never fulfilled
their potential because of similar conditions, and how many were never even
exposed to the possibility, cannot be counted. But Dr. Cuffey, now 50 and a
paleontologist at Pennsylvania State University, wasn't left at the dock; he was
already on board. Both his father and mother were astronomers, and the boy knew
early on that science was his life's ship.

When he was very young, Dr. Cuffey recalled, ''Dad taught at the Naval Academy,
and near there were some famous fossil shell beds, the Calvert Cliffs. We would
go on field trips together. I started picking up shark's teeth and fossil shells
when I was 3.''

Periodically, his father's duties took him to Washington, and the elder Cuffey
would drop off his son at the Smithsonian Institution. ''I would spend the day
looking at the dinosaur skeletons and got to know them as personal friends, as
only a small kid can,'' Dr. Cuffey said. ''What it may mean is that a scientist
has to be born, or at least be born into a family that supports the interest.''

The support was palpable. In 1956, when he was a senior at University High
School in Bloomington, Ind., Roger Cuffey and his father built a high-powered
reflecting telescope. The following March, Roger won a Westinghouse scholarship,
''for a project in which I looked at Mars through that telescope and mapped the
planet's surface. This was before there were any satellites to go around it,''
he said.

At that time, the science program at his high school was unremarkable. ''It
always seemed to involve relatively less interesting, simple things like levers
and pulleys,'' Dr. Cuffey said. ''My guess is that it was probably what they
knew and what they had equipment for. But I know that as time went on, many
school systems became more heavily involved in more interesting, complex sides
of science. I'm sure this was stimulated by Sputnik.''

Aside from his family's support, Dr. Cuffey had the help of a teacher named Jack
Munsee. ''He provided broadening opportunities for me,'' Dr. Cuffey said. ''For
instance, he had me present some short papers to the Indiana Junior Academy of
Sciences.''

Dr. Cuffey said that, ''without Jack, I still would have gone on, I'm sure.''
But when asked whether a student who lacks either a mentor or family support
would be inspired by the nation's system of science education, he said,
''Probably not.''

GAY ANN WILSON
Board member, Center for Excellence in Education

GAY ANN WILSON acknowledges that she ''did not go on to be a Nobel Prize-winning
scientist.'' She did win a Westinghouse scholarship in 1960 while a senior at
North Phoenix High School in Arizona, for proving the feasibility - if not the
widespread applicability -of using beans and peas as substances for typing
blood.

As Gay Ann Edlund, she graduated Phi Beta Kappa with a degree in biology from
Stanford University in 1964. Then she married, moved to San Diego, had children
and worked as a volunteer in a mental hospital.

But Mrs. Wilson, the wife of United States Senator Pete Wilson of California, is
not a loss for science. She is a board member of the Center for Excellence in
Education, an organization formerly called the Rickover Science Institute for
its founder, Adm. Hyman Rickover. ''We hand-pick students between their junior
and senior years who excel in math and science and bring them to Washington for
a six-week summer program where we train them in research techniques,'' Mrs.
Wilson said.  ''They have two weeks of classroom instruction from top high
school and college science teachers, three weeks in a mentored program in a
private or government agency, and then come back to put their project together.
Many of these students use that research to apply for the Westinghouse.''

As a child, Mrs. Wilson said, she ''had no family support'' for an interest in
science. ''My mother considered it unfeminine,'' she said. But her first high
school chemistry teacher was a woman. ''She also had a black belt in karate,''
Mrs. Wilson said, ''so she was larger than life for me.'' That teacher, whom
Mrs. Wilson recalls only as Miss Stevenson, recruited her protegee into science.

''I think teachers and professors must consider themselves recruiters for
science, not merely teachers,'' Mrs. Wilson said. ''It can even be someone who
isn't so good in science, but is a good recruiter.''

Mrs. Wilson has become a recruiter herself. ''I realized that California was not
doing well in the Westinghouse search and I didn't know why,'' she said. ''There
are always 40 national winners. New York will invariably have 17 to 20 of the
40, and California will be lucky to have 3. So I have been working with Governor
[George] Deukmejian's education adviser toward establishing science summer
school around the state.'' The idea, she said, is ''to get kids for two or three
summers before they get into high school.''

Mrs. Wilson would also like to establish two or three regional science-math high
schools in California. ''I don't think science teachers have the status they
should have,'' she said. ''Many times they were not science majors, but are
assigned to teach it. Consequently, they aren't excited about it.''

Elementary school science, she said, ''has got to be taught by someone who is
excited about it, so we get to these kids early.''

ANH TUAN NGUYEN-HUYNH
Biochemistry undergraduate

ANH TUAN Nguyen-Huynh brings to science a survivor's intensity of intention.

Only four years after arriving in the United States from Vietnam, with little
facility in English, Mr. Nguyen-Huynh won a Westinghouse scholarship for a
project on the pharmacology of antipsychotic drugs. He was then a senior at
University High School in Cleveland. Now he is a biochemistry major at Harvard
University.

Mr. Nguyen-Huynh was born in Saigon, South Vietnam, in 1968, soon after the Tet
offensive. When Saigon collapsed in 1975, his father, a South Vietnamese Army
officer, was arrested and later died in captivity. Mr. Nguyen-Huynh said that in
1981, at age 13, ''my mother decided we must leave because she thinks we are in
danger, and our future was bleak.''

With about 40 other people, he, his mother and sister crowded into a fishing
boat for a terrifying voyage across the Gulf of Siam to Thailand. Five times
pirates boarded the boat. ''They took jewelry, clothing, money,'' he said.
Miraculously, no one was harmed. ''The adults were very scared,'' Mr.
Nguyen-Huynh said, ''but I was young and didn't know better.''

After four months in a refugee camp near Songkla, Thailand, and eight months in
a camp in Indonesia, Mr. Nguyen-Huynh stepped off a plane in Seattle during a
winter storm. Stooping down, he picked up a handful of white, wet matter. ''I
wanted to touch snow,'' he said. ''I had only heard there was such a thing.''

Asian students in America, Mr. Nguyen-Huynh said, lean toward the sciences
''because the language barrier is less, but what consolidated my interest was
when I worked at Cleveland Metropolitan General Hospital with Dr. Anne Andorn, a
psychiatrist who was studying antipsychotic drugs.''

Mr. Nguyen-Huynh said, ''It's hard for me to say, for other people, whether high
school preparation here is solid.'' What is needed, he said, are ''teachers who
care about their subject, a curriculum that stresses understanding of concepts
rather than straight memorization, opportunity for some hands-on experience.

''The interest has to be nurtured, encouraged,'' he said.

SHELDON GLASHOW
Professor and Nobel laureate in physics

SOME teachers are smart enough to admit their ignorance, and Sheldon Glashow
appreciates that. ''I remember in seventh grade, my teacher was talking about
astronomy and I asked her: 'Why is the man in the moon always facing the
earth?,' '' he said. ''That meant the lunar day corresponded to the Earth's day.
It seemed to me a coincidence that was not implied by anything she had taught
us.''

Fortunately, that teacher, at Junior High School 52 in Manhattan, was secure
enough to respond by saying she did not know. ''That was a good answer,'' Dr.
Glashow said, ''because it is rare that you find a teacher so brazenly willing
to flaunt her ignorance.''

What the future Westinghouse winner and Nobel laureate learned was that ''there
simply were questions the teachers could not answer. That turned me toward
books.''

Both his father, a plumber, and his brother, who became a dentist, ''regarded
Einstein as a hero to be emulated,'' Dr. Glashow recalled. With their
encouragement, he earned admission to the Bronx High School of Science. There he
made friends with another student, Steven Weinberg, and around them gathered a
group of students who became ''kind of a school within a school,'' Dr. Glashow
said. ''You know, long talks about science over the phone, on the subway home.''

In 1950, during his senior year, Dr. Glashow won a Westinghouse scholarship for
a project investigating the ''hydroponic growth of tomato plants with selenium,
a chemical element, replacing sulfur.'' Hydroponics is the technique of growing
plants in fluids.

He and Mr. Weinberg went on to Cornell together, then met again at the
University of California at Berkeley, this time as professors. Later they found
themselves at Harvard in academic positions, and in 1979, they shared the Nobel
Prize in Physics. The Nobel committee cited their contribution in discovering a
piece of the puzzle called the unified field theory, which proposes that the
universe's four fundamental forces - gravity, electromagnetism, the strong force
and the weak force - are connected.

Dr. Glashow, still at Harvard teaching physics, is concerned about the state of
science education in America. ''At the junior high and high school level, it
stinks on hot ice,'' he said. ''With exceptions, the teachers know little and
the books are worse.''

A large part of the problem is systemic, he contends. ''The only way you can
take physics is first to take biology and chemistry, which is maniacal because
what we do is teach them as three independent disciplines, which they are not.''

Because of such problems, he said, ''The brightest American kids are no longer
going into science, they are going into investment banking.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Nina Schor (The New York Times/Scott Goldsmith) (pg. 24);
Theron Stanford (The New York Times/Terrence McCarthy) (pg. 25); Robert Axelrod
(pg. 26); Atom Sarkar (The New York Times/Walter D. Unks) (pg. 27); Paul Teschan
(The New York Times/Dan Loftin) (pg. 28); Roger Cuffey (pg. 29); Gay Ann Wilson
(The New York Times/Jose R. Lopez) 9pg. 30); Anh Tuan Nguyen-Huynh (The New York
Times/Joe Wrinn) (pg. 31); Sheldon Glashow (Tom Graham) (pg. 34)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE EPIDEMIC: DID THE PRESS CRY WOLF?

BYLINE: By DAVID SHAW; David Shaw writes about the news media for The Los
Angeles Times. His most recent book is ''Press Watch: A Provocative Look at How
Newspapers Report the News.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1493 words



THE MYTH OF HETEROSEXUAL AIDS
By Michael Fumento.
411 pp. New York:
A New Republic Book/Basic Books. $22.95.

To hear Michael Fumento tell it, the notion of an impending AIDS epidemic in the
general heterosexual population is a colossal lie perpetrated on the American
public by a deliberately deceitful press, with the eager cooperation of
self-aggrandizing AIDS activists, willfully negligent public health service
officials and morally bankrupt ideologues at both ends of the political
spectrum. That's for starters. With the exception of three epidemiologists and,
of course, himself (''Notwithstanding my expose . . . in the November 1987 issue
of Commentary and the large amount of publicity it received, the media continued
to use the inaccurate figures''), Mr. Fumento hardly has a kind word for anyone
in the struggle against a disease that has already killed some 70,000 Americans.
That's almost 40 percent more deaths than United States servicemen suffered in
the Vietnam War - a comparison, incidentally, that Mr. Fumento, a former AIDS
analyst for the United States Commission on Civil Rights, specifically rejects
as meaningless. In fact, by the time he gets around to calling acquired immune
deficiency syndrome ''a terrible disease,'' on page 331 of ''The Myth of
Heterosexual AIDS,'' a provocative and - one is tempted to say - insidious book,
it's difficult to escape the feeling that he isn't so sure that AIDS is really
such a bad thing. After all, even when he calls it ''a terrible disease,'' he
quickly adds - in the same sentence, much like a man giving a winter weather
report - ''the worst will soon be over''; in the very next sentence, he says,
''There are many other terrible diseases.'' Well, yes. So?

Mr. Fumento's seeming (and unseemly) callousness toward AIDS victims, and his
determination to ascribe the most perfidious motives to those who have warned
that AIDS could threaten many heterosexuals, are most unfortunate. They severely
undermine what is otherwise a legitimate and soundly reasoned thesis: that there
will be no AIDS epidemic in the general heterosexual population - that is, those
members of the heterosexual community who are neither hemophiliacs nor
intravenous drug users and who do not regularly have sex with hemophiliacs or
intravenous drug users. The arguments, statistics and perceptions that he
adduces to support his position appear almost as irrefutable as they are
controversial.

Many conservatives, Mr. Fumento says, have used the threat of heterosexual AIDS
to argue against the evils of promiscuity. But he convincingly shows that even a
promiscuous (and careless) heterosexual has little chance of getting the
disease. A woman living in a metropolitan area who over the course of a year has
one-night stands with 10 men, none of whom use condoms, has less than one chance
in 16,000 of being infected. By comparison, her chances of being killed in an
automobile accident are one in 4,500, and of being raped, one in 1,500.

Nevertheless, Mr. Fumento is able to cite story after story in the press
trumpeting the impending explosion of AIDS among heterosexuals:

Life magazine (July 1985): ''Now No One Is Safe From AIDS.''

U.S. News & World Report (June 1987): ''Everyone is at risk.''

The Atlantic (February 1987): ''Heterosexuals and AIDS: The Second Stage of the
Epidemic.''

But there has been - and will be - no ''second stage,'' the author says. Indeed,
Mr. Fumento almost seems to say that any incidence of AIDS in the general
heterosexual population is unlikely and that any reports of such transmission
are suspect, if not downright spurious. Common sense and the laws of probability
- and all we still don't know about AIDS - seem to suggest that may be
overstating the case. But a few cases, even many cases of heterosexual AIDS, do
not an epidemic make, and despite some occasionally spurious logic of his own,
Mr. Fumento carefully, persuasively explains why there will be no epidemic.

Toward this end, he cites three respected epidemiologists - Rand Stoneburner of
the New York City Department of Health and Harold Jaffe and Alexander Langmuir,
both with the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta - and adds much of his own
insight and research. Simply put, his argument is that most heterosexuals do not
have sex with anything remotely approaching the number of partners as do
homosexuals - and when heterosexuals do have sex, they are far, far more likely
to have vaginal or oral sex than anal sex; because of the nature of the anus
itself, anal sex results in the tearing and bleeding that provide the vehicle
for AIDS transmission. Similarly, Mr. Fumento points out, it is the sharing of
needles - and, ineluctably, of blood - among intravenous drug users that
accounts for the huge numbers of AIDS cases in that population.

But what about Africa? In a chapter entitled just that, Mr. Fumento clearly
demonstrates why it is wrong to say that AIDS will spread into the general
heterosexual population in the United States, ''mimicking the course it has
taken in Africa.'' The epidemiology of the disease on the two continents is just
as different as the cultures.

So why has there been - especially in 1985, 1986 and 1987 - such a panic about
heterosexual AIDS? Although Mr. Fumento blames a variety of sources, he comes
down hardest on the press. I have written critically about coverage of AIDS
myself, and many of the examples of journalistic carelessness, ignorance,
laziness, superficiality and sensationalism that Mr. Fumento describes sound
depressingly familiar. But he isn't content with that sweeping indictment. He
also questions the motivations of those in the news media. Time and again, he
suggests the press deliberately misled the public about the likelihood of a
heterosexual AIDS epidemic.

He cites quotations from a Washington Post story on frightened heterosexuals and
suggests the quotes may have been ''made up,'' though he makes no effort to
prove that. He notes another story and says, ''What the reporter did not want us
to know was that those infections, as with actual AIDS cases, were almost
entirely made up of members of risk groups.'' He says ''the media played fast
and loose with its statistics, whether out of ignorance or intent.'' He condemns
those journalists who ''put their own interests in fame and spectacular articles
ahead of the public's right to know.''

With few exceptions, the press has done a dreadful job on AIDS - first ignoring
it (largely because it was only happening to them), then overstating it (as a
threat to us). There have, no doubt, been a few reporters and editors who
exaggerated the threat to the heterosexual community because, consciously or
not, they realized that was the only way most of their readers would pay
attention to the story. Or, to put it in Mr. Fumento's argot, sensational
stories sell newspapers and magazines and draw television audiences. Similarly,
some public health officials and AIDS activists exaggerated the heterosexual
threat in order to attract support - political, financial and emotional - to
their cause. But it's far more likely that most people in all those areas were
acting out of ignorance and hysteria than out of the ugly, self-serving
motivations Mr. Fumento ascribes to them. Having been so rigorous in his
examination of the ''myth,'' he should have been equally rigorous in his
examination of the mythmakers. But, then, sensational charges do sell books.

ALARMED ABOUT THE ALARM

When the AIDS alarmists told us ''everyone is at risk'' and ignored relative
degrees, the threat was beneficial for fund raising and destigmatization, but
disastrous as a source of information. Persons at low or zero risk were told
that they should spend time and energy reacting to a nonthreat. Worse, each
person who was truly at high risk was reassured that he or she was simply one
among many. Sure, homosexuals with multiple partners are at risk, but so are
heterosexuals with multiple partners. Never mind that the first might be having
high-risk sex with a hundred such partners a year, thirty of whom are
seropositive, while the second might be having lower-risk sex with two partners
a year whose chance of being infected is virtually nil. . . . Somewhere out
there, in the white upper-middle-class areas of New York City or New Jersey or
Los Angeles, there may be a man or a woman who, but for the cries of the . . .
alarmists, would be infected with the AIDS virus. But how many in the black and
Hispanic ghettos of those same cities, and how many homosexuals in areas outside
of high-information places like New York and San Francisco, became infected
because they absorbed the same message? Everything causes cancer, everything
that you eat is bad for you, and everybody is at risk for AIDS. The alarmists
call it ''erring on the side of caution.'' They should have shortened it to just
''erring.''

From ''The Myth of Heterosexual AIDS.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Aloft in Shuttle: Sketches of Astronauts

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 562 words


For the flight of the space shuttle Columbia, the space agency chose two
astronauts with experience in space and three who will be making their first
shuttle flights.

Daniel C. Brandenstein
Mission Commander

Captain Brandenstein has logged 315 hours in space as pilot and commander of two
shuttle missions . . . Was a naval flier for 14 years and flew in 192 combat
missions in the Vietnam War before joining the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration in 1978 . . . Has logged 5,200 hours in 24 types of aircraft and
has made 400 landings on aircraft carriers . . . Became an astronaut in August
1979 . . . First shuttle mission was aboard the Challenger in 1983, when he
piloted the shuttle on the first night launching and landing . . . On second
mission, served as commander of the Discovery in 1985 . . . Born in Watertown,
Wis., 46 years ago . . . He and his wife, Jane, have one child, Adelle, 17.

James D. Wetherbee
Pilot

Lieutenant Commander Wetherbee was a career naval flier before joining NASA,
having logged more than 2,500 hours flying time and 345 carrier landings in 20
different types of aircraft . . . This is his first space mission . . .
Graduated from the University of Notre Dame in 1974 with a degree in aerospace
engineering . . . Received a Navy commission, trained on attack jets and later
became a test pilot . . . Joined the space agency in May 1984 . . . A

Bonnie J. Dunbar
Mission Specialist

Dr. Dunbar has logged 169 hours in space . . . Associated with NASA since 1978,
when she became a payload officer and flight controller at the Johnson Space
Center in Houston . . . Graduated cum laude from the University of Washington in
1971, and received a doctorate in biomedical engineering from the University of
Houston in 1983 . . . She was a guidance and navigation officer for the Skylab
re-entry mission in 1979, and was selected as an astronaut in 1981 . . . Served
as a mission specialist on a Challenger flight in 1985 . . . Dr. Dunbar, 40, was
born in Sunnyside, Wash., and is is married to Dr. Ronald M. Sega of Monument,
Colo.

Marsha S. Ivins
Mission Specialist

Ms. Ivins is a NASA engineer whose 15-year career at the Johnson Space Center in
Houston has included engineering stints in the crew station design branch and
aircraft operations . . . Received a degree in aerospace engineering from the
University of Colorado in 1973 . . . Worked as a flight simulation engineer on
shuttle training aircraft . . . Ms. Ivins has logged more than 4,500 hours in
civilian and NASA aircraft . . . Became an astronaut in June 1985 . . . Assigned
to the astronaut support team for orbiter test and checkout at Cape Canaveral .
. . Ms. Ivins, 38, was born in Baltimore and is single.

G. David Low
Mission Specialist

At 33, Mr. Low is the youngest astronaut on the Columbia mission . . . An
astronaut since 1985 . . . Graduated from Washington and Lee University in 1978
with a a degree in physics and engineering . . . Also received a bachelor's
degree in mechanical engineering from Cornell University and a master's in
aeronautics and astronautics from Stanford University . . . Worked in
preliminary planning for several planetary missions while at the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory at the California Institute of Technology . . . Mr. Low, who is
single, was born in Cleveland in 1956.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The astronauts heading for the shuttle yesterday. They were G.
David Low, Dr. Bonnie J. Dunbar, Marsha S. Ivins and Capt. Daniel C.
Brandenstein and Lieut. Comdr. James D. Wetherbee of the Navy (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 12, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Victor J. Maritato, Priest, 65

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 121 words


The Rev. Victor J. Maritato, a priest in the Diocese of Brooklyn who had served
as a Navy chaplain for 21 years, died Sunday at his home in Pompano Beach, Fla.
He was 65 years old.

Father Maritato was assigned to the aircraft carrier U.S.S. Bennington in the
Gulf of Tonkin during the Vietnam War. He received the Navy Commendation Medal
for his service in and around Naples, from 1968 to 1970. He also served in
Puerto Rico, Parris Island, S.C., and Meridian, Miss., before retiring from the
Navy in 1979.

Father Maritato is survived by two sisters, Florence Zappia of Westbury, L.I.,
and Carmela Donato of Margate, Fla., and three brothers, Pasquale, of
Plantation, Fla., Louis, of Brooklyn, and Albert, of Margate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IDEAS & TRENDS;
If They've Won, Can Conservatives Still Be Important?

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1209 words


THE transformations sweeping Eastern Europe have reverberated through the
institutes and offices, the meeting rooms and magazines that, for the past
decade or so, have made up the most influential body of American political
thought: conservatism. The echoes, in fact, are the sound of a victory chorus,
even if the conservatives' detractors do not believe they should be the only
ones to celebrate.

Naturally enough, conservatives believe that the extraordinary collapse of
Communism in Europe has vindicated their most important beliefs about foreign
policy. Or, as Burton Y. Pines, the vice president of the Heritage Foundation, a
conservative public policy group in Washington, put it, ''We've won, and we won
more extensively, more dramatically and more quickly than anybody could have
imagined.''

In the conservatives' view, it was they and not apologetic liberals who bore the
true message about the evils of Communism, a message that the people of the
Soviet bloc are now for the first time free to proclaim themselves. For years
these theorists argued that Communism was both threatening and bankrupt. If it
is suddenly less threatening, they say, that is because of American wariness and
military strength.

But what now? Has the agenda proclaimed by the coalition of forces that made up
American conservatism lost its purpose now that its chief foreign policy enemy
has been vanquished? Will the movement survive? And, if it does, what will be
its issues in the future?

Perhaps the ultimate question is whether there is really something fundamental
that sets American conservatism apart from other political philosophies. Put
another way: is the movement, particularly in the powerful form it took in
recent years, something permanent, or is it merely a phenomenon of an age when
almost everybody sensed a common danger from the Soviet Union?

Some commentators have already seen what the essayist Charles Krauthammer has
called ''the conservative crackup.'' The idea here is that the Soviet threat was
the cement that held the movement together. Without it, the theory goes, it will
disintegrate into a large number of factions.

Looking Within

The conservatives themselves agree that the time has come for introspection and
re-evaluation. A few even concede that in some areas of American life, there may
be no need for a specifically conservative agenda. In foreign policy, for
example, some leaders on the right predict a return to the consensus they
believe existed before the Vietnam War. Yet, with the many strains of
conservatism no longer united by anti-Communism, it is difficult to see exactly
what a unifying domestic agenda might be.

Some conservatives fervently believe that the movement has always been centered
on national concerns, and if the foreign policy gap between East and West has
narrowed, they will simply return to the domestic issues: government
bureaucracy, the welfare state, the erosion of moral and educational standards.

But others are not sure that is possible. With the great icon, Ronald Reagan, no
longer in office, and the Communist threat reduced, they see factionalism as not
only possible but likely.

At the same time, the old liberal-conservative quarrel remains. If the
conservatives have declared victory on the ideological battleground, others
would like to deprive them of it. Some commentators, like Strobe Talbott of Time
magazine, have argued that the collapse of the Soviet bloc is not at all the
fruit of conservative policies but of Communism's inherent weaknesses.

Some contend that it was the cold-warriorism of the conservatives, their hawkish
hostility to the Soviet Union, that gave rise to East-West tensions in the first
place. And even those who blame the Soviets, rather than the Americans, for the
cold war, refuse to give the conservatives credit for its end. Foreign policy,
they say, has always been a good deal more bipartisan than the right admits.

The immediate response of some conservatives has been to taunt the liberals for
being bad losers. ''Who, after all, has been most loudly proclaiming the
superiority of capitalism?'' they ask. ''Who led the moral charge against the
evident odiousness of Communism?''

Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the Reagan representative to the United Nations and
perhaps that Administration's most influential foreign policy theorist, gives
Mr. Reagan credit in two important areas.

''One was the confident reaffirmation of the case for free institutions,'' she
said in an interview. ''And two, I think that the restoration of American
military strength, occurring as it did with the stagnation of the Soviet
economy, really dramatized and illustrated for Gorbachev the problems in that
country of technology and the economic base.''

While celebrating Mikhail S. Gorbachev's reforms and his decision not to
intervene in his neighbors' affairs, conservatives have been more cautious than
liberals in assessing his prospects for success. Needless Concessions?
Columnists like William Safire of The New York Times and William F. Buckley,
publisher of the National Review, have warned about two things: making needless
concessions to the Soviets in the hope of helping Gorbachev succeed in reforming
the Communist system, and letting down the American military guard too hastily.

''The complacent community is inhaling every fresh dandelion within the Soviet
empire as a reason to diminish our defense forces,'' Mr. Buckley wrote. ''But
although it can be said that by all the evidence, Communism has failed, it can't
yet be said that the aggressive potential of the Soviet Union has evaporated.''

And so the debate continues, but some conservatives say the issues are far more
matters of nuance and degree than of fundamental difference. Some, like the
columnist Patrick Buchanan, who have generally favored increased military
spending, are already saying that the time has arrived to pare down military
spending. It is a common misconception, conservatives like to argue, that they
want a big Pentagon, no matter what. Saving money on the military would be a
desirable ''peace dividend,'' they say, if the Soviet military threat has been
genuinely reduced.

''The right in America is a mixture of very different strands,'' said Michael
Joyce, president of the Bradley Foundation, a conservative group in Wisconsin.
''One thing that has been common to all of these factions -the Chicago School,
the neo-conservatives, the National Review religious conservatives, the old
South types - was a common revulsion of totalitarian regimes. So that to the
extent that this great massive totalitarian system is in self-destruction, you
could say that will accentuate the differences.''

Mr. Pines of the Heritage Foundation, by contrast, denies that anti-Communism
was ever the real conservative cement.

''What created the conservative juggernaut were by and large domestic issues -
abortion, falling standards, inflation, a stagnating economy and the growth of
the bureaucracy,'' he said. ''There are going to be different parts of the
movement thinking different things and having different priorities. But by and
large if some of our energies are freed up to focus on the domestic arena, we're
going to hold our coalition together.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 32, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 820 words



Here are some notable releases of the last few months. BATMAN - Michael Keaton,
Jack Nicholson and Kim Basinger star in a ''shapeless, big-screen
reincarnation'' set in a ''nightmare version of megalopolis.'' (Vincent Canby)
1989. Warner. $24.95. Laser disk, $24.98. 2 hours 6 minutes. Closed captioned.
PG-13.

THE DRESSMAKER - Small-scale and exquisitely acted by Joan Plowright and Billie
Whitelaw, the film is ''constructed as if it were some kind of delayed-action
explosive.'' (Canby) 1989. Capitol. $79.95. 1:32. No rating. 84 CHARLIE MOPIC -
Patrick Duncan, a Vietnam veteran, wrote and directed this portrait of war.
''Most of the time effective and believable.'' (Richard Bernstein) 1989.
RCA/Columbia. $89.95. 1:35. R. GHOSTBUSTERS II - This sequel ''has the weight
and stylishness of designer toilet tissue, but it doesn't offend.'' (Canby)
1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD, $24.95. 1:42. CC. PG.

GREAT BALLS OF FIRE - This movie, starring Dennis Quaid, is as oversized and
outrageous as Jerry Lee Lewis's scandalous life. ''Terrific music and outrageous
fun.'' (Caryn James) 1989. Orion. $89.98. LD, $39.95. 1:48. CC. PG-13.

HOTEL TERMINUS: THE LIFE AND TIMES OF KLAUS BARBIE - Max Ophuls's ''vivid,
harrowing, minutely detailed'' recollection of France under the Germans.
''Great.'' (Canby) 1988. Virgin Vision. $99.95. LD, $99.95. 4:27. No rating.

HOW TO GET AHEAD IN ADVERTISING - Bruce Robinson's ''engaging if slightly
overstretched combination of satire, science fiction, Freud and domestic
farce.'' (Canby) 1989. M.C.E.G./Virgin. $89.95. 1:34. CC. PG.

LAWRENCE OF ARABIA - ''David Lean's direction, adroitly weaving together music,
scenery and the steely force of Lawrence's personality . . . gives the film its
transcendent power.'' (Maslin) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $29.95. LD, $49.95. 3:36. CC.
PG. LICENCE TO KILL - Timothy Dalton as James Bond ''is beginning to hold his
own with the shadows of his former self.'' (James) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98. LD,
$39.98. 2:11. CC. PG-13.

MAJOR LEAGUE - Until the last half-hour David Ward's loopy film, featuring Tom
Berenger and Charlie Sheen, is ''wonderfully unpretentious.'' (James) 1989.
Paramount. No list price. LD, $24.95. 1:47. CC. R. THE MIGHTY QUINN - Denzel
Washington ''gives the kind of smooth, funny, laid-back performance that could
help make him the first black matinee idol since Sidney Poitier.'' (Canby) 1989.
CBS/Fox. $89.98. 1:38. R. THE NAVIGATOR - A time-travel fantasy in which the
director, Vincent Ward, ''takes every artistic risk his bizarre premise
allows.'' (James) 1988. Trylon. $89.95. 1:32. PG.

THE PRIME OF MISS JEAN BRODIE - ''A very decent movie'' with an ''extraordinary
performance'' from Maggie Smith.'' (Canby) 1969. CBS/Fox. $79.98. 1:56. CC. PG.

RENEGADES - Kiefer Sutherland and Lou Diamond Phillips play mismatched partners
in this ''fast, violent, implausible film.'' (James) 1989. MCA. $89.95. LD,
$34.98. 1:45. CC. R. SAY ANYTHING - This romantic comedy with John Cusack and
Ione Skye is ''all charming performances and grace notes.'' (James) 1989.
CBS/Fox. $89.98. LD, $39.98. 1:40. CC. PG-13.

SCENES FROM THE CLASS STRUGGLE IN BEVERLY HILLS - Paul Bartel's mordant satire
''is one long smile with an occasional belly laugh.'' (Canby) 1989. Virgin.
$89.95. LD, $39.95. 1:43. CC. R. STAR TREK V: THE FINAL FRONTIER - It has
''appealing moments. . . . But true fans may be disappointed.'' (James) 1989.
Paramount. No list price. LD, $29.95. 1:47. CC. PG.

WHEN HARRY MET SALLY . . . - Rob Reiner has made ''the sitcom version of a Woody
Allen film,'' starring Billy Crystal and Meg Ryan, ''full of amusing lines and
scenes.'' (James) 1989. Nelson/Orion. $89.98. LD, $24.95. 1:36. CC. R. WHO
FRAMED ROGER RABBIT - ''A film whose best moments are so novel, so deliriously
funny . . . they truly must be seen to be believed.'' (Maslin) 1988. Touchstone.
$22.99. 1:43. CC. PG.

THE WINDS OF WAR - The TV mini-series based on Herman Wouk's novel ''rumbles
along, creating its own momentum, until it eventually becomes the equivalent of
a good read that can't be put down.'' (John J. O'Connor) 1983. Paramount.
$139.95. 14:43. CC. No rating.

WOMEN ON THE VERGE OF A NERVOUS BREAKDOWN - Pedro Almodovar's film is an
''entertaining, deliberately benign Spanish farce.'' (Canby) 1988. Orion.
$79.98. LD, $39.95. 1:38. R. WORKING GIRL - Mike Nichols's film ''has a genius
for getting by on pure charm.'' (Maslin) 1988. CBS/Fox. $89.98. 1:53. CC. R. A
WORLD APART - Beautifully acted by Barbara Hershey, the Chris Menges film about
South Africa ''never goes quite far enough.'' (Canby) 1988. Media Home
Entertainment. $89.95. 1:54. CC. PG.

For Children

BAMBI - ''Walt Disney's wizards,'' as a contemporary critic called them, work
their magic. 1942. Disney. $26.99. LD, $39.99. 1:09. CC. G.

THE LAND BEFORE TIME - Five dinosaurs on the road; cute. (Maslin) 1988. MCA.
$24.95. LD, $49.98. 1:09. CC. G.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review; List

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Campus Life: Evergreen State;
School Seeks Minority Voices In Its Classrooms

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 33, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 525 words

DATELINE: OLYMPIA, Wash.


Evergreen State College has announced a new admissions policy that it hopes will
increase the number of minority and handicapped students at the school, as well
as add more diversity to its classrooms.

The policy, school officials said, will give preference to minority and
handicapped applicants, as well as veterans, older people and those whose
parents never attended college. The policy, which goes into effect this fall,
replaces one in which students ranked in the top 50 percent of their class were
admitted on a first come, first served basis.

''Basically, we are saying our society is made up of various and diverse
populations and our student body ought to reflect the population at large,''
said Arnaldo Rodriquez, the college's dean of enrollment services. He said the
college's minority population has averaged about 10 percent of its 6,000
students.

Mr. Rodriquez said he hopes the new policy would double the minority population
over the next 5 to 10 years.

Diversity of Expression

The policy drew strong support from students who helped form the college's new
student government.

Brendan Williams, a sophomore from Iowa City and a co-founder of the student
government, said the college has lacked a real diversity of expression. ''You
don't want to go into a seminar with 20 clones of yourself,'' he said, adding
that the new admissions policy ''will create a more tolerant atmosphere.''

Mary Lou O'Neil, a senior from Seattle, said she thought the new admissions
policy was wonderful.

''It will change Evergreen for the better,'' she said. She predicted that in 10
years the college would be a true example of a multi-cultural living
environment. ''It is much better to live it than just be taught it,'' she said.

New Minimum Standards

While the student leaders strongly endorsed the new policy, they conceded most
students probably knew little about it.

Mr. Rodriquez said the change was spurred in part by a directive from the
state's Higher Education Coordinating Board, which supervises all state colleges
and universities.

The directive set new minimum standards for admission that are based on scores
produced by a combination of high school grade point averages and standardized
exams, like the Scholastic Aptitude Test.

Mr. Rodriquez said Evergreen will also continue to require applicants to be in
the top 50 percent of their classes. Additional points will be awarded to people
over 25 years old, Vietnam veterans, members of minority groups and applicants
whose parents did not attend college.

Other States Do It

College officials believe the new policy will gradually change the student body,
which averages 24 years old. Mr. Rodriquez said that while the policy is new to
Washington, some states, like California, already have a similar policy.

Evergreen State College, which was founded in 1967, was the first in the nation
to create a curriculum around interdisciplinary seminars, like ''Intelligence,
Society and the Computer'' or ''Political Ecology.''

Evergreen students do not take written tests. There are no grades, no required
courses and no traditional academic departments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 16, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Court Blocks a Newsletter From Printing Ernst Article

BYLINE: By ALISON LEIGH COWAN

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 611 words


The Atlanta newsletter that in May broke the story of the merger of Ernst &
Whinney and Arthur Young, two large accounting firms, has been temporarily
blocked by the surviving firm from publishing an article on the merger in its
January issue.

Ernst & Young obtained a temporary restraining order on Jan. 8 from Justice
Beatrice Shainswit of the New York State Supreme Court against the newsletter,
Bowman's Accounting Report. The order also covered any of Ernst & Young's
employees who may have leaked confidential information to Bowman's.

The order prohibits the defendants from ''using, referring to, disseminating or
in any way disclosing any confidential and proprietary information of Ernst &
Young that has come into their possession.'' A hearing is set for next Monday.
Ernst & Whinney and Arthur Young merged in June.

The issue had already gone to press when the order was served on Arthur W.
Bowman, the newsletter's editor. But the issue had yet to be mailed to
subscribers, so Mr. Bowman published the issue but substituted the lead article
meant to be on Ernst & Young with a front page filled with black ink and the
word ''censored.''

Mr. Bowman, who has reported on the accounting profession for almost a decade
before beginning his publication in July 1987, referred all telephone calls
yesterday to his attorney, Keegan Federal.

Mr. Keegan said he planned to seek an earlier hearing and restitution from Ernst
& Young for the costs of reprinting the January issues. He also criticized the
accounting firm for seeking the order without notifying Mr. Bowman in advance, a
common practice in New York.

In its complaint, Ernst & Young has sought to portray the dispute as one
centering on the misappropriation of internal financial information that had
been distributed to the 2,000 partners of the firm before the merger. Ernst &
Young said it learned that Mr. Bowman had the material in a telephone call he
had made to Ray Groves, Ernst & Young's co-chairman, while reporting the story.

But outside lawyers say that the dispute touches on First Amendment issues and
that the injunction is likely to be overturned.

''Prior restraints are nearly unthinkable under American law,'' said Floyd
Abrams, a constitutional expert at Cahill, Gordon & Reindel. ''There is only the
lowest likelihood imaginable that such a prior restraint could be upheld.''

'They Don't Stick'

He noted several precedents in which attempts to prevent news articles from
being published ultimately failed.

''They don't stick,'' he said, citing the Pentagon Papers case in 1971, in which
the Government tried to block The New York Times from publishing a classified
study of the Vietnam War.

Carl D. Liggio, Ernst & Young's general counsel, said such cases were not
relevant. ''What's at issue has nothing to do with prior restraint,'' he said.
''He can publish whatever he wants. He just cannot publish our internal
confidential information.''

But Mr. Abrams said that even when confidential information might be compromised
by publication, the law tended to favor publishers. ''A lot of businesses think
that their internal deliberations are by their nature trade secrets,'' he said.
''But the law does not permit a bar on the press upon publishing what it
learns.''

Regardless who ultimately prevails in court, many legal experts said yesterday
that attempts to discredit or ban publications often backfire. Indeed, such
campaigns have made best sellers out of Salman Rushdie's novel, ''The Satanic
Verses,'' and Connie Bruck's book, ''The Predators' Ball.''

Mr. Liggio declined to say who at Ernst & Young made the decision to seek the
restraining order.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Reagan Boom - Greatest Ever

BYLINE: By Martin Anderson; Martin Anderson, a senior fellow of the Hoover
Institution, at Stanford University, was an adviser to Ronald Reagan.

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 889 words

DATELINE: PALO ALTO, Calif.


Almost everyone knows that the greatest depression the U.S. ever had was in the
1930's. It was known as the Great Depression, and its infamy merits a separate
section in economics textbooks. But what was its counterpart? When did our
greatest economic expansion occur?

We just had it. And it is still expanding, setting new records with each passing
month.

We don't know whether historians will call it the Great Expansion of the 1980's
or Reagan's Great Expansion, but we do know from official economic statistics
that the seven year period from 1982 to 1989 was the greatest, consistent burst
of economic activity ever seen in the U.S. In fact, it was the greatest economic
expansion the world has ever seen - in any country, at any time.

The two key measures that mark a depression or expansion are jobs and
production. Let's look at the records that were set. Creation of jobs. From
November 1982, when President Ronald Reagan's new economic program was beginning
to take effect, to November 1989, 18.7 million new jobs were created. It was a
world record: Never before had so many jobs been created during a comparable
time period. The new jobs covered the entire spectrum of work, and more than
half of them paid more than $20,000 a year. As total employment grew to 119.5
million, the rate of unemployment fell to slightly over 5 percent, the lowest
level in 15 years. Creation of wealth.

The amount of wealth produced during this seven year period was stupendous -
some $30 trillion worth of goods and services. Again, it was a world record.
Never before had so much wealth been produced during a comparable period.
According to a recent study, net asset values - including stocks, bonds and real
estate - went up by more than $5 trillion between 1982 and 1989, an increase of
roughly 50 percent.

There are other important measures. Steady economic growth. As we begin the
decade of the 1990's, we are in our 86th straight month of economic growth - a
new record for peacetime, five months longer than the wartime growth of World
War II and only 23 months short of the wartime record set during the Vietnam War
in the 1960's. Most experts now predict that it will last right through 1990,
and perhaps beyond.

Income tax rates, interest rates and inflation.

Under President Reagan, top personal income tax rates were lowered dramatically,
from 70 percent to 28 percent. This policy change was the prime force behind the
record breaking economic expansion. Interest rates and inflation also fell
sharply and, so far, have stayed comfortably low - a further indication of the
power and pervasiveness of Mr. Reagan's economic policies. The stock market.
Perhaps the key indicator of an economy's booms and busts is the stock market,
the bottom line economic report card. And here the record has been striking.
During the period from 1970 to 1982, the stock market barely moved. The Standard
& Poor's index of 500 stocks inched up about 35 percent during that entire
period. But starting in late 1982, just as Reaganomics began to work, the stock
market took off like a giant skyrocket. Since then, the Standard & Poor's index
has soared, reaching a record high of 360, almost triple what it was in 1982.

There were other consequences of the expansion. Annual Federal spending on
public housing and welfare, and on Social Security, Medicare and health all
increased by billions of dollars. The poverty rate has fallen steadily since
1983.

When you add up the record of the Reagan years, and the first year of President
Bush - during which he has faithfully continued Mr. Reagan's economic policies -
the conclusion is clear, inescapable and stunning. We have just witnessed
America's Great Expansion.

The Reagan economic expansion was not perfect and we will never have one that
is. The Federal budget deficits were too high and still are, too many Federal
regulations lay unreformed and the trade deficit is worrisome.

In fact, the Reagan expansion may not have been the best economic expansion in
history, for every economic expansion must be judged by many criteria. But if we
look at the sheer size and immensity of it, at its scope and power, then it
cannot be denied that it was the greatest.

The full impact of the powerful economic recovery that President Reagan launched
during the 1980s is still unfolding.

Mr. Reagan's expansion provided the financial resources to allow the U.S. to
build up the combat capability of its defense forces and to begin blazing the
new trail for a protective missile system. This, in turn, convinced the Soviet
rulers they could never defeat the U.S., and today the Soviet Union and the U.S.
are busily engaged in nuclear disarmament as peace breaks out in country after
country throughout the world.

Equally important, it proved beyond doubt to all (except perhaps for a handful
of left-wing faculty members in our best universities) that capitalism is
superior to Socialism and Communism. Our economy is the guiding beacon for all
those countries that are ripping apart the ruthless collectivist regimes that
ruined the lives of their people for so long.

One thing the Marxists got right: Economics is a powerful determining factor of
history. But Marxists never dreamed it would be the economics of Ronald Reagan
and all those capitalists that would prevail in the end.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

GREATER U.N. ROLE IS URGED TO SETTLE CAMBODIA CONFLICT

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1126 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Jan. 16


The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council called today
for the United Nations to administer Cambodia and supervise free elections
there.

China, which has long backed the Khmer Rouge guerrillas in Cambodia's
20-year-old conflict, changed its position and for the first time supported
increased United Nations involvement, rather than continued warfare, to settle
the dispute.

China joined the United States, the Soviet Union, France and Britain to call for
''an enhanced U.N. role'' to end the conflict, with the five nations urging a
cease-fire and a United Nations peacekeeping force to insure security in
Cambodia.

'Force of Arms' Rejected

Today's agreement was the latest in a series of actions by the Council to end
regional conflicts. Earlier it approved plans for a cease-fire in the Persian
Gulf war between Iraq and Iran and for Namibian independence.

In a statement issued today, the five nations said there should be a period of
United Nations supervision, ''culminating in the inauguration of a
democratically elected government.''

''No acceptable solution can be achieved by force of arms,'' they said in a
concluding statement. ''An enduring peace can only be achieved through a
comprehensive political settlement,'' including a cease-fire and an end to
outside military aid. [Text, page A6.] Officials involved in the talks said they
hoped that there could be final agreement on a peace plan in three to six
months, but they said much depended on the plan's winning approval from the
Soviet-backed Hun Sen regime in Pnomh Penh as well as the Khmer Rouge and two
other guerrilla factions seeking to topple Mr. Hun Sen.

Increased Fighting

At a news briefing, a senior American official who asked not to be named said:
''Clearly the Cambodians themselves have to be a major part of the process. It
can't just be plunked down on their heads.''

The Security Council members said that because of increased fighting in
Cambodia, ''there is an urgent need to speed up diplomatic efforts to achieve a
settlement.'' In recent days, the Khmer Rouge, the most powerful of the rebel
forces, asserted that it has made an attack on Battambang, the nation's second
largest city, as well as smaller attacks on the outskirts of Pnomh Penh, the
capital.

The Chinese have supplied arms to the Khmer Rouge, which ruled Cambodia from
1975 to 1978 and undertook a brutal restructuring of society that resulted in at
least one million deaths. Mr. Hun Sen was installed as Prime Minister after
Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1978 to oust the Khmer Rouge regime of Pol Pot.

U.S. Backed 2 Groups

The United States has backed two guerrilla groups allied with the Khmer Rouge,
one headed by former Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the other by former Prime
Minister Son Sann. Washington has sought to oust Mr. Hun Sen as a Vietnam
puppet, but Mr. Hun Sen has sought to shed that image since Hanoi announced it
completed the withdrawal of all its troops from Cambodia in September.

One big question left by the agreement today is whether the Khmer Rouge will
consent to such a plan. While many diplomats expect Washington and Moscow to be
able to prevail on the factions that they have supported, the Khmer Rouge has
from time to time refused to heed the orders of Beijing.

The senior American official said that to develop a peace plan, the five powers
still had to work out the details of a cease-fire, guaranteeing security,
monitoring a cutoff of weapons shipments and creating a neutral environment for
elections.

American officials said the five permanent Security Council members would meet
in New York late this month to advance the plan. There will be another
high-level meeting in February, the officials said. Today's agreement must also
be approved by the 10 other Security Council members before it becomes binding
on the United Nations.

'Rather Productive Session'

''We've had a rather productive session,'' the senior American official said.
''We see this process continuing, and there are real difficulties to be
confronted.''

The agreement said a special representative of the Secretary General was needed
in Cambodia to supervise United Nations activities during a transition period.
The United Nations would seek to establish a neutral political environment to
insure that no party has an advantage before free elections.

The Security Council members said they would ''commit themselves to honoring the
results of free and fair elections.''

The five nations said the scale of the United Nations operation ''should be
consistent with the successful implementation of a Cambodian settlement'' and
''should take account of the heavy financial burden that may be placed on member
states.''

An Australian Proposal

The American official said the talks estimated that the number of United Nations
peacekeeping troops, who would go into Cambodia only after a cease-fire, could
range from a few thousand soldiers to ''the high thousands.''

The agreement today, which was based on an Australian proposal, comes after the
failure last August of a 19-nation conference aimed at creating a national
government of reconciliation with the four warring parties. Prince Sihanouk
insisted that the Khmer Rouge be part of a government involving all four
factions, while Mr. Hun Sen vetoed the idea of a Khmer Rouge role in the
government.

Officials involved in the talks said the agreement today aimed to push ahead
with a peace plan without giving any of the warring Cambodian parties the
ability to veto it single-handedly.

Nonetheless, the agreement calls for setting up a ''supreme national council''
that would be the voice of Cambodian sovereignty between the time the fighting
stops and an elected government is sworn in. Officials said that there could be
snags between the warring factions in deciding who should serve on the council;
however, officials made clear that they want to be running the country if they
are supervising a cease-fire and elections.

The five nations said they would ''welcome an early resumption of a constructive
dialogue among the Cambodian factions.'' They said that was essential to the
transition process, ''which should not be dominated by any one of them.''

''The core question is for the various Cambodian parties to agree that it's
better to entrust management of this transition period to the U.N.,'' the
American official said. ''That has to be viewed as a better alternative than
fighting it out on the battlefield.''

In Jakarta on Monday, the Indonesian Foreign Minister, Ali Alatas, who has
served as a key negotiator on Cambodia, said all four factions had no objections
to discussing the plan to establish interim United Nations administration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 19, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Kraft General Foods Gets a New President

BYLINE: By DANIEL F. CUFF

SECTION: Section D; Page 5, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 501 words


Jeffrey C. Bible, an Australian by birth who has worked throughout Philip
Morris's far-flung tobacco operations, has a major new assignment on the food
side of the giant Philip Morris Companies.

Mr. Bible, 52 years old, was named last week as president and chief
adminstrative officer of Kraft General Foods, where he will report to Michael A.
Miles, chairman and chief executive of the Philip Morris unit.

Philip Morris, in its continuing moves to diversify, took over Kraft in December
1988 and, last year, put it together with its General Foods Corporation. Late
last year, Mr. Miles was named chief executive.

''We've spent the last year putting these two enormous companies together,'' Mr.
Bible said yesterday, ''but there's still quite a bit to be done. Mike has a
battery of people reporting to him, and my initial aim will be to help Mike by
taking the burden off him with the staff groups.''

Mr. Bible, who was most recently the president of Philip Morris International,
added: ''I've never been involved in the food business, but it's good for
somebody from the Philip Morris side to learn it and bring our corporate culture
to their corporate culture. I think we can make this an enormously prosperous
company.''

He has mainly dealt with Philip Morris's cigarette operations. He made a strong
career mark in the company by reviving the Marlboro brand in Australia in the
1970's.

He related that Marlboro took a bashing at a time of Vietnam War
anti-Americanism and also when a rival introduced a packet of 25 cigarettes - as
opposed to Marlboro's package of 20 - called Winfield's.

They quickly became a success and ate into Marlboro's No. 1 position in
Australia. ''It was a bit traumatic for us at the time,'' he said. ''We could
take something like that in stride today, but in those days they knocked us
around badly.''

Mr. Bible, who was based in New York, was dispatched to Australia, where he
worked for three years. ''We got it right,'' he said. ''We got our share back
and the profits back.''

Trained as an accountant, Mr. Bible originally left Australia to take a job in
the Middle East with United Nations refugee operations. He then joined the
International Labor Organization, a United Nations function, in Geneva, and
joined Philip Morris in Switzerland in 1968 as it was getting its European
operations under way.

After two years, Mr. Bible left for six years to enter investment banking and
then returned to Philip Morris. He eventually was brought to New York by Hamish
Maxwell, then president of the international division and now chairman and chief
executive of Philip Morris.

''I came as vice president for nothing,'' Mr. Bible recalled, but his
responsibilities grew quickly and he was overseeing Canadian and Australian
operations when the company decided to send him to Australia in 1981 to
resurrect the Marlboro position. He returned to New York in 1984.

Mr. Bible met his wife, Sara, a Scot, while he was living in Switzerland. They
have three children.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 19, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Approval of Bush, Bolstered by Panama, Soars in Poll

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1802 words


As he completes his first year in office, George Bush, helped by overwhelming
support for the invasion of Panama, stands higher in the public's approval than
any President has at an equivalent point in his administration since John F.
Kennedy, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.

Three out of four Americans say they approve of the job Mr. Bush is doing. This
76 percent approval is a level only rarely achieved by Presidents since World
War II, and one particularly rare since the crises of political confidence that
were brought on by the Vietnam War and the Watergate scandal.

In the Jan. 13-15 poll, 13 percent of Americans expressed disapproval of the job
Mr. Bush is doing. The margin of sampling error was plus or minus three
percentage points.

Not since Presidents Kennedy and Dwight D. Eisenhower has an elected President
been able to achieve such widespread approval after having been in office for
one year. The approval rating for President Kennedy was 79 percent and for
President Eisenhower it was 70 percent.

Satisfied by Foreign Policy

Neither Ronald Reagan nor Richard Nixon ever achieved this level of approval. In
a Gallup Poll in the early months of Jimmy Carter's Presidency, he achieved
approval ratings rivaling Mr. Bush's now, but went fairly steadily down after
that.

Lyndon Johnson received similar support in the year after he succeeded the slain
President Kennedy. But after his landslide election victory over Barry
Goldwater, his public approval, too, quickly began to erode.

Tempering the generally positive view of Mr. Bush was a further finding of the
poll: When asked whether he or President Reagan had accomplished more during his
first year in office, 37 percent said Mr. Bush had and 43 percent said Mr.
Reagan.

The view of Mr. Bush among the 1,557 randomly selected American who were
surveyed by telephone is bolstered by general satisfaction with his handling of
foreign policy (73 percent approve) and, in particular, by strong support for
the United States invasion of Panama (74 percent said it was justified) and by
the return of Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega to the United States for trial (54
percent approve).

Approval of Mr. Bush's handling of foreign policy overwhelmed various domestic
doubts about the President and the state of the nation.

Jitters about the economy have increased considerably since Mr. Bush's election,
the survey found, with 36 percent of Americans saying they think the economy
will get worse. That is an increase of 11 percentage points from November 1988.
Only 8 percent said it would get better, the most pessimistic outlook on that
question since January 1981, shortly before the start of the worst recession in
postwar history. Mr. Bush himself got mixed reviews for his handling of the
economy, with half approving but 4 in 10 disapproving.

Mixed View of Drug War

On several other domestic issues -improving education, protecting the
environment and sheltering the homeless - a majority of Americans said Mr. Bush
was mainly just talking about the problem or not doing enough.

On the issue of greatest concern to Americans, drugs, slightly more than half
said Mr. Bush has made progress. That view was presumably influenced by the
capture of General Noriega, who faces Federal drug trafficking charges. But
there was also considerable skepticism, with 41 percent saying they believed Mr.
Bush had mainly just talked about dealing with the drug problem.

There is long-term political danger for Mr. Bush in Americans' uneasiness about
domestic matters. In identifying the biggest problems facing the nation, only 7
percent cited the area of the President's greatest strength, foreign policy. But
one in three cited drugs and two in five identified the economy and other
domestic issues.

Mr. Bush's political advisers are delighted about the President's standing in
this poll and other recent surveys with similar findings, and they are looking
for ways to capitalize on it. At the same time, they recognize the soft spots,
so to counter those and to pressure Congress, Mr. Bush has begun talking about
what he terms Washington's unfinished agenda.

In a recent speech, he accused Congress of not acting on items he has been
pressing for, like a clean air bill and a cut in the tax on capital gains.
Democrats on Capitol Hill reject this criticism, but Mr. Bush is likely to
continue the theme in his State of the Union Message Jan. 31, senior Republican
officials said.

Unusual Rise in First Year

Mr. Bush's approval rating has actually risen during his first year, the reverse
of the recent trend for Presidents. In the early months of the Administration,
about 61 percent of the public expressed approval in several surveys. That rose
to 70 percent around the time of local elections in November and then slipped
amid criticism that Mr. Bush was passive in the face of upheaval around the
world and problems at home. But the slide has reversed in the last two months as
Mr. Bush met at Malta with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union,
helped President Corazon C. Aquino fend off a coup in the Philippines and then
sent troops into Panama.

Mr. Bush's support spread broadly in the latest survey. Even 64 percent of
Democrats and a remarkable 70 percent of blacks said they approved of the job he
is doing.

As various other polls in recent days have also found Mr. Bush winning
historically high levels of approval, Democrats have been arguing that the
support is, in the words of Ronald H. Brown, the party chairman, ''a mile wide
and an inch deep.''

The Times/CBS News survey suggests that part of Mr. Bush's success is that he
has given people few reasons to be against him. By this point in Ronald Reagan's
Presidency, nearly one voter in five was able to cite proposed budget cuts or
the handling of the economy and the budget deficit when asked what Mr. Reagan's
principal shortcoming was.

But when asked for Mr. Bush's failing, the only issue that drew strong reaction
was the invasion of Panama, with 7 percent saying the United States should not
have taken such action.

Criticism Is Diffuse

While 14 percent cited some domestic problem as a failing, these views were
spread across many different issues, suggesting that the criticism was diffuse
rather than focused. The same phenomenon occurred when people were asked to
describe Mr. Bush's greatest success. One in four cited the Panama invasion, but
after that, support was spread across a wide range of issues.

''George Bush nibbles around the edges rather than throwing ideological bombs,''
Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the Republican whip in the House, said
yesterday. ''This is a marginal Administration. It incrementally moves forward
on 70 fronts.''

The Panama invasion was by far the most powerful moment in defining the Bush
Presidency, the poll suggests. Three-fourths of those surveyed said the invasion
was justified.

But they also said Panama was a special case. Half said the United States should
stay out of the affairs of other countries rather than try to overthrow a
dictatorship. And most said they believe Mr. Bush shared this view, with 57
percent saying it was not likely Mr. Bush would send American troops into other
countries to overthrow dictators like General Noriega.

Past presidents have benefited the way Mr. Bush is now from what they call the
''rally round the flag phenomenon.'' This is the surge of public support that
typically accompanies foriegn actions, whether military or diplomatic.

Even failed adventures can produce the effect. President Kennedy reached the
pinnacle of public approval for a modern President, 83 percent in the Gallup
Poll, shortly after the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba.

Nuclear War Fear Subsiding

While Americans remain reluctant to declare the Cold War over, the highest
percentage ever recorded by the Times/CBS News Poll, 46 percent, now say it very
unlikely that the United States will get into a nuclear war in the next 10
years.

The poll shows that while Americans tend to give Mr. Gorbachev more credit than
Mr. Bush for the changes sweeping Eastern Europe, a majority say Mr. Bush
deserves at least some credit for them.

Mr. Bush's approval rating has the potential for influencing much of American
politics this year. Richard Brody, professor of political science at Stanford
University, noted that President Kennedy's high standing helped insulate
Democrats from the Congressional losses that the party in control of the White
House normally suffers in an off-year election.

Indeed, Mr. Gingrich predicted yesterday that the Republicans might actually
gain seats this year. At a breakfast, Mr. Gingrich was also asked what President
Bush would do about Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan's proposal to cut Social
Security payroll taxes.

''If the President's popularity is at 80 percent,'' Mr. Gingrich replied, citing
the figure of a recent Gallup Poll in the first week of January, ''I think the
President can do whatever he wants.''

In another survey, conducted in the second week of January by by The Washington
Post and ABC News, the President registered 79 percent approval.

How the Poll Was Conducted

The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews
conducted Jan. 13 to Jan. 15 with 1,557 adults around the United States,
excluding Alaska and Hawaii.

The sample of telephone exchanges called was selected by a computer from a
complete list of exchanges in the country. The exchanges were chosen so as to
assure that each region of the country was represented in proportion to its
population. For each exchange, the telephone numbers were formed by random
digits, thus permitting access to both listed and unlisted numbers. The numbers
were then screened to limit calls to residences.

The results have been weighted to take account of household size and number of
residential telephone lines and to adjust for variations in the sample relating
to region, race, sex, age, and education.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, the results based on such samples will differ
by no more than three percentage points in either direction from what would have
been obtained by seeking out all American adults.

The percentages reported are the particular results most likely to match what
would be obtained by seeking out all adult Americans. Other possible percentages
are progressively less likely the more they differ from the reported results.

The potential sampling error for smaller subgroups is larger. For example, for
either Republicans or Democrats in the sample it is plus or minus four
percentage points.

In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any
survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: At a ceremony marking his first year in office, President Bush
listened to the applause of a gathering of Federal employees yesterday morning.
Joining in the applause was Vice President Dan Quayle. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez);
graphs of poll results assessing Bush's pogress during first year in office

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

FILM VIEW;
Kudos Come When Actors Abandon Type

BYLINE: By Caryn James

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1457 words


Meryl Streep acts silly, Tom Cruise looks grungy and Danny DeVito is the voice
of reason; this season's films have been a parade of big-name stars acting
against type. And while Ms. Streep is hilarious as the husband-stealing romance
writer draped in acres of pink satin in ''She-Devil,'' and Mr. Cruise flawless
as the paraplegic Vietnam veteran in ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' their
performances are enhanced by an undeniable layer of surprise. It is as if
audiences were saying, ''Meryl Streep, of all people, being funny!'' or
calculating Mr. Cruise's tragic course and disheveled appearance against his
hidden glamour-boy looks. And there is a metaphorical wink at the audience in
Mr. DeVito's role as well, for the hot-tempered Louie DePalma of ''Taxi'' and
the small-time con man of ''Romancing the Stone'' and ''The Jewel of the Nile''
emerges as the most logical, least impassioned character in ''The War of the
Roses.''

However good a performance is, acting against type adds a knowing, in-joke
quality, as audiences weigh how very much these actors are Acting. Such
unexpected roles, which often elicit acting awards as dividends, are perfect
examples of the Cher Syndrome.

Every serious acting role of her career has been greeted with the shocked
recognition: Cher can act! This has been going on for at least seven years,
since she was nominated for a best supporting actress Oscar for ''Silkwood.'' It
should no longer astonish anyone that she can play a character other than
herself - or other than the Cher persona she has cultivated so carefully.

But the surprised reaction persists, because between film roles Cher recaptures
the public imagination as a frivolous, flaky pop celebrity almost dressed in
leather and metal. And this ''nonfiction'' Cher is the typical role her movie
parts cast her against.

In her astutely orchestrated career, she has chosen to play unglamorous
characters far from her wild-woman public image. In ''Silkwood,'' she was a dour
and drab-looking nuclear-plant worker. In ''Mask'' she gave her best performance
yet, as a woman who hangs out with scruffy bikers, drinks too much, yet is so
consumed with love for her deformed son that she attacks an entire school
system. And in ''Moonstruck,'' she worked against type by beginning as an
unglamorous, middle-aged Italian-American widow with gray streaking her hair.
Though the truism is that Cher won her ''Moonstruck'' Oscar in part because she
had been unfairly ignored for ''Mask,'' it is also true that the role of Loretta
Castorini required all the against-type tricks - the fake-Brooklyn accent, the
graying wig, the dowdy clothes - that signal Serious Actress at Work.

With less fiercely defined personas, most actors play against previous film
roles as much as they work against public perceptions of their off-screen
natures. Film history is full of against-type performances that have stunned
audiences into a new appreciation of an actor's range. Jackie Gleason, who will
always be Ralph Kramden, pulled off a startling shift to drama as Minnesota Fats
in ''The Hustler.''

In 1954, ''The Country Girl'' offered a double turn, with both Bing Crosby and
Grace Kelly defying their expected screen personas. Known as a singer and a
lightweight actor in movies such as ''Going My Way,'' here Crosby played an
alcoholic, which gave him plenty of opportunities not only to be serious, but to
act drunk - one of the most conspicuous examples of Acting.

And Kelly won an Oscar and new respect as a serious talent for her performance
as Crosby's distressed wife. It didn't hurt that the future princess, always the
typical cool, beautiful blonde, appeared without glamorous makeup, wearing
frumpy housedresses and cardigan sweaters. She was perfectly convincing in her
role, but Grace Kelly looking plain seemed the true acting stretch.

As an actor, Tom Cruise pushes himself much further in ''Born on the Fourth of
July.'' He must convey enormous internal changes, from gung-ho Marine to antiwar
protester, in addition to re-creating the visible challenges facing a man with
extreme physical limitations. Still, viewers may be jolted at seeing him as an
unshaven, long-haired, unglamorous man in a wheelchair. This, after all, is the
actor whose playboy smile turned a joke like ''Cocktail'' into a huge success.
And while his performances in ''The Color of Money'' and ''Rain Man'' were
subtle and substantial, both roles allowed him to look handsome, which in turn
made the performance seem easier. Looking unattractive makes acting seem like
harder work for Tom Cruise.

Of course, uglying up only works for certain types. When Ms. Streep turned
herself into the picture of a homeless, alcoholic woman in ''Ironweed,'' a woman
whose rotting teeth, red nose and sickly pallor appeared absolutely genuine, it
seemed just another of Meryl Streep's miraculous transformations. After she
acquired her Polish accent for ''Sophie's Choice'' and her Danish accent for
''Out of Africa,'' a simple physical change seemed the least she could do, and
perfectly true to her image as a chameleon actor of serious roles.

But she is so unlikely as Mary Fisher in ''She-Devil'' that the freshness works
to her advantage, and her scenes become the only bright spots in this otherwise
wasted comedy. She plays her character as a parody of a femme fatale, luring
Roseanne Barr's husband to her elegant house, acting addle-brained about money,
then pouncing on him in a most undignfied, un-Streep-like manner.

Short memories are often responsible for such surprises. Ms. Streep has played
comedy before, but ''Heartburn'' was such a tame, unfunny comedy of manners that
her role in ''She-Devil'' seems brand new.

''We're No Angels'' also benefits from jolting the audience's expectations,
although, as it turns out, the funniest thing about the movie is the very idea
of Sean Penn and Robert De Niro as escaped convicts who masquerade as priests.
David Mamet's lame script wastes the huge comic possibilities of this casting,
though both men have a few amusing moments. Mr. Penn's befuddled comic delivery
- ''I don't want to get in anyone's face,'' he tells a gathering of dignified,
prayerful priests - seems more surprising than it should. He was very funny in
1982's ''Fast Times at Ridgemont High,'' though his comic ability has been
obscured by more typical, macho-tough roles in films like ''Colors'' and
''Casualties of War,'' as well as by his quick-fisted off-screen personality.

If Mr. De Niro comes across as less funny, it is partly because he mugs
obsessively and partly because his own against-type comic breakthrough came just
two years ago in ''Midnight Run.'' Then he provoked the ''Robert De Niro being
funny!'' reaction from audiences who had forgotten or never seen his comic roles
in early Brian DePalma films such as ''Greetings'' and ''Hi, Mom!''

And at first it seems equally odd for Dan Aykroyd to play the straightforward
role of Jessica Tandy's businessman son in ''Driving Miss Daisy.'' But his
skillful performance - he must establish a presence while remaining in the
background - may remind audiences that Mr. Aykroyd was always a superb comic
actor in his ''Saturday Night Live'' days. A couple of ''Ghostbusters,'' of
course, were enough to overwhelm any sense of his true abilities.

Acting against type is not always so easy to define. The most slippery role of
the season is Alan Alda's in ''Crimes and Misdemeanors,'' where he plays a
self-important, shallow television producer given to inane pronouncements such
as, ''If it bends, it's comedy; if it breaks, it isn't.'' To many viewers, this
is a supreme example of acting against the high-minded type exemplified by
Hawkeye Pierce of ''M*A*S*H.'' Mr. Alda has already gained one against-type
dividend: the New York Film Critics Circle award as best supporting actor.

But no recent award was more surprising to me, or to other viewers who saw the
slick character as a shrewd take on the Alda persona itself, an example not so
much of acting against type but of offering an exaggerated sort of parody. Who
better to play the shallow television producer, a man the Woody Allen hero
deplores, than an actor-director who neatly divides public opinion between those
who think he's profound and those who see him as a naked emperor?

There is no shame in benefiting from the Cher Syndrome, of course. Even Laurence
Olivier, after all, startled audiences by acting against type when he abandoned
his refined persona to play the small-time vaudevillian failure Archie Rice in
''The Entertainer.'' But the syndrome suggests it is nearly impossible for an
actor to escape entirely into a role, to leave behind the residue of public
images and past performances.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A picture caption in the [Arts and Leisure] section about actors playing against
type misidentified the film in which Cher appeared. It was ''Moonstruck.''

GRAPHIC: Photos: Some notable examples of playing against type: Cher in
''Moonlighting''; Laurence Olivier in ''The Entertainer''; Meryl Streep in
''She-Devil'' and Danny DeVito in ''The War of the Roses'' (Francois Duhamel
(DeVito)) (pg. 11); Confounding expectations have been Dan Aykroyd in ''Driving
Miss Daisy,'' Jackie Gleason in ''The Hustler,'' Alan Alda in ''Crimes and
Misdemeanors'' and Robert De Niro in ''We're No Angels.'' (Brian Hamill (Alda);
Takashi Seida (De Niro)) (pg. 20)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 23, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Evoking the Vanished Past Of a Family in Dissolution

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 998 words



Sweet Talk
By Stephanie Vaughn
194 pages. Random House. $16.95.

When writers talk about having an ear for dialogue, they usually mean a gift for
capturing the rhythms of conversation, a gift for hearing how people talk, how
they connect or don't connect. As this impressive first collection of stories
demonstrates, Stephanie Vaughn clearly possesses such an ear. More than that,
she's able to use this gift to map entire lives, to read in her people's
pronouncements, circumlocutions and non sequiturs, the secrets of character and
personality.

The father in these interconnected stories - most of which chronicle the
childhood, youth and adulthood of a woman named Gemma - is an Army officer who
tells his children to speak in complete sentences. ''Learn to come to a full
stop when you complete an idea,'' he advises. ''Use semicolons and periods in
your speech.'' In his own talks with his children, he likes to give lectures
about ''the how-to's of a civilized world'': he teaches Gemma the old military
alphabet (Able, Baker, Charlie, Dog, etc.), the principles of tomato planting
and the mechanics of gutting a dove. He also favors the use of aphorisms, pithy,
self-contained pronouncements, shorn of personal emotion: ''Sometimes the
biggest battles are the smallest ones''; ''It's the smart men who are most
likely to get through any war''; ''Keep your voice low and you can win any
point.''

''He never said, 'You know,' '' Gemma recalls, ''never spoke in fragments, never
slurred his speech, even years later when he had just put away a fifth of Scotch
and was trying to describe the Eskimo custom of chewing up the meat before it
was given to the elders, who had no teeth. He spoke with such calculation and
precision that his sentences hung over us like high vaulted ceilings, or rolled
across the table like ornaments sculptured from stone. It was a huge cathedral
of a voice, full of volume and complexity.''

On the night he learns that he has been passed over for promotion, he stands
with his daughter on a riverbank overlooking the Canadian border - they are
living at a missile base near Niagara Falls - and stares at the moonlit ice. ''I
am looking at that thin beautiful line of Canada,'' he says. ''I think I will go
for a walk.'' As Gemma watches him test the ice, then cross from one ice floe to
another, she wonders whether he will slip and fall - it is an image she will
remember years later, when she visits a cemetery and looks at the red, white and
blue carnations decorating his grave.

Through such scenes, through a combination of lyrical and incongruous details,
through the shrewd juxtaposition of time present and time past, Ms. Vaughn
admits the reader into one family's private world, revealing the secrets they
hide and share with one another, the fictions they invent to glue their lives
together.

In one story, the reader watches Gemma's mother hoard her grocery money in order
to buy a starter kit so she can become an American Fragrance Lady - a
door-to-door saleswoman who peddles perfume that comes in heavy glass bottles
''cast in the shapes of the Liberty Bell, Independence Hall and other national
monuments.'' Although her husband quickly scuttles this plan, she will later
wonder - when she is dying of cancer and trying to raise money to visit a Swiss
clinic - how ''the sale of a thousand little Plymouth Rocks and Empire State
Buildings might have bought her, if not health, then at least the rarefied air
and the beguiling sunlight on the side of an Alpine mountain.''

This sense of now and then, after and before, informs all the best stories in
''Sweet Talk,'' measuring the dissolution of Gemma's family and her own
immersion in the frustrations of adult life. In the space of just five years,
she recalls, ''my father, always a weekend drinker, began to drink during the
week. My grandmother broke her hip in a fall. My mother, a quiet woman, was now
helped through her quiet by Valium.'' Gemma's brother, MacArthur, has gone off
to Vietnam and returned, a detached, solitary man, uninterested in finding a job
or making any plans; and Gemma, herself, has moved to California, where she
leads a vague, aimless existence with a vague, aimless boyfriend. We had ''six
university degrees between us and no employment,'' she observes. ''We lived on
food stamps, job interviews and games.''

In its evocative descriptions of small-town life, and its familial
configurations (increasingly estranged parents, a son who goes to Vietnam and a
daughter who flees to the western edge of the continent), ''Sweet Talk'' may
well remind the reader of Jayne Anne Phillips's ''Machine Dreams.'' Though not
nearly as ambitious as that novel, this volume demonstrates a similar ability to
delineate a vanished past, and to make ordinary, unfulfilled lives yield
resonance and meaning. At the same time, Ms. Vaughn emerges as a thoroughly
original writer, blessed with a distinctive voice, by turns witty and lyrical,
wisecracking and nostalgic. She's someone who can conjure up the sadness of ''a
green, antique island'' one moment, the absurd plight of catching lice from a
lover, the next.

Actually, Ms. Vaughn's strength as a writer emerges most clearly in the more
elegiac, first-person stories devoted to Gemma's childhood and youth. The later
tales - some of which abandon Gemma to focus on less clearly defined heroines -
tend to veer into self-conscious flippancy. The sense of place, so sure in the
Gemma stories, dissolves in the California tales into familiar descriptions of
highways and fast-food restaurants; and the prose can turn oddly grandiloquent.
For instance: ''Tonight for supper they had fish sticks, which had been out of
the ocean too long and tasted like small punishments.''

Such lapses, however, should not discourage the reader from reading ''Sweet
Talk.'' The Gemma stories are each beautifully observed, emotionally vivid
pieces of writing, and together they mark the debut of a wonderful new writer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Stephanie Vaughn (Harvey Ferdschneider)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 23, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Justice Fortas Told President About Case, Researcher Says

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 593 words

DATELINE: MILWAUKEE, Jan. 22


Associate Justice Abe Fortas of the Supreme Court violated judicial ethics about
the confidentiality of cases by providing information to President Lyndon B.
Johnson, a history professor says after studying newly released records of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation.

The information that Court deliberations may have been given to the White House
and the bureau in the mid 1960's involved information that could have been used
to discredit Senator Robert F. Kennedy, Democrat of New York. Senator Kennedy, a
former Attorney General, and Mr. Johnson became antagonists because of the
Vietnam War and other political and personal differences.

The documents were obtained by Athan Theoharis, a professor of history at
Marquette University here through a legally enforceable request under the
Freedom of Information Act and were described in The Milwaukee Journal on
Sunday.

The records show that Justice Fortas, President Johnson and White House aides
saw an opportunity to associate Senator Kennedy with an illegal eavesdropping
incident that occurred in 1963 while he was Attorney General, the newspaper
said.

'Real Questions About Fortas'

''It raises real questions about Fortas's role on the Court,'' Mr. Theoharis
said, ''and the degree with which he identified with the partisan interests and
anti-Kennedy forces in the Johnson Administration.''

Justice Fortas resigned from the Court in 1969 as a result of an unrelated
ethics matter. He died in 1982.

Mr. Theoharis said the F.B.I. files show that Justice Fortas violated the
Constitution's doctrine of separation of court and executive power by agreeing
to provide inside information to the bureau's assistant director, C. D. De
Loach.

The documents also say Justice Fortas was cautioned by the bureau that he would
violate judicial ethics by reporting on private discussions among the Court's
members, the newspaper said.

Case Involved a Lobbyist

The case involved the electronic surveillance of a hotel room occupied by Fred
Black, a Washington lobbyist who was appealing a fraud conviction to the High
Court.

Information from the surveillance was not used in prosecuting Mr. Black.
Thurgood Marshall, who was appointed to the Court by Mr. Johnson in 1967 but who
was Solicitor General when the case was before the Justices, disclosed the
surveillance in arguments before the Court on Mr. Black's appeal.

The Court suspended deliberations in Mr. Black's case and asked Attorney General
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach if the surveillance had been authorized.

Because Mr. Kennedy was Attorney General when the surveillance occurred, there
appeared an opportunity to discredit him, the newspaper said. A memorandum by
Mr. De Loach quoted Justice Fortas as saying, ''The entire matter boiled down to
a continuing fight for the Presidency.'' The documents also describe Justice
Fortas as telling Mr. De Loach that the members of the Court ''held a
confidential meeting among themselves'' and decided to review the bureau's
records before ruling on Mr. Black's appeal.

Plan to Protect Johnson

Justice Fortas suggested a plan to Mr. De Loach ''to protect the President and
the F.B.I.'' by appointing a pro-Johnson arbitrator to review the bureau's
electronic surveillance policy, the documents said.

The Court later called the surveillance illegal and in November 1966 ordered a
new trial for Mr. Black, who was then acquitted.

Mr. De Loach, now retired, told the newspaper in a telephone interview from
Hilton Head Island, S.C., that he could recall nothing of the case.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IS IT TIME TO TRUST HOLLYWOOD?

BYLINE: By MOLLY HASKELL; Molly Haskell is the author of ''From Reverence to
Rape: The Treatment of Women in the Movies.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3709 words


The road to adaptations is paved with good intentions, just as the road leading
away is a vale of dashed hopes - the disappointment of readers for whom no cast
or single interpretation can match the ideal images in the mind; the
disillusionment of authors standing by the wayside clutching checks and crying
Foul! No one, to hear tell of it, has ever witnessed a movie that did justice to
the complexities, the nuances, the high ironies of a novel on which it was
based, and writers and critics have got off some of their most withering bons
mots at Hollywood's expense.

Yet breathes there an author with soul so pure that at some moment during the
ardors of creation he has not allowed his mind to dwell longingly on the
possibility of Hollywood adaptation with all-star cast? Or, failing that, even a
mini-series with Farrah Fawcett? Whence this willingness to talk options, deals,
percentages and turnarounds from a breed that would once have scorned the very
idea of speaking to Hollywood in its own crass terms? Have those two archenemies
of the 30's and 40's, the Vulgarian Producer and the Sensitive Writer, laid down
their arms? Is the producer then less vulgar, the writer less sensitive?

In a rash of optimism that would have been unlikely even 10 years ago, writers
now believe that even the most personal or esoteric books have a shot at a
faithful adaptation, a hope that is not entirely wishful thinking. We need only
read the newspapers, where book-to-movie deals are publicized with the fanfare
of Impressionist paintings on the auction block, to know that more books are
being optioned than at any time in recent history. Writers are respected and
even consulted more than in the past, and movies are free to use previously
censored material from the printed page.

A famous New Yorker cartoon of some years ago showed a couple in a movie theater
looking at the screen as The End appears over a close-up of the hero and heroine
kissing. The woman is whispering to her male companion, and the caption reads,
''In the book, he kills her.''

Nowadays, the book's grim finale would almost certainly be preserved; and more
likely the woman would be killing the man. Stories that would have been
considered too melancholy, too ambiguous, too salacious, too rarefied or too
cultivated for American tastes are being brought to the screen, and the sons and
successors of those producers and directors who promoted traditional family
values are now purveyors of alienation. ''The Dead,'' ''Room With a View,''
''Kiss of the Spider Woman,'' ''The Unbearable Lightness of Being,''
''Ironweed,'' ''Dangerous Liaisons,'' ''Gorillas in the Mist,'' ''Midnight
Express,'' ''The Color Purple,'' ''Enemies, a Love Story'': novels that would
have been considered unfilmable, because of subject matter or tone, find
directors, producers and stars with the bankability and empathy to bring them to
the screen, often - because screen images are so overwhelmingly graphic and
visceral - with results that are more disturbing than anything on the printed
page. Oliver Stone directs a ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' adapted from Ron
Kovic's Vietnam memoir, that spares no physical detail in its harrowing portrait
of what paraplegia does to a man; ''My Left Foot,'' with Daniel Day-Lewis
playing the cerebral palsy victim Christy Brown, is no less indecorous in its
handling of this horribly frustrating and almost unwatchable disability; Gus Van
Sant Jr.'s ''Drugstore Cowboy,'' a bleakly funny look at a quartet of drug
addicts, was adapted from an unpublished novel by James Fogle; and of those
books that one reads, loves and places instantly in an
impossible-to-be-made-into-a-movie category, Marilynne Robinson's
''Housekeeping'' would have ranked high on the list - until it became, in the
hands of the Scottish director Bill Forsyth, a labor of love and remarkable
fidelity. James Ivory made a film of ''Maurice,'' E. M. Forster's
autobiographical novel about homosexuality, which couldn't even be published
until many years after the author's death. And Danny DeVito's wild and
deliriously hate-filled movie version of Warren Adler's ''War of the Roses''
turns America's candy-colored sweethearts, Kathleen Turner and Michael Douglas,
into yuppie marital rivals engaged in a turf battle to the death over their
antique-filled house, a monument to acquisitiveness that has become the
mausoleum of their marriage.

Of all the films listed, it is, ironically, the British film, ''My Left Foot,''
that would have had the least trouble passing muster with the censors in the
Production Code-throttled days of the studio system, or stirring the
old-fashioned inspirational enthusiasms of an L. B. Mayer or Harry Cohn. It has
all the sure-fire elements: a poor working-class family (by definition more
loving than an upper-class family); an artistic yet manly hero; triumph over
adversity; and a connubial happy ending that promises sex without showing it.
But then the scene that saves the movie from disease-of-the-week soap opera -
the electrifying moment in which Christy's rage and sexuality erupt in
nonplatonic love for his doctor, played by Fiona Shaw - would have been excised
before the book got out of story conference.

Of course, these films are to some degree misleading: many are made outside
official Hollywood and on low budgets, and are intended for audiences who have
read a book, any book - a small and apparently shrinking portion of today's
moviegoing public.

In the old days, there were few independent films and no Masterpiece Theater to
adapt the great 19th-century novels, or serialize them with something close to
the time span and breadth they required. Studio heads bought everything in
sight, from masterworks of the canon on down, and converted it into mass
audience entertainment, with well-known and often ludicrous results. In
Hollywood's first ''Anna Karenina,'' coyly titled ''Love,'' the heroine, played
by Garbo, doesn't die, but after the convenient death of her husband marries
Vronsky. In the transformation of ''The Brothers Karamazov'' into a movie,
thousands of pages of Dostoyevsky and the central and complex religious debate
are whittled down to an exchange that goes something like this:

The father: Do you believe in God? Ivan: No. Alyosha: Yes.

But even at their best, movie adaptations have tended to go their own willful
way, taking from novels strong characters and decisive actions, reducing or
simplifying the layered and symphonic effects that are often the essence of a
novel.

Writers who went to Hollywood were often humiliated when their books were bought
and - this was a craft industry - handed over to the pros. Like F. Scott
Fitzgerald, who thought screenwriting was a form he could lick, many of the more
literary writers have had trouble accepting the notion that screenwriting is
indeed a craft, or an art form, of its own. In a famous dispute between Joseph
L. Mankiewicz and Fitzgerald on the subject of the writer's uncolloquial
dialogue for an adaptation of Erich Maria Remarque's ''Three Comrades,'' time -
and the published edition of the screenplay - have proved Mankiewicz right and
Fitzgerald wrong. Most people begin with the assumption that the fault is with
the adaptation rather than the original, whereas all great literary works
contain within themselves contradictions, inconsistencies and flat dialogue,
obscured by the excitement of the writing.

Moreover, there may be something about a first-rate movie that is incompatible
with a first-rate book. The generally sound axiom has held that a great work is
by definition one that has found its complete and ideal realization in one
medium, thus making it untransferable, and that real auteurs, directors with
distinct visions of their own, have traditionally gravitated to minor works and
less inflected forms: pulp fiction, short stories, novellas, where character and
incident can be more easily removed from the context of words.

But ironically, the fact that a fine adaptation might be one that is freely
reimagined rather than faithful to its source is a concept little understood by
custodians of literature, for whom the definition of a good adaptation, even of
a good film, is a beautifully illustrated classic. Adaptations are a favorite
gambit with English departments that wish to honor film, or attract the youthful
illiterates they imagine to be film buffs. While the self-proclaimed
non-humanists in the academy have given movies academic respectability by
smothering them with theory, the humanists have ''legitimized'' them under the
banner of literature. Teaching an experimental course in writing on film at
Barnard College this year, I was startled to find, when I went to their
audio-visual department, that almost all of the cassettes listed were
adaptations of the classics. They were superior adaptations - ''Room With a
View,'' ''Wuthering Heights,'' ''Kiss of the Spider Woman,'' ''The Red and the
Black,'' ''Death in Venice,'' ''The Grapes of Wrath,'' ''Great Expectations,''
''Pride and Prejudice,'' ''Women in Love,'' etc., and if students were using
these as visual aids, or even quick substitutes for the books, they might have
done worse, but there was nothing I wanted to use in a film course. Such a
library is not just inadequate to film studies, it creates a misconception:
namely, that the most interesting movies have been adapted from the most
reputable novels, whereas, in fact, cinematic classics are seldom movies with
exquisite literary pedigrees but the works of original directors pursuing their
own obsessions through film after film, creating stylistically and thematically
distinct landscapes in what is often the cultural backwater of the genre film.

The cinema is a mongrel art, a river into which the other arts flow, and its
most luminous moments have little to do with literary sources and a great deal
to do with the history of movies and our responses to them - westerns as quests
in which lone individuals wrestle with the conflicting demands of the community
and self; women's films as ceremonial celebrations in the religion of love, with
the stars as gods in whose faces we read the erotic liturgy; the film noir as
forays into the dark alleys of the psyche.

This is not to say, as certain critics do, that an adaptation should be judged
entirely on its merits as a film and without reference to the work on which it
is based. We can no more divest ourselves of the images and associations that a
novel has bequeathed us than we can, when we walk into a movie theater, suddenly
shed all the other trappings of personal history: an interior fantasy life made
up of the buried fears and desires of childhood and adolescence, the suppressed
pain and longings of a lifetime that movies, with their dreamlike disguises, tap
into without even trying. Yet here precisely is the difference: the intensity
with which movies - narrative movies, that is, on a large screen - involve us,
personally and almost involuntarily, shames us, makes us feel that a medium that
can so expose the child in us can't be an ''art form'' at all. The images that
haunt us from books have a more discrete existence: we can open and shut a book,
thereby enjoying a sense of power, a more ''grown-up'' relationship to the
characters. Movies, on the other hand, blur the distinction between us and them,
between imagination and reality. They deal in myth, thus redemption, and in even
the fragmented anti-illusionist works of modernist directors there is still an
atavistic yearning to identify, to merge with the characters on the screen,
those larger-than-life alter egos whom we long to possess. In a book, one can
accept more easily the ironic view, the satirical view, shifting and ambiguous
sympathies, because the reader sees through the characters to the transparent
sensibility of the author. In movies, however, the viewer sees the characters
mainly through the opaqueness of the actor's body and personality. In this more
emotional and visceral realm, one violates the bonds of sympathy at great peril.

This is particularly true where female characters are concerned; in American
movies, we rarely see a morally ambiguous heroine, one who doesn't fit into the
dramatic dialectics of an either/or, virgin/whore polarity. The range of what a
man can do and still be sympathetic - or shall we say ''manly'' - is much wider
than what a woman can do and remain acceptable. A friend who saw ''The War of
the Roses'' in a 42d Street theater in New York reported that two-thirds of the
way through the movie, the audience was screaming at the Kathleen Turner
character, ''Kill the bitch,'' though the husband played by Michael Douglas was
if anything more morally repugnant. Francois Truffaut, when he made ''Jules and
Jim'' from the novel by Henri-Pierre Roche, had to reduce the number of lovers
who fell under the spell of Jeanne Moreau's Catherine in order to retain the
audience's sympathy.

And in Hollywood, even without censorship, even in these supposedly wide-open
times, the ''system'' is still in place, and with it comes invisible pressure on
movies to defend the ideals of the reigning mythology.

Jeffrey Boam, a successful screenwriter, complained to an interviewer for this
newspaper that he didn't blame audiences for staying away from ''A Cry in the
Dark,'' the movie based on a real incident in which a baby disappeared in the
Australian outback and was possibly killed by a dingo. '' 'They want Mel Gibson
to come and get the baby back. They don't want to feel helpless and ambiguous;
they want a hero.' ''

With such popcorn maxims coming from writers, how is it possible even to dream
of preserving the ambiguities of books?

The old jokes still apply: Producer: I loved your book. Writer: Oh, did you read
it? Producer: Not personally.

This might well have been the producer who optioned Radclyffe Hall's ''Well of
Loneliness.'' Time magazine began an appalled report on the crass exploitation
of sex that had recently overtaken the movies (this was 1961) with the story of
the aforementioned producer, whose writers were stymied by the difficulties of
turning the book into a movie. When asked what the problem was, they told the
producer that the heroine was a lesbian. To which the producer replied: ''So
change it - make her an American.''

But are we really better off in the 90's? Should writers now ''go Hollywood,''
hang out at the Polo Lounge in the hope of preserving the integrity of a book
that has been optioned for the fourth time and has finally found a studio, or a
star, or a producer, or an agent ready to ''package'' it? Warren Adler, author
of ''The War Between the Roses,'' the first of his many novels to finally make
it to the screen, is a jovial, savvy man, part entrepreneur, part novelist, who
believes in the impossible dream, wants to get involved in the movies made of
his work. He successfully developed and ran several Washington businesses until
he could take up writing full time; he gets choice tables in good restaurants
and he can hold his own in bottom-line discussions, yet what he has to say is
not encouraging.

''First of all, the movie companies option a couple of thousand books a year. By
my own calculation, there are approximately 450 to 500 theatrical movies made,
of which about 24 are from novels. When you deduct the dead writers, that leaves
about 4 percent.

''Further, the studios and agents are in league. Their business affairs people
talk to each other and know exactly what you did and for how much, in what I
consider a violation of antitrust laws. You're naked in that community.

''You finally sell your book to the 'right person' - someone who 'gets it,' and
then you're persona non grata. They've been pursuing you nonstop, murdering you
with praise until you sign the contract, and then they stop answering your
calls. They don't want you to 'defend the book.' ''

One of those quaint but vivid Hollywood phrases: I form a mental picture of a
writer cradling his book in his arms while the producer looks down at it, a big
cigar hovering close to those inflammable pages. The book has become a property.
Producers are like parents who've adopted a baby and are not likely to want the
birth parents to share in the child's upbringing. Different ideas about child
rearing, and it's their baby now.

''I'm interested in knowing what proportion of writers want to get involved and
how many do,'' was the exploratory comment made by Peter Guber, the currently
hot producer with movies like ''Batman'' and the upcoming ''Bonfire of the
Vanities'' to his credit. We were having a telephone interview, only he was on a
car phone, racing down the Santa Monica Freeway on his way to the set of ''The
Bonfire,'' while I was on my old black rotary phone, straining to hear. And he
was asking the questions.

''Here's the skinny, without prioritizing,'' he said, rattling off queries to be
followed up, points on which he would like to have substantiating research.
''There are more books being bought than ever.

Are prices escalating the same as other things? Who are the agents who make the
most deals for literary properties?''

This was a man who saw things not in words or images, but in numbers. ''If only
the people who read the book go to the movie, the movie is a disaster: 200,000
read 'The Witches of Eastwick,' two million may read a best seller - still a
drop in the bucket in movie audience terms. But the renown of a best seller
whets the appetite, creates a 'want-see' mentality even if people don't read the
book but see the cover in ads, in the Book-of-the-Month Club promotion. And a
hit movie can sell an author's works in the millions.''

Mr. Adler agreed that the amount of money spent to get people into a film was
dramatically more than what a publisher would spend to promote a novel to the
best-seller list, not to mention such ancillary possibilities as cassette. He
felt that for a writer whose novel has received this kind of treatment,
Hollywood ''should be considered merely a fabulous promotional vehicle.''

Mr. Guber noted that from a producer's point of view there were advantages to be
gained from the pre-selling that goes into a successful book - its higher
visibility, the advertising, the insights provided by reviews into ''what works
best and what doesn't.''

''Who would be interested in seeing a movie about a black woman who's abused by
a black man in 1934?'' he asked rhetorically. ''But if it's 'The Color Purple' .
. . ?''

Feeding the fantasies of writers are those windfalls in which an agent lands
more for an author on a single book than the writer has earned in the rest of an
entire career. Certainly, as any agent will tell you, whether or not they ever
get made into movies, movie options and option renewals provide a sort of
continuing stipend.

''I tell my writers to forget about the movie,'' says the literary agent Georges
Borchardt, whose zeal on behalf of his writers is matched by a rueful skepticism
toward the fast-track world of deal making; ''I say, 'Just think of the option
as a sort of yearly pension. Use it to write another book. Be glad that you've
been spared the actual movie, which might be an embarrassment.' ''

Another problem for writers in Hollywood is mastering the terms of creative
accounting employed when a writer is offered a percentage of the ''net'' as
opposed to the ''gross.'' Penelope Gilliatt, who wrote the original screenplay
for ''Sunday, Bloody Sunday,'' tells of going to the lawyer Charles Rembar with
her contract for the film. This was some years after the film's successful
release, but still she had received only £9,000. Once Mr. Rembar looked up the
contract, his reaction was instant. ''What they gave you is net,'' he said.
''Net is gossamer.''

Ultimately, it seems that the degree to which a movie adheres to the
idiosyncratic vision of a book is directly related to the degree to which its
makers are willing to forgo big stars, high-tech male bonding or other staples
of lowest-common-denominator megabucks thinking, in order to appeal to an adult
public who may have read the book and resent alterations.

Yet, as a producer friend told me, it's hard to finance a small picture without
at least one star, and, in a further twist of irony, the stars, thanks to
high-pressure agents, have priced themselves out of range of all but the most
lavishly budgeted films.

It may also be that the grimmer the subject, the more necessary the star. It
took 10 years and Tom Cruise to bring Ron Kovic's memoir to the screen; and Mr.
Kovic is reported to have disapproved of the casting of Mr. Cruise as too ''Top
Gunnish.'' It's what any of us might have said, yet Tom Cruise gives a stunning
performance, and without a star, a charismatic presence, what audience would
want to follow a Vietnam veteran into the quagmire of loss and desperation and
physical ruin that paraplegia represents?

The tension between seriousness and star magic will always exist on the screen,
and even the most uncompromising writers will have to accept this basic fact.
They will have to accept it, that is, if, in their lonely calling, they have
listened to the siren call of lotus land, dreamed of the collaborative adventure
of movie making.

Writers have gone west and survived. Moreover, in these revisionist times, we're
learning that producers weren't such bad fellows, or writers as downtrodden as
legend would have us believe. Frederick R. Karl, in his recent biography of
Faulkner, tells us that the genius from Mississippi was neither as destitute
when he went to Hollywood, nor as beleaguered once there, as history has made
him out to be. Faulkner's profits from screenwriting and the sale of his novels
to the movies went not just to the maintenance of home and family, but to such
high-flying hobbies as buying planes, and the shy little man who had suffered
from sexual rejection and a harrowing marriage finally knew success with women.
Hollywood had its compensations and presumably still does. But I expect that the
mutual suspicion of the 30's and 40's was more warranted than the mutual
infatuation of today. Hearts will be broken, and you can bet your bottom line
they won't be the hearts of producers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (pg. 36)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 32, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 762 words


Here are some notable releases of the last few months.

BATMAN - Michael Keaton, Jack Nicholson and Kim Basinger star in a ''shapeless,
big-screen reincarnation'' set in a ''nightmare version of megalopolis.''
(Vincent Canby) 1989. Warner. $24.95. Laser disk, $24.98. 2 hours 6 minutes.
Closed captioned. PG-13.

THE DRESSMAKER - Small-scale and exquisitely acted by Joan Plowright and Billie
Whitelaw, the film is ''constructed as if it were some kind of delayed-action
explosive.'' (Canby) 1989. Capitol. $79.95. 1:32. No rating.

EDDIE AND THE CRUISERS II: EDDIE LIVES - This film, in which Michael Pare stars
as a cross between Bruce Springsteen and Elvis Presley, ''blithely runs through
music-world cliches.'' (Caryn James) 1989. International Video Entertainment.
$89.95. 1:46. CC. PG-13.

84 CHARLIE MOPIC - Patrick Duncan, a Vietnam veteran, wrote and directed this
portrait of war. ''Most of the time effective and believable.'' (Richard
Bernstein) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. 1:35. R.

GHOSTBUSTERS II - This sequel ''has the weight and stylishness of designer
toilet tissue, but it doesn't offend.'' (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD,
$24.95. 1:42. CC. PG.

GREAT BALLS OF FIRE - This movie, starring Dennis Quaid, is as oversized and
outrageous as Jerry Lee Lewis's scandalous life. ''Terrific music and outrageous
fun.'' (James) 1989. Orion. $89.98. LD, $39.95. 1:48. CC. PG-13.

HOW TO GET AHEAD IN ADVERTISING - Bruce Robinson's ''engaging if slightly
overstretched combination of satire, science fiction, Freud and domestic
farce.'' (Canby) 1989. M.C.E.G./Virgin. $89.95. 1:34. CC. PG.

INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE - ''This is one long, boisterous adventure,
full of storms at sea, exploding boats and breathless escapes. But [Sean]
Connery's presence gives resonance to Indiana's life . . . and deeper shading to
the film.'' (James) 1989. Paramount. $24.95. LD, $24.95. 2:06. CC. PG-13.

LAWRENCE OF ARABIA - ''David Lean's direction, adroitly weaving together music,
scenery and the steely force of Lawrence's personality . . . gives the film its
transcendent power.'' (Janet Maslin) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $29.95. LD, $49.95.
3:36. CC. PG.

LICENCE TO KILL - Timothy Dalton as James Bond ''is beginning to hold his own
with the shadows of his former self.'' (James) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98. LD,
$39.98. 2:11. CC. PG-13.

THE MIGHTY QUINN - Denzel Washington ''gives the kind of smooth, funny,
laid-back performance that could help make him the first black matinee idol
since Sidney Poitier.'' (Canby) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98. 1:38. R.

RENEGADES - Kiefer Sutherland and Lou Diamond Phillips play mismatched partners
in this ''fast, violent, implausible film.'' (James) 1989. MCA. $89.95. LD,
$34.98. 1:45. CC. R.

SAY ANYTHING - This romantic comedy with John Cusack and Ione Skye is ''all
charming performances and grace notes.'' (James) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98. LD,
$39.98. 1:40. CC. PG-13.

SCENES FROM THE CLASS STRUGGLE IN BEVERLY HILLS - Paul Bartel's mordant satire
''is one long smile with an occasional belly laugh.'' (Canby) 1989. Virgin.
$89.95. LD, $39.95. 1:43. CC. R.

STAR TREK V: THE FINAL FRONTIER - It has ''appealing moments. . . . But true
fans may be disappointed.'' (James) 1989. Paramount. No list price. LD, $29.95.
1:47. CC. PG.

WHEN HARRY MET SALLY . . . - Rob Reiner has made ''the sitcom version of a Woody
Allen film,'' starring Billy Crystal and Meg Ryan. (James) 1989. Nelson/Orion.
$89.98. LD, $24.95. 1:36. CC. R.

WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT - ''A film whose best moments are so novel, so
deliriously funny . . . they truly must be seen to be believed.'' (Maslin) 1988.
Touchstone. $22.99. 1:43. CC. PG.

THE WINDS OF WAR - The TV mini-series based on Herman Wouk's novel ''eventually
becomes the equivalent of a good read that can't be put down.'' (John J.
O'Connor) 1983. Paramount. $139.95. 14:43. CC. No rating.

THE WOMEN OF BREWSTER PLACE - The story of several black women over a few
decades ''is good old-fashioned melodrama, right down to a not-very-believable
upbeat conclusion.'' (O'Connor) 1989. J2 Communications. $79.95. 3:00. No
rating.

WOMEN ON THE VERGE OF A NERVOUS BREAKDOWN - Pedro Almodovar's film is an
''entertaining, deliberately benign Spanish farce.'' (Canby) 1988. Orion.
$79.98. LD, $39.95. 1:38. R.

For Children

BAMBI - ''Walt Disney's wizards,'' as a contemporary critic called them, work
their magic. 1942. Disney. $26.99. LD, $39.99. 1:09. CC. G.

THE LAND BEFORE TIME - Five dinosaurs on the road. (Maslin) 1988. MCA. $24.95.
LD, $49.98. 1:09. CC. G.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 30, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Founded by Idealists, Group Thrives on Need

BYLINE: By KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words


In the 70's, they were a phenomenon in philanthropy: rich young people with
avowedly leftist politics using their inheritances to promote ''change, not
charity.''

Around the country, they organized community groups opposing the Vietnam War,
picketed nuclear plants and demonstrated for desegregated housing. On the local
level, they gave money for battered women and abused children, the homeless and
disabled, homosexuals, lesbians, minority members and a range of neighborhood
groups that could not attract help from conventional donors.

Today, they have grown into a network called the Funding Exchange covering 25
states; last year they gave away $5.5 million, typically in small grants of
about $1,500. The sums are tiny when compared with the Ford Foundation's $218
million in annual donations, but important because they often provide seed money
for an emerging community group.

''We find and help these newcomers because we are closer to the ground,'' said
June Makela, executive director of the network since its beginning in 1979. And
to keep the decisions close to the ground, all Funding Exchange members have
governing boards with community representatives determining how money should be
spent.

Landscape of Philanthropy

In a buoyant reunion, the original organizers of the Funding Exchange, now in
their 30's and 40's, joined hundreds of their supporters in Manhattan recently
for the 10th anniversary of the network, which now links 15 statewide or
regional members like Vanguard and Liberty Hill in San Francisco and Los Angeles
and Crossroads and North Star in Chicago and New York.

''We've grown up; we're part of the landscape of American philanthropy,'' said
George Pillsbury, an heir to the family baking fortune, who gave away most of a
$400,000 inheritance and helped found the Haymarket People's Fund in Boston.
''We're now seen as members of the club.''

The political activism of the network members has not changed, although the
causes have. Network members oppose United States involvement in Central America
and dealings with South African businesses. They organize demonstrations by
rent-strikers, support farmers' boycotts and rally against growth in military
spending.

''North Star gives to the smartest, angriest and most community-active groups in
New York,'' the Manhattan Borough President, Ruth W. Messinger, said of that
12-year-old philanthropy.

Over the years, network members have often been out in front in supporting new
issues.

Help for Battered Women

Vanguard financed one of the first shelters for battered women in 1976, years
before larger foundations or government agencies began supporting projects
against domestic violence. When other foundations begged off, Vanguard was among
the first to finance a brochure on safe sex. The brochure, ''Can We Talk?,'' has
been translated into 40 languages.

But increasingly the network is adopting techniques of mainstream philanthropy.
Instead of depending on a fragile year-to-year financing base, the Funding
Exchange has begun a fund-raising campaign to establish a $15 million endowment.
And members are scouting college campuses to attract a new generation of wealthy
donors.

''The endowment represents a giant step,'' Ms. Makela said. ''It says we intend
to stay around for decades to come. Skeptics predicted these rich young kids
would soon get tired and outgrow radical politics. Instead, our donor base has
grown to 4,000 contributors, and they are no longer just young people with
inheritances, but wage earners.''

The network's organizers came to terms with their generation's role in
philanthropy in different ways.

A few of the network's organizers grew up in families with a tradition of giving
to liberal causes. Anne H. Hess, for one, quotes the teachings of her
grandmother Edith Stern, a daughter of Julius Rosenwald, the philanthropist, who
amassed a fortune in the 1890's from Sears, Roebuck & Company.

'Responsibility of Wealth'

Ms. Hess, who, along with Mr. Pillsbury, is directing the endowment campaign,
said: ''My grandmother always said one responsibility of wealth is giving it
away responsibly. This was a lesson she learned from her father.''

''I came of age when young people in their 20's with a social conscience felt
foundations were not meeting our political agenda, or promoting human rights for
women, for prisoners, farm workers or Native Americans,'' Ms. Hess said.

Some young donors said inheriting money evoked feelings of guilt, embarrassment,
fear of envy, or doubts about self-worth. Many of these concerns, they found,
are explored sympathetically in a manual called ''Robin Hood Was Right,'' which
network members published in 1977.

John Lapham said that when he came into his inheritance from a family business,
he felt confused and isolated. ''It was taboo to talk of money to my family and
friends,'' he said. ''I read the Robin Hood book, and I went to a Haymarket
meeting and I found a place where I could give my money and it felt right for
me.''

Charles Collins, a great-grandson of Oscar Mayer, founder of the meat-packing
company, learned at 16 that he would come into an inheritance. ''I dreaded the
whole idea,'' Mr. Collins said. ''My father told me I need never work, but he
hoped I would.''

A steady supporter of the Haymarket Fund, Mr. Collins gave away virtually all
his $300,000 four years ago, mainly to Haymarket. He supports himself with a
modest salary from the Institute for Community Economics, a 12-year-old
nonprofit organization that runs the country's largest loan fund for low-income
housing.

''My biggest worry was the bad effect this might have on my family relations,''
Mr. Collins said, ''and I simmered inside. But I was able to talk it through
during long walks with my father.''

At the Funding Exchange's celebration, with his father looking on proudly, Mr.
Collins was given the group's first Robin Hood award.

''Whenever I begin to sound self-righteous, my partner, Rebecca Morrison, has a
way of pulling me up short,'' he said. ''She reminds me all I did was the moral
equivalent of finding a wallet on the street and returning it to its owner.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Funding Exchange, started by rich young people using their
inheritances to promote change, has grown into a network covering 25 states. At
the group's tenth reunion, June Makela, executive director, met with George
Pillsbury, who gave away most of his $400,000 inheritance to help found a
community group in Boston. (NYT/Michelle V. Agins)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 30, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1294 words



International    A2-15



Pro-Government demonstrators in Rumania laid siege to the headquarters of the
opposition parties in a well-organized response to opposition protests.    Page
A1



Washington's ties to the new leaders of Rumania, as well as other new
governments in Eastern European, have been muted because of doubts that they
have committed themselves to democratic change.    A12



An initiative beyond Moscow's orbit emerged when the Baltic separatist movements
persuaded their counterparts in Armenia and Azerbaijan to hold peace talks -
without the Kremlin's presence.    A1



News analysis: The political game is proving to be a tough one for Communists
and the fledgling opposition parties in East Germany.    A13



Erich Honecker released from hospital, then arrested    A13



Deposed Bulgarian leader moved to prison    A13



Former Communists in Poland pick leaders for a new party

    A14



Will Nelson Mandela be released? All of South Africa, and the world, is awaiting
what almost everybody thinks will be one of the most momentous events in South
African history.    A3



A major Israeli religious leader among Jews of North African origin, Rabbi
Baruch Abu-Hatzera, has called for negotiations with the Palestinian Liberation
Organization.    A3



The hub of the Ho Chi Minh trail, the village of Tchepone in Laos, is now merely
a cluster of simple buildings in a land still scarred by the rain of bombs
dropped by American B-52's during the Vietnam War.    A8



Reparations for the Bhopal accident, delayed by legal wrangling, have still not
reached the victims, five years after the Union Carbide pesticide plant spewed
lethal gases across the impoverished city.    A9



The Vice President visited Jamaica on the final day of a three-day diplomatic
mission to Latin America. The Prime Minister of Jamaica criticized the invasion
of Panama and called for new elections there.    A15



Carter praises Sandinista's preparations for elections

    A10



U.S. attacks U.N. chief over Cuba rights report    A11



State of siege is lifted in Haiti    A15



Economic analysis: Argentina's unlikely disciplinarian

    D1



Soyapango journal: Sand diggers' plight in El Salvador

    A4



National    A16-21



A plan to cut five Army divisions while making new investments in costly
strategic nuclear programs was proposed by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney,
outlining his long-term plans for reshaping the military.    A1



Democrats were skeptical about President Bush's $1.23 trillion budget,
criticizing cuts in social programs and saying they doubted its thesis that the
deficit can be eliminated without imposing new taxes.    A1



News analysis: The new budget relies on the accuracy of favorable economic
predictions and several accounting tricks to meet the budget deficit level
required by law.    A20



How domestic programs would fare under the budget

    A21



Site picked for National Air and Space Museum expansion

    A16



Boston Journal: A scholarship fund has eased racial tensions. It was created by
Giusto and Evelyn DiMaiti, the parents of Carol Stuart, whose killing sparked
racist sentiment.    A1



City officials in Virginia Beach, Va., have been faulted for failing to properly
plan for the racially tinged rioting and looting that hit the resort city over
the Labor Day holiday.    A16

Trial opens for tanker captain in Exxon Valdez oil spill

    A16



More people reportedly ready to testify against Mayor Barry

    A18



Funding Exchange becomes part of the charity landscape

    A18



Deaths of workers in confined spaces caused by suffocation, poisoning, and
drowning in chemical and refinery tanks have prompted OSHA to consider issuing
new guidelines.    A17



A precursor of the optical computer, which uses pulses of light rather than
currents of electricity, was demonstrated by scientists at Bell Laboratories.
    A1



Companies buying other companies - or buying their own stock - drove prices on
Wall Street to record highs in the 1980's. Now there are signs that corporate
America will no longer buy shares with such abandon.    D1



RJR Reynolds bonds plunge for second straight day

    D1



Regional    B1-5



News Analysis: The right to beg in the subways, upheld by Judge Leonard B. Sand,
will likely have greater impact on the statute books and constitutional law
journals than in New York's anarchic subway system.    A1



Transcripts of the communications between the crew of Flight 52 and air traffic
controllers were released, showing that the crew told regional controllers the
plane ''would run out of fuel'' if redirected to Boston.    B1



Albany's long-awaited new arena, due to open tonight with a black-tie cocktail
party, is distressing some people in Albany. The Knickerbocker Arena, they say,
is ugly.    B1



A key witness at John Gotti's trial described taking part in the shooting of a
carpenters union official after meeting with Mr. Gotti.    B1

The Mayor's newest appointments are Carol O'Cleireacain, who will be New York
City's finance commissioner, and Catherine Abate, who will be probation
commissioner.    B3



Dr. Krim came under fire on new Health Commissioner

    B1



A fund-raising letter says Cuomo is running for re-election.

    B3



A New Jersey housing investigation has been started by the Department of Housing
and Urban Development after the discovery that the head of a small authority in
Passaic was paid $245,000 in salary and ''ineligible'' extras.    B5



Body of kidnap victim, 12, found in bags in the Bronx

    B3



Neediest Cases    B5



Business Digest    D1



Science Times

Infant immune system may be key to transplant progress

    C1



An electromagnetic gun may be able to launch satellites

    C1



Environmental problems threatened buried treasures of Egypt

    C1



An important clue to development of panic disorders    C3



Progress toward a drug to fight inflammation of arthritis

    C3



Many fish species endangered by pollution and predators

    C4



An AIDS drug approved after clamor

  C5



Arts/Entertainment



How one team casts productions    C15



Theater: ''Moving Targets''    C14



Music: The songs of Cole Porter    C14



Connie Kay's purring jazz drums    C15



Dance: The Ohad Naharin troupe    C16



Word and Image: Noriega on ''Frontline''    C18



Fashion    B7



Sports



Baseball: Strawberry arrested    B10



Basketball: Syracuse tops St. John's    B9



Ex-player at Creighton near court date    B9



Football: Can the 49ers repeat?    B9



Broncos have no answers    B11



Steinberg to meet with Holmgren    B11



Track and Field: Nehemiah finds motivation    B10



Obituaries    B6



Clarence (C) Sharpe, jazz saxophonist

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed



Editorials    A22



Bush on defense: too much

An unfair ''Integrity Fund''

Topics: Super for some

Letters    A22



Flora Lewis: Ethiopia peers west    A23



Elizabeth Dore: Panama, key to Ortega's campaign    A23



Daniel C. Maguire: The Governor and the Bishop    A23


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
A White House Speechwriter's Words and Deeds

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 944 words



What I Saw at the Revolution
A Political Life in the Reagan Era
By Peggy Noonan
353 pages. Random House. $19.95.

Three different stories collide in Peggy Noonan's ''What I Saw at the
Revolution,'' an account of her career as a speechwriter for Presidents Reagan
and Bush. The first is her appraisal of President Reagan, and it is surprisingly
starry-eyed, and questionable as useful history. The second is about Washington
and the Reagan White House, and its gossip is catty and shrewd. The third and
best of all is about the author herself, a lively stylist with a charming
vulnerability and a romantic view of the country.

Thinking about the clashing political and personal observations in her book,
this reader couldn't help wondering: How did a bright young woman from what she
calls a nice Irish middle-class family, who was born in Brooklyn and grew up in
Massapequa, L.I., decide to get mixed up in what she makes sound like such
witless and heartless company?

Other than the obvious - ambition and glamour, and maybe that's all there is to
it - the answer never really becomes clear in ''What I Saw at the Revolution.''
It's hard not to like Ms. Noonan for her frankness and breeziness. But
admiration becomes puzzlement when she is boasting about the fancy phrases she
wrote for President Reagan and to a lesser extent for candidate and President
Bush. Unwittingly, her book exposes one of Mr. Reagan's shortcomings: he rarely
changed the script they handed him.

Ms. Noonan does offer an explanation. She describes the turning point when she
switched from her family's traditional Democratic allegiance to embrace the
conservative credo of the Republican Party. While going on a college bus in 1971
to an anti-Vietnam War rally in Washington, she suddenly realized that she
didn't agree with what her Fairleigh Dickinson classmates were saying. ''There
was contempt for America,'' she writes of her classmates, and asked herself,
''What am I doing with this -this contemptuous elite?''

Ms. Noonan began her career in radio in Boston, then moved to New York and wrote
Dan Rather's CBS radio commentary. She says she found herself able to tailor her
conservatism to Mr. Rather's moderate opinions. In one of the sweeping judgments
that characterize her book, she divides the CBS staff between the Reagan ''blue
collars,'' the technicians, and the liberal ''white collars,'' the writers,
editors and producers, herself excepted.

After honestly admitting that she was more of a partisan than an objective
journalist, Ms. Noonan told friends on The National Review that she wanted to
work for President Reagan. Word was passed on to the White House and she got a
job on the speechwriting staff in 1984. Ms. Noonan had found her metier: she
learned the new style quickly, graduated from ''Rose Garden Rubbish'' to writing
for Important People, heeded the advice of the spin doctors to make Mr. Reagan
sound right, made sure that what she wrote was credited in the right political
circles, and learned to love hearing her words come out of the mouth of the
President.

But Ms. Noonan was neither a cynic nor a hypocrite; she believed in what she
wrote then and still does.

Almost sight unseen (except for a glimpse of a shaking foot in the Oval Office
or a waving hand in a corridor), she admired Mr. Reagan and what he stood for.
She places him in the Presidential class of Franklin D. Roosevelt, whose
speeches she studied, but without noting that Mr. Reagan was the first President
who opposed the Federal regulatory agencies and much of the social legislation
that flourished in Roosevelt's time. And yet she boldly makes this comparison:
''Ronald Reagan, like Franklin Roosevelt, led a domestic realignment.''

Ms. Noonan's Presidential history is fragile. Of Mr. Reagan, she writes: ''More
than any President since Jackson, he spent the years before power with the
people, the normal people in his country.'' Overlooking the fact that he spent
most of his professional life as an actor, she explains that he learned about
the common man by ''going from plant to plant for G.E., shooting the breeze with
the workers in the cafeteria, the guys on the line telling him what they
thought.''

Commenting on Mr. Reagan's fortitude and independence as a conservative, she
points out that ''he had faith in his ability to be intelligent and tough, and
if the others didn't they were wrong was all. And there was a bit of Le droit,
c'est moi - if I do a thing it is by definition conservative, bub, because I
damn well define conservatism in our time.''

Her ventures into pop psychology also appear flawed - especially when writing
about Democrats as if she is whistle-stopping on Air Force 1 or 2. For example,
she says: ''You know why I think Ted Kennedy has historically supported raising
your taxes? Because Old Joe was a bootlegger and a Hollywood buccaneer. He
thinks all wealth is tainted and all rich men thieves, and he doesn't mind
hurting them to help the poor. Unfortunately he didn't hurt them - or himself -
he hurt the middle class.''

''What I Saw at the Revolution'' is appealing when Peggy Noonan is writing about
herself, the social scene in Washington, the rivalries in the Reagan inner
circle (her low blows at Nancy Reagan's snooty personality are worth the price
of the book), about her own failed marriage but the joy of her young son, her
return to New York and a good corner deli. Her personal ''thousand points of
light'' seems clearer than the phrase she wrote for Mr. Bush. Somehow Ms. Noonan
makes this reader root for her next work - but not as a speechwriter placing
semi-precious words within a hollow crown.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Peggy Noonan (Diana Walker)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 1, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Seoul Officials See Accord on U.S. Troop Cut

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 674 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea, Jan. 31


Senior Government officials said today that they ''fully expect'' to reach an
agreement with the United States this year for the largest withdrawal of
American military personnel from South Korea since the end of the Vietnam War.

The officials said that they expected that the reductions would involve 4,000 to
5,000 of the 43,000 Americans serving in the armed forces in South Korea. The
move would bring United States forces to the level of the early 1980's, before
the Reagan Administration began a broad buildup that swelled the American
military presence in Asia and around the globe.

Despite their surprising willingness to reach an agreement, South Korean
military officials have in recent days stepped up their warnings that the
sweeping changes in Eastern Europe have yet to reduce tensions in Asia, or to
have any detectable influence on North Korea.

The officials' comments, in interviews with foreign reporters here, came two
days after the Pentagon announced proposals to close three of its five Air Force
bases in South Korea, eliminating 2,000 support positions and consolidating
fighter aircraft at two remaining bases.

A senior South Korean official deeply involved in military affairs said today
that the Government of President Roh Tae Woo had no objection to cutbacks ''as
long as the basic element of deterrent defense remains in Korea.''

That appears to mark a subtle but important change in South Korea's stated
position. Previously, the Government had regularly sought assurances that there
would be no reductions of any kind.

The change in tone appeared to reflect a decision by South Korea that, given the
choice of bearing a bigger share of the cost of stationing American troops here
or watching their numbers dwindle, the more attractive option is to allow at
least some decline.

The question of how deeply to cut the United States presence here is expected to
be a top subject of an Asian tour by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, scheduled to
begin in about two weeks. Mr. Cheney will visit Japan, South Korea and the
Philippines, the three main sites of United States military installations in
Asia.

The last major pullout of American troops in South Korea came in 1971, when
President Nixon moved about 20,000 military personnel from the peninsula. In
1978, President Carter announced a plan to withdraw all but 14,000 troops and
support personnel, but it drew intense criticism from both in South Korea and on
Capitol Hill. He ultimately canceled the plan after pulling back only 3,600
people.

For several days the Korean press has been likening President Bush's efforts to
reduce American strength here to Mr. Carter's. Some have suggested that the move
amounts to an abandonment of South Korea.

''Any plan to reduce the size of U.S. ground forces in Korea in haste is
unrealistic,'' the English-language Korea Herald asserted this morning, saying
North Korea's ground forces outnumber South Korea's by about 10 to 7. Dong A
Ilbo, a leading newspaper here, insisted today that ''the military threat from
the North has not decreased,'' but said that ''the question of American troop
withdrawal has left our hands.''

Government officials disputed that view, saying that the United States was
acting only after full consultations with South Korea. During the Carter
Administration, they argued, North Korea was more threatening and the South had
yet to surge ahead economically or build up its own military forces. Most
officials here say that they now view the North's economy as unsustainable, and
that North Korea will soon have to reduce its own army.

But Hyun Hong Choo, the Minister of Legislation, said today that the United
States ''must link its scaledown with developments in North-South relations.''

Mr. Hyun suggested that in return for troop cuts the North should withdraw some
troops now stationed just above the demilitarized zone, arrange for exchanges so
that families could cross the border to visit relatives, and open a suspected
nuclear weapons installation for inspection.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 1, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1277 words



International    A3-15

The State of the Union address, President Bush's first, called for sharp new
reductions in Soviet and United States troop deployments in Europe.    Page A1

Troop proposal tries to catch up with Europe's changes     A12

Plans for troop cuts are praised on Capitol Hill     D23

The U.S. foreign aid plan for how nearly $8 billion will be distributed this
year was announced. Under the plan, Central America would lose a lot of money,
and Poland's aid would increase dramatically.    A3

The drive for German reunification was seized upon in West Germany where
President Gorbachev's recent recognition of the clamor for unity was greeted as
a major step.    A1

Gorbachev denies plan to quit post    A13

Moscow McDonald's opens    A13

News analysis: Communist roots burden new Polish party    A13

Newspaper is showcase for Bucharest's dissenters    A14

Three more ethnic Albanians reported slain    A12

American troops in Panama will be brought back ''well before the end of
February,'' President Bush announced.    A8

Cuba accuses U.S. of firing on freighter     A8

Salvadoran chief asks U.N. help to restart talks with guerrillas     A8

Battles raged in a Lebanon enclave north of Beirut as thousands of troops loyal
to Gen. Michel Aoun moved to suppress and disarm the powerful Lebanese forces
militia.    A3

Baker may meet Egypt and Israel Ministers on peace talks     A6

A South African black man died while in police custody, according to an official
statement that has shaken the country. The man was the father of a grandchild of
Nelson Mandela.    A8

Westerners quit Sudan town after rebel threats     A10

Namibian assembly sets March 21 as independence date     A9

A withdrawal of U.S. troops in Korea, the largest reduction since the end of the
Vietnam War, would take place under an agreement that Korea expects to reach
with the United States this year.    A15

Britain tells of 70's anti-I.R.A. drive     A7

India says Pakistan is stirring up Kashmir unrest     A5

National    A16-21, B8-9, D22-23

The President's domestic plans that were mentioned in his address added little
new substance to policies outlined earlier this week in budget proposals that
Democrats have already criticized as inadequate.    A1

Bush takes the chance to play hide-and-seek     D23

The number of savings institutions in trouble is so great that the Government
should consider keeping some of them open rather than face the exhorbitant cost
of taking them over, the head of the Federal savings rescue effort said.    D1

The index of leading indicators, a widely followed economic forecasting gauge,
for December had its biggest rise since April, the Commerce Department said. The
rise was regarded as a sign that growth would continue.     D1

Stocks end five-day slide; Dow up 47.30     D1

A national health campaign intended to educate consumers about nutrition and
health claims opens today. But some health and nutrition experts have predicted
that the program will further confuse consumers.    A1

A protein appears to predict cancers    B8

Two ex-law-enforcement officers in Mexico were indicted with 17 other people in
connection with the kidnapping, torture and murder of a Drug Enforcement
Administration agent in 1985, the Justice Department announced.    A1

A defendant in a child-abuse case that produced the longest criminal trial in
American history has to stand trial again for 13 charges that the jury failed to
resolve, prosecutors said.    A16

The evolution of the cosmos via gravity is the focus of a study using the
largest computer simulation of the universe ever attempted.    B8

Reagan depicted by Poindexter as guiding Contra aid efforts     A20

Environmental groups told they are racist in hiring     A20

Atlanta trial focuses on charge of color bias     A20

A deserter, returning, is arrested    A16

Ex-Navajo leader is facing 3 criminal trials     A18

Abortion foes gain in Wisconsin Assembly vote     A21

Regional    B1-6, B24

John Cardinal O'Connor strongly defended the jailed Bishop who said that
Governor Cuomo was ''in serious risk of going to hell'' for support of abortion
rights.    A1

Many of the school system's ills are reflected in the story of a former school
board president who was convicted of taking $18,000 in bribes and kickbacks.
A1

A Bronx school superintendent is indicted     B1

School districts to resist Chancellor on vetoing job offers     B3

A deputy mayor for public safety was appointed. Justice Milton Mollen will fill
the new position set up to oversee cooperation among the police, the courts and
district attorneys.    B1

The number of police officers on the force will not be able to reach the Dinkins
administration's goal by June because of budget constraints, and the
administration will propose to postpone the target date until June 1991, city
officials said.    B1

Officer fatally shoots unarmed teen-Ager    B1

Man in subway killing says he acted to protect his son     B2

Police officer is attacked and stabbed in Brooklyn     B5

Defense seems to admit Gotti role as mob boss     B3

U.S. racketeering suit to focus on dock union     B2

A zoning law's concept of a ''family'' can cover a group of 10 college students
living in a one-family house, the New Jersey Supreme Court has ruled.    B6.

Neediest Cases    B5

Business Digest    D1

The Home Section

Take junk, let it rust, bring it home    C1

Trees that droop, ever so sculpturally    C1

Learning to hang more than a diploma    C1

Close to Home    C2

Where to Find It    C2

Currents    C3

Home Improvement    C4

Arts/Entertainment

Cindy Sherman's visions of art history    C17

Big prices for film scripts    C17

Musicians bargaining on pact    C18

Harlem troupe plans layoffs    C18

Questions on ''Roger and Me''    C20

Malbin collection to be sold    C24

Film: Japanese ''Black Rain''    C17

Word and Image: From Iris Murdoch, paradox and enigma    C21

TV film of civil rights slayings    C22

Sports

Basketball: Celtics beat Knicks    B13

Column: Anderson on Strawberry and Dick Williams    B13

Football: Running-back puzzle for Giants    B16

Hockey: Rangers and Blues tie    B13

Devils squander another chance    B14

Soccer: More goals sought    B13

Health    B10

Personal Health

Taming unruly boys: old techniques and new approaches

Obituaries    D21

Samuel C. Phillips, directed the Apollo lunar landing

Arnaud d'Usseau, a playwright and screenplay writer

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials    A22

Mr. Bush's piggy bank

RICO racket in the Senate

The U.N. has earned its dues

Don Wycliff: Glory of ''Glory''

Letters    A22

A. M. Rosenthal: Bush won. Who lost?    A23

Tom Wicker: Lyrics and the law    A23

Elizabeth Teague: Why Gorbachev might quit    A23

Lowell Weicker Jr.: First aid for a U.S. agency     A23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HIS SENTIMENTS EXACTLY

BYLINE: By WILFRID SHEED; Wilfrid Sheed, a novelist, often writes about culture
and politics. His collection ''Essays in Disguise'' will be published this
month.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2478 words



WHAT I SAW AT THE REVOLUTION
A Political Life in the Reagan Era.
By Peggy Noonan.
353 pp. New York: Random House. $19.95.

Back in 1968, the baby boom and concern over the Vietnam War draft seemed to hit
national politics simultaneously and for the first time ''kids'' became
important. Bobby Kennedy was rumored to be especially covetous of Eugene
McCarthy's volunteers - Bobby had kids too, but not the best kids, the most
idealistic, selfless and, if you will, ''Peace-Corpsish'' kids of their
generation.

Nobody even bothered to ask who had the Republican kids that year, it seemed
like a contradiction in terms, but in fact it would have been Ronald Reagan by a
mile, with his army of Young Americans for Freedom or Y.A.F.'s (I've always
wondered what an Old American for Freedom would be called) - the most idealistic
and selfish of their generation, as they might satirically have termed
themselves.

And then there are the Sons and Daughters of the Hard Hats, the kids who were
drawn neither to Bobby nor Gene - especially not to Gene - and gave our oldest
President the youngest constituency. These were the young people who had no
inclination to jump on their parents - whose lives, they may have figured, had
been tough enough without this added nuisance, a late-breaking denunciation from
junior; or on their country, whose blessings they were still fresh enough to
appreciate. And of this group one of the more gifted and articulate would go on
to write speeches for Ronald Reagan and give him his best voice, his Irish,
man-of-the-people-voice: a style that might be called Late High Blarney,
particularly suitable for a man whose real self could be nonexistent, or
permanently out to lunch, for all the voice's true owner ever could find out
about him.

Which brings us at long last to Peggy Noonan. Lengthy preambles are a pest, but
justified in her case because Ms. Noonan places herself firmly, not to say
hauntingly (she is an elegiac writer), in her situation, such that when she says
this is where I stand, she means a specific time and place - Massapequa, L.I.,
to be precise, in the Irish, or what's-it-to-you, wing of the upwardly mobile
working class and the Roosevelt coalition, and these are still her lodestars.

Ms. Noonan might further be described as a strict reactionary, like her boss,
driven rightward by the sheer obnoxiousness of the left. Who can forget how
Ronald Reagan turned Republican after meeting some real-life Communists in his
days at the Screen Actors Guild? He was prone to recite this experience
mantrically to anyone who'd listen till it must have begun to sound a bit like
the famous commercial, ''Bo knows Communism.'' Yes indeed.

In Ms. Noonan's case her sticking point was a bus load of Fairleigh Dickinson
peaceniks who in 1971 were jeering in their excruciating fashion at John Wayne
and Coca-Cola and at our whole ''racist, genocidal nation'' and on and on, you
remember the list: phallic, imperialist - they obviously weren't talking about
Massapequa or any America she recognized. (The possibility that they and other
prigs like them were secret F.B.I. agents recruiting students for the Republican
Party has to be dismissed, I suppose, but they certainly negated some peace
marches.) After college, she would fill out her picture of the enemy by musing
on the limousine liberals of CBS News, her next port of call, with their
conviction that they were put on earth to teach their inferiors liberalism. And
to keep the flame lit, she still gives herself booster shots of scorn, viz.:
''There's something in good conservatives that makes them happy to sit for an
hour with a janitor and talk . . . in a way that one suspects a Ralph Nader . .
. never could'' (but how about James Watt versus Tip O'Neill, to make it a fair
fight?).

The point seems important enough for her to repeat it yet one more time, so that
we can see exactly who she is steering away from and perhaps why it's really
O.K. to be where she is right now. ''Up on the Hill or at the White House the
young rough-looking guy from a state school is probably either a Republican or a
conservative, and the snooty sniffy guy with a THANK YOU FOR NOT SMOKING sign on
his tidy little'' - even his furniture thinks small - ''desk is a Democrat. . .
. It was all changing (and the cliches hadn't begun to catch up!).'' (In fact,
the cliches caught up so long ago that the Republicans have based their last
five campaigns on them - a tactic which might account for at least some of those
rough-looking Republicans.) There may be something to be said for keeping your
eye on the enemy when the alternative is looking at friends like the Reagans.
Ms. Noonan's all too brief description of these is wonderful social comedy, a
kind of Frank Capra version of ''Alice in the White House'' or of ''The
Mikado'': Maureen is the classic boss's daughter, or Katisha character: one can
imagine Edward Arnold or Eugene Pallette puffing over at any moment to smooth
her feathers and fire whoever is bothering her. Nancy would be the Red Queen,
sailing ominously through the White House with her entourage, glaring briefly,
murderously at Ms. Noonan's work clothes. The President himself has to be the
White King, a kindly old fellow who keeps falling off his horse and has to be
helped up again. A Reaganite might protest that they're not really like that and
he might be right, because one senses that this could just be Massapequa acting
up again, cocking a snook at the nonsense outside, and that if Ms. Noonan had
found herself on a bus full of Reagans instead of peaceniks at an impressionable
age, the Democrats never would have lost her.

And this is the great strength and pleasure of ''What I Saw at the Revolution'':
the glee it keeps giving one to find a recognizable human, a comrade, in truly
preposterous circumstances, be they left or right. It wasn't just Ms. Noonan's
clothes that Nancy was glaring at, but her very presence. You don't belong here.
And Ms. Noonan, hailing from a real neighborhood and a real family, is struck by
some lines of criticism she has heard from over the wall. If the young
Reaganites are ''so interested in the family how come none of them are married?
How come none of them have kids? . . . You guys don't believe in God, you just
believe in religion. I ponder this,'' she adds.

Not that she didn't have allies. There was genuine intellectual excitement among
the new conservatives, as they traversed the ruins of the New Deal like G.I.'s
in postwar Europe (never mind that their leader was a - what shall we call him -
Roosevelt Republican?), and she does full justice to the joy of writing and
receiving brainy memos about ''judicial activism'' and ''criteria for reform,''
interspersed with some fine wisecracks. Veterans of other political movements
will remember the music of it, if not the words, and perhaps even feel like
dancing a jig, because Ms. Noonan can evoke a mood like nobody's business.

But that's only when Irish eyes are smiling. It's always fun in the lower ranks
where the amateurs and the kids are, but as you mount the stairs, the laughter
fades. ''You know how it is with intense people in an intense environment, and
so many of these guys are fish who swam upstream, and add to that the difficult
natures that politics often draws and movements draw, and . . . and add all that
up and you get . . . well . . . what you get is a bunch of creepy little men
with creepy little beards who need something to seethe on,'' and more marvelous
billingsgate, with the rough-looking Republicans nowhere in sight.

And then there's this, as she might say (she calls her boppity-bop prose
''Thirtysomething''-ish, but whatever it is it has a nice beat). For all their
pointy-headed liberalism, the Carter people did have their own saloon where they
would brawl until dawn, while the creeps crawl into bed at 9:35 P.M. and wait
for the cliches to catch up. Ms. Noonan believes that even the Nixon
Administration generated more comradeship than Mr. Reagan's as if adversity
might be better for you than all this triumph. But maybe that's because she
wasn't there.

What the Reagan Administration does have, though, are strange birds of passage,
one-man vaudeville turns, such as the National Security Adviser Robert (Bud)
McFarlane - a robot programmed for something quite indecipherable - and the cold
warrior Pat Buchanan, the Cowardly Lion (I know she doesn't mean it this way),
who won't fight for anything on an office level, and the improbable Ollie North,
the eternal 12-year-old and comic-book hero extraordinaire, who doesn't like
girls to attend his hubba-hubba, why-don't-we-buy-our-own-battleship meetings.

And then, for group numbers, there are Chief of Staff Donald Regan's ''mice''
(Wonderland figures for sure) - junior assistants who nibble away at her
speeches just for something to do - and the shadowy figures at the National
Security Council who drain what's left of the speeches of all their color and
life, of all their Noonan-ness, as if Nancy Reagan isn't the only one who
doesn't think she belongs here. Her good guys - Presidential assistants Richard
Darman and Craig Fuller, for instance - have better things to do than sit
constant guard over her words, while the rest of the White Housers seem actively
hostile, as if her very presence suggested that our hero didn't make the words
up himself as he went along.

But what gives the book its real pathos, beyond perhaps even the author's full
awareness, is that the President didn't seem to care either. Ms. Noonan does her
level best for Ronald Reagan in this book. After a meeting at which he has
manifestly woolgathered, but not without point, she triumphantly reports that
''he had opinions, he had something he wanted to do'' - to which a voter can
only respond weakly, ''I should certainly hope so.''

Otherwise, she can only resort to talk about his self-evident ''greatness,''
which leaves no more trace on the page than a dybbuk's shadow, but sounds
suspiciously like the emanations people felt when Cary Grant entered the M-G-M
cafeteria: there may be more to it than that, but as I say, it doesn't show up
in print. What Ms. Noonan does notice though - and it suggests she was on to his
game more than she wanted to be - was a habit Ronald Reagan had of complicitous
winking, which suggested to various observers that he knew what was going on all
right, and was mighty amused by it all.

But on dark days she would give up altogether. ''I would think to myself . . .
that the battle for the mind of Ronald Reagan was like the trench warfare of
World War I: Never have so many fought so hard for such barren terrain.'' And it
wasn't just his mind. ''This White House is like a beautiful clock that makes
all the right sounds, but when you open it up, there is nothing inside. . . .
When I thought of him in those days, it was as a gigantic heroic balloon
floating in the Macy's Thanksgiving Day parade.''

Such was the indifference bordering on simplemindedness of the White House staff
that they didn't even realize that it pays to be kind, or at least rudimentarily
decent, to writers on their way out the door. Ms. Noonan is finally released
without so much as a thank-you note or a photo-op with the Great Balloon - who,
for his part, doesn't come down from the sky long enough to realize she's even
missing.

And this is what is most astounding. Ms. Noonan had given him his very best
words (written out as they are here they may sometimes seem as flat as
unaccompanied song lyrics, but they sang pretty well at the time), and you would
suppose that just this one thing he would keep his eye on and do something
about. But no, it was all the same to him where the words came from - maybe the
elves brought them. And indeed Ronald Reagan only noticed her absence when by
some miracle her name got attached to George Bush's famous acceptance speech (in
which she committed a minor fraud by disguising Mr. Bush's instinctive
preference for weak phrases).

Suddenly she was a celebrity, somebody he could cope with, and he insisted on
having this famous stranger write his final State of the Union message for him.
Which is perhaps all you need to know about the role of the writer in Hollywood.

The best epigraph to the whole book appears, I believe, quite early on. Ms.
Noonan is talking about a brutal round of layoffs at CBS, including some revered
veterans, and the shudder it has sent through the ranks; ever since Ed Murrow
had braved bombs to cover the London blitz, CBS News had considered itself
something special; but suddenly, no more. CBS ''spent loyalty as if it was going
out of style,'' says Ms. Noonan, ''which perhaps it is. Rather captured it. . .
. 'Listen,' Dan said, 'this place has all the tradition of a discount shoe
store.' ''

That she sees, even now, no connection between this kind of scene and the Reagan
White House illustrates the infinite distance between a speechwriter's reality
and a critic's. Subsisting on a diet of affirmations and debating points, a
President's ghost would only complicate her life intolerably by doubting her own
uplifting words for more than a minute, or looking on the downside of her lovely
revolution. But what she can't criticize with her mind she more than makes up
for with her eyes and ears, and there are some deadly word-pictures in here
along with some highly admiring ones - perhaps in each case beyond the subjects'
warrant. So long as Ms. Noonan is writing about it, the old shoe store fairly
rocks with life, but one senses that she is investing the characters with her
own vitality and making them a mite more interesting than they deserve.

At any rate, I am much more curious about what she does next than what they do
next.

A TALK WITH ONE OF THE MICE

Hi, Peggy, how are you?

Fine, thanks, David. You well?

Yes I am. Ah, the speech to the Shriners.

Yes.

Ah, have a minute to go over it?

Go over it?

Yes, for changes.

I've already received everyone's comments, but I'm not done with it . . .

Well, I've received comments too, and why don't we take a look at it?

All right.

Good. On page one, take out paragraphs three and four.

Why?

It's our feeling that the joke in graph three isn't funny. We don't think a
witticism is necessary at that point.

Who is ''we''?

''We'' is those who've made the decision.

What does that mean?

Can we go to page two?

No, who is we and how did they make their decision? They have a staff meeting on
the president's jokes now? You all vote or what? Anyone make a joke defense or
was it all joke attack?

Silence.

David, I've been doing this for a while now, for two years, and I know a little
about this.

Silence.

Can we go now to page two, please, he says, in a monotone.

From ''What I Saw at the Revolution.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Ronald Reagan's former speechwriter Peggy Noonan at
her home in Manhattan (NYT/Jim Wilson) (pg. 1); Peggy Noonan with her son, Will.
(NYT/Jim Wilson) (pg. 29)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

AFGHANS: Now They Blame America

BYLINE: By John F. Burns; John F. Burns covered Afghanistan for The New York
Times during most of 1989. A former chief of the Times's Moscow and Beijing
bureaus, he is currently Toronto bureau chief.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 22, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5245 words


AT FIRST, IT WAS A JUST A morbid whistling overhead, the sound of an
antipersonnel rocket in the dying moments of flight. Then it exploded in a
shattering burst of smoke and dust.

A group of children had been playing a noisy game of tag near their mud-walled
homes. Now, as the smoke cleared on this bright December afternoon, there was
only moaning. Near the crater dug by the rocket lay two children, a boy of 17
and his 6-year-old sister, shattered by shards of twisted steel. Around them
nearly a dozen other children were strewn about, many of them grievously
wounded.

Throughout 1989, rocket attacks by United States-backed rebels had been pounding
Government-held cities and towns; in major cities like Kabul and Kandahar I had
seen these rockets kill as many as 40 people in a single blast. But this was
Khost, a Government outpost in a remote, south-eastern corner of the country
(map, page 28), a place so small and so long besieged that its services barely
function at all. It took 20 minutes for any help to appear. By then, another
youngster, a 4-year-old girl, had died. By dusk, three more children were dead.

As a crowd gathered around the children, I was identified as an American
reporter. There were murmurs as the word passed; the United States provides the
rebels with $700 million in support each year - by far their largest single
source - and the rockets are widely regarded as an American responsibility. One
old man stepped forward. ''Get away!'' he shouted. ''Why do you do this to us?
Tell us why!''

The cry was familiar to the handful of American reporters who remained in
Afghanistan after the last Soviet troops withdrew on Feb. 15, 1989. In the
courtyards of 1,000-year-old mosques, in the sinuous back streets of ancient
cities, in smoky restaurants where men in turbans chewed mutton kebabs, ordinary
Afghans regularly approached and asked - sometimes in puzzlement, more often in
anger - how the United States could allow the rebels to fire American-supplied
weapons into neighborhoods and bazaars, killing and wounding the ordinary people
on whose behalf they claim to be fighting.

During 1989, according to estimates made by Western relief agencies, rebel
rocket attacks killed at least 1,000 people in Kabul, the capital, and perhaps
several times that many across the country. But through it all, American
officials insisted that the United States would continue to arm and finance the
rebels, while supporting their refusal to negotiate with the Soviet-backed
regime in Kabul. By the fall, the officials had begun to speak almost casually
of the need for another ''season'' or two of fighting before the rebels could
force the capitulation of the Kabul Government.

But the Government has shown no willingness to surrender, and no sign of
collapsing in the face of the rebel attacks. Instead, it has pursued its own
murderous military policies, killing large numbers of civilians - probably far
more than the rebels - with its own long-range Soviet-made Scud-B missiles, a
European battlefield weapon that is notoriously ill suited for the pinpoint
accuracy required in strikes against guerrillas, and in high-altitude bombing
raids that only rarely hit rebel targets.

Still, for many Afghan civilians, it was the rebels' resort to similar tactics
that seemed the most troubling aspect of the war, so contrary was it to
everything the United States had professed to seek in Afghanistan. That these
tactics worried American officials was plain from the remarks of Peter Tomsen,
President Bush's special envoy to the rebels, who told reporters during visits
to rebel headquarters in Pakistan that their use of rockets against civilian
targets reminded him of atrocities against civilians that he had seen in
Vietnam, where he had served as a junior diplomat.

Mr. Tomsen said he had appealed to the rebel groups to end the attacks against
civilians. But there was no sign that the United States was ready to cut back
weapons supplied to the groups responsible, or to discipline them in any way. As
1990 began, the rocket attacks continued, with the overwhelming majority of them
- more than 90 percent, according to the estimates of the International
Committee of the Red Cross - hitting nowhere near military targets.

The damage to American prestige has been immense. Since the Soviet Union sent
its troops into Afganistan in late 1979, Afghans had looked to the United States
as the one foreign power with the resources, and the concern, to help end the
country's miseries. It was American money and arms - together with support from
China, Iran and Saudi Arabia - that ultimately helped force the Kremlin's
decision to withdraw its troops.

But once the Russians were gone, many Afghans began to see the United States in
a new guise, as a distant power that sanctioned the routine killing of
civilians. And although these attitudes were widespread by last summer, it was
only in the last few weeks, almost a year after Soviet troops withdrew, that
there was any sign that the Administration was seriously reviewing its policy.
Last month, the Administration sent a fact-finding mission to South Asia, led by
Under Secretary of State Robert Kimmitt, the third-ranking official in the
department. According to Administration officials, Mr. Kimmitt's conclusions
will influence the United States position in the Moscow talks later this week
between Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Foreign Minister Eduard A.
Shevardnadze, where Afghanistan is expected to be high on the agenda.

It remains to be seen whether Mr. Kimmitt's mission has reaffirmed Washington's
existing policy, or laid the groundwork for a shift toward a negotiated
settlement. But one thing is certain. After the last Soviet armored vehicles
slipped and slid through the snow-bound mountain passes of the Hindu Kush on
their way home to the Soviet Union, few who witnessed the relief among ordinary
Afghans could have imagined the situation a mere 12 months later - that the
United States would come to be blamed by many of these same people for
prolonging the suffering of the war, while the Soviet and Afghan Governments
presented themselves as the harbingers of peace.

THOUGH AFGHANISTAN HAS A long history of invasions, no marauders have done more
to stir hatred than the Russians. During the last decade of war, at least half
of the country's more than 30,000 villages were obliterated. In ancient cities
like Kandahar, founded by and named for Alexander the Great, Soviet
fighter-bombers, seeking to root out rebels, carpet-bombed entire districts. The
Soviet bombs, together with their rockets and mortars and shells, killed most of
the 1.3 million Afghans (out of a prewar population of 12 million to 15 million)
that Western relief agencies estimate have died in the war.

As I traveled about the country, I saw devastation that went far beyond anything
I had seen in half a dozen other distant wars. In Darwaza-i-Mashad, the oldest
section of the 2,500-year-old city of Herat, every building for miles was
destroyed. In streets that had been thriving when Alexander's army passed
through three centuries before the birth of Christ, nothing remained but rubble
overgrown with weeds. A Russian military interpreter who had worked in the
country throughout the Soviet occupation quietly wept as he looked over the
devastation. ''Look what we have done,'' he said. ''My God, how can we be
forgiven?''

In the Salang valley north of Kabul, beside the mountain road used by Soviet
troops for their withdrawal, scores of villages had been leveled. Of the life
that had sustained the valley since well before Columbus landed in America,
nothing remained but flocks of scavenging birds. On the road, and on the river
banks below, lay the wrecks of hundreds of fuel tankers, trucks, tanks, armored
personnel carriers and jeeps, burned and destroyed in rebel attacks. These, and
the wrecked aircraft and helicopters that litter the ravaged terrain, are the
only memorials that remain to the 15,000 Soviet soldiers who died in the war.

SET AGAINST THE SOVIET BARBARITY, THE United States seemed ideally placed to
help usher in the peace. This prospect spread a mood of triumph among American
officials. Jon Glassman, charge d'affaires of the American Embassy in Kabul,
caught the mood when he called the Kabul Government, in the wintry days just
before the last Soviet unit departed, ''a house without girders,'' and predicted
that it would fall to the rebels in a matter of weeks, months at the most.

Those forecasting a swift collapse did not reckon on the doggednesss of a
Government with its back to the wall. Last March, pressured by their American
and Pakistani advisers, the rebels massed for an attack on Jalalabad, a
strategic city 50 miles from the rebels' home bases in Pakistan. Though
Jalalabad was considered the most vulnerable of the Government's strongholds,
after four months and perhaps 5,000 dead, the great majority of them rebels, the
city had not fallen. The American officials who had encouraged the attack were
soon acknowledging it as a ''catastrophe'' that should never have been launched.

In September, again on American advice, the rebels mounted another major attack,
at Khost. Three months later that siege, too, had bogged down, and Government
generals were boasting to visitors that they could hang on for years. It was the
same story everywhere Western reporters went - at Kabul, Kandahar, Herat and a
dozen other urban centers. By the end of the year, the Government had not lost a
single city or town it had held when Soviet forces withdrew. In some districts,
it had even extended its area of control, re-occupying terrain that Soviet
forces had given up as lost.

Meanwhile, on the rebel side, there was growing disarray. Within two weeks of
the Soviet pullout, the rebels established a ''provisional government,'' largely
at the urgings of the Americans. But this ''government,'' based in Peshawar,
Pakistan, remained mostly a fiction; its telephone numbers could be obtained
only at the American consulate in Peshawar, and the numbers rarely answered.
Privately, American officials came to regard the provisional defense ministry -
which Mr. Tomsen, the American delegate, claimed was preparing to take over
management of the war - as a joke.

''They're just a bunch of mullahs over there,'' one American diplomat in
Peshawar told me. ''Go ahead and talk to them, have a cup of tea, but don't
expect to learn anything useful about the war.''

Not only did the 15 rebel parties continue to operate as separate units, but the
ethnic, religious and political splits that run like fissures through their
ranks widened. Some groups stopped fighting. A few concluded their own
cease-fire arrangements with the Government. Two major groups, Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar's faction of the Islamic Party and Burnahuddin Rabbani's Islamic
Society, began a private war, ambushing and assassinating each other's fighters
whenever the opportunity arose.

Still others, while they continued to receive American arms, turned their
energies toward a burgeoning trade in opium, a traditional Afghan enterprise
that grew so rapidly in rebel-held areas that the country now exports at least
800 tons, and perhaps as many as 2,000, of opium gum a year - figures which,
according to American drug enforcement officials, places Afghanistan second only
to the ''golden triangle'' of Burma, Thailand and Laos as the world's largest
source of the raw material for heroin.

''It's a travesty,'' a Scandinavian aid official said last spring, after he had
traveled on horseback through districts of Helmand province, in south-central
Afghanistan, that are the biggest source of the opium. On some days, the
official said, he had traveled for a dozen miles through fields vivid with the
pink, red and white opium poppies, and saw rebel commanders consulting with
peasants about the crop.

Most of the opium is processed in laboratories in the rebel areas, or shipped -
generally aboard donkeys, but sometimes aboard jeeps bought with United States
funds - to processing plants in Pakistan. According to official American
estimates, perhaps proportions of the heroin - tons every year, worth billions
of dollars on the street - is eventually sold in the United States, accounting
for perhaps one in three heroin deals in the country.

For Americans, the enormous growth in the heroin trade may be the most lasting
consequence of the war. Yet American officials made little of it in public until
recent months. By last fall, the officials were sufficiently concerned about the
heroin traffic - and about the potential damage that could be done to
Congressional support for the rebels - that Robert B. Oakley, the United States
Ambassador to Pakistan, was authorized to arrange an unusual diplomatic
encounter: a meeting at the Islamabad Embassy between American officials and
Maulvi Nasim Akhundzada, the 34-year-old rebel commander who is the drug kingpin
of the upper Helmand Valley.

Mr. Akhundzada had let it be known before the October meeting that he was ready
to suppress the opium traffic in return for payments of $2 million a week,
enough to support a private army of 7,000 men. According to embassy officials,
no deal was considered, much less struck. Instead, the officials said, they told
Mr. Akhundzada that American aid for the area would only be considered once
heroin trafficking stopped.

Mr. Akhundzada listened to the Americans, then went back to Helmand, where he
has continued his drug-running. While cut off from American weapons and money -
a belatedly adopted United States policy denies aid to any rebel commander known
to be drug trafficking - Mr. Akhundzada has little immediate cause for concern.
With his drug profits, he has found other rebel groups who still receive
American backing only too eager to sell him the weapons and vehicles he needs.

THE DAY AFTER THE LAST Soviet troops were withdrawn, Mikhail S. Gorbachev sent
President Bush a letter outlining a proposal for a cease-fire: Washington and
Moscow would suspend arms shipments, encourage the Government and the rebels to
join in a coalition, and act as guarantors until the country could choose a
permanent government. Soviet officials spoke of holding elections under United
Nations supervision, and urged the deposed King, Mohammed Zahir Shah, to return
to Kabul, where he reigned for 40 years until his exile in 1973.

But Washington promptly rebuffed the Soviet initiative, and continued to brush
off all Soviet proposals for almost a year. Until the Kimmitt mission last
month, American officials took the position that the Afghan fighting would
continue until the Kremlin agreed to effect by manipulation what the rebels have
failed to accomplish by force - - the removal of the Kabul Government.

This demand originated with the rebels, who refused to have any dealings with
President Najibullah, the 43-year-old Kabul leader and former head of the
notorious Khad secret police, whom the rebels accused of killing thousands in
Kabul's prisons. Initially, many Afghans saw a policy that demanded the removal
of a Government with such a grisly record as hard to fault. But as the months
passed and the war stagnated, they began to question whether demanding Mr.
Najibullah's ouster as a precondition for talks made sense, especially if there
was a chance that the same thing could be accomplished by negotiation.

The Kabul leader himself made this point in virtually every interview and
speech, declaring that he and his Government were prepared to share power with
the rebels, to compete in fair elections, and to step down if they lost.
''Najibullah is not the issue,'' he said in an interview with The Times in June.
''The issue is how to stop the war.'' As for his past as head of the secret
police, Mr. Najibullah noted that the Bush Administration has negotiated with
other political groups and leaders it abhors, citing its participation in talks
with, among others, the genocidal Khmers Rouge of Cambodia.

If the American policy had any hope, it appeared to rest with dissidents in the
Government army, who attempted to remove Mr. Najibullah in at least three
abortive coups in 1989. But for its part, the Kremlin pledged to stand by the
man it installed as Kabul leader 1986. And even if the Soviets did decide to
replace him, the rebels would almost certainly have a tougher time in any
negotiation now than they would have had at the time of the withdrawal. Then,
the Government was at its weakest, uncertain how well its troops would fare once
the Russians were gone.

Now the Government's confidence has been bolstered, and morale among front-line
troops seems higher than it has been in years. The defections that were occuring
around the time of the Soviet withdrawal have slowed, in part because the rebels
greeted some of the first soldiers to cross over by executing them. ''Come back
next year, or the year after, I'll still be here,'' said Brig. Gen. Abdul
Sattar, commander of frontal units in Khost. Soldiers around him, Kabul
loyalists hardened by years of siege, chuckled as he spoke.

The Najibullah Government has made some unexpected headway on the political
front as well. In part, this is because Mr. Najibullah has proved to be a far
more effective performer than his detractors had imagined. Almost daily, he has
met with civic delegations -peasants, teachers, doctors, Islamic scholars,
anybody who would give him a hearing - to present the Government's new image.
Step by step, he repudiated virtually everything the 1978 revolution originally
stood for, apologizing for trying to substitute the ''utopianism, rhetoric and
flashy slogans'' of Marxism for common sense, for attempting to implement land
reform in ''a half-baked manner,'' and for riding roughshod over the country's
deeply rooted Muslim faith and its complex structure of clans and tribes.

The expediency of all this is transparent, since Mr. Najibullah was a major
figure in the Government during the years when many of the excesses were
committed. But he has been assured an audience by the fact that he has been
pressing for a negotiated peace at a time when the rebel leaders remained
pledged to the continuation of the war. Even in refugee camps in Pakistan, among
the 3.5 million Afghans who had fled their country, families gathered around
their radio sets to listen to broadcasts of Mr. Najibullah's speeches and
dialogues from Kabul. And in Afghanistan itself, in the Government-held cities
and towns, and in the rebel-held valleys and villages, increasing numbers of
Afghans were coming to the conclusion that the rebels, though they had driven
the Soviets out, had not proved they were fit to govern the country.

For one thing, many Afghans seemed unpersuaded that the rebel leaders were
likely to offer the country the social and political reforms it required. The
Kabul Government's performance has been so heinous that few outside the country
have remembered what it was about Afghanistan in 1978 that made the country such
fertile ground for a communist coup - the fact that four Afghan children out of
five received no education, that one child in two died before his or her fifth
birthday, that as recently as 1971 more than half a million people had died of
starvation in a single winter, and that the per capita income, at $157, was one
of the lowest in the world. In Africa, such statistics are commonplace; in Asia,
they put Afghanistan at the bottom of just about every list.

These facts help explain why, after all that had occurred in Kabul, there were
still people of conscience working in the Government bureaucracy and army. Over
flickering campfires, in backstreet restaurants and in the intimacy of their
homes, many of these people expressed a loathing for Mr. Najibullah and his
associates no less intense than that among the rebels. Yet they remained with
the Government - in part because of their hope that from the ashes of the
revolution a new regime would arise, a Government equally opposed to the
religious fundamentalism of the rebels and the brutality of those who made the
1978 coup.

''What would you have people like me do?'' one American-educated official asked
one evening, as he sat on the balcony of a Kabul hotel room sipping a whisky and
watching the sun slip behind the Koh-i-Baba mountains. ''I know far more about
the bloodthirstiness of Najibullah and his people than you ever will. But as I
see it, it makes better sense to me to hope for a negotiated settlement of this
war, something that doesn't simply hand the country over to the bearded men up
there in the mountains.''

BY AUTUMN, REPORTS OUT OF WASHINGTON were telling of skirmishes between the
Central Intelligence Agency and the State Department, as officials scrambled to
explain why forecasts of an early rebel triumph remained unfulfilled. Some
blamed the C.I.A., which they said had been so confident of a rapid rebel
victory that it began cutting back on weapons deliveries even before the Soviets
had withdrawn. Others said the key blunder was in launching the Jalalabad
attack, which cost the rebels their heaviest casualties of the war, without
gaining any significant terrain.

In November, after hearing testimony from Mr. Tomsen and other officials,
Congress voted to continue funding the rebels' military operations through the
fall of 1990. New and more powerful munitions would be added to the rebels'
armory, officials said, to help offset the heavier Soviet weaponry delivered in
a daily airlift to Kabul.

But hearing Mr. Tomsen and other officials stretching their deadlines - in the
summer, they spoke of victory by the fall, but by the winter they were talking
of the need for another ''season'' of fighting, and possibly two - some old Asia
hands thought they heard distant echoes of Vietnam. It was not only that
officials greeted each new rebel failure with appeals for perseverance; they
also began to show an unusual prickliness toward critics, within the bureaucracy
and outside, who questioned the policy.

An early casualty was Edmund R. McWilliams Jr., a State Department officer who
had been assigned to Kabul until 1988, then transferred to Pakistan. Despite a
reputation as an uncompromising supporter of the rebels, Mr. McWilliams ran into
trouble with his State Department superiors when his reporting from Pakistan
began to cast doubt on the rebels' ability to prevail in the war. A few months
after the Soviet withdrawal, he was ordered home to Washington, where he was
assigned to duties that had nothing to do with Afghanistan. Among American
officials who remained, talking to reporters came to be regarded as a hazardous
pastime.

American reporters, too, became targets. When James Rupert, a reporter with
extensive experience in Afghanistan, wrote in The Washington Post that public
sentiment in Kabul appeared to be shifting in favor of Mr. Najibullah, Mr.
Tomsen said the newspaper was ''unreliable.'' After a Times story appeared
reporting that rebel rockets were stirring anti-American sentiments in Kabul,
another senior State Department official, Howard Schaffer, implied to a
Congressional committee that this reporter had been duped by the Kabul
Government.

Few of these officials had any firsthand knowledge of the situation inside
Afghanistan; and some, like Mr. Tomsen, had no personal experience there at all.
Neither they, nor any American political (Continued on Page 37) figure, included
Kabul and the Government-held areas of the country on their visits to the
region. And under a longstanding rule, no American official (at least none
working in an overt capacity) was allowed to enter the country from the rebel
side. All of this virtually guaranteed that perspectives appropriate to an
earlier stage of the war would be slow to change.

SIMILAR FORCES HELPED shape American reporting on the war. From 1980 until late
1986, few American journalists were allowed to visit Kabul or any other
Government-held area, which meant that coverage of the war was left primarily to
reporters working from the rebel side. Those venturing into the war zones
carried back powerful accounts of the rebels' struggle, and of the
destructiveness of the forces they faced. But it was inevitable that over the
years, what Americans learned of the conflict came increasingly to reflect the
rebel viewpoint; whatever balance access to the other side would have offered
was lost.

In addition, much of the Afghan reporting available to Americans came from
resident freelancers, many of them relatively inexperienced. The result was that
strong bonds often developed between those covering the conflict and the rebels.
Many of the reporters became identified with a particular rebel group, usually
the one that arranged their journeys ''inside.'' Too often, abuses by these
groups went unreported, or at least underplayed.

In Peshawar's American Club, reporters skeptical of an approach that celebrated
the rebels' virtues encountered ostracism. One visitor, Mary Williams Walsh of
The Wall Street Journal, had her entry to the club ''suspended'' after reporting
sardonically on the rebel boosterism she found. Later, after The New York Post
ran a series of stories alleging that the CBS Evening News had used faked film
footage in some of its reporting on rebel attacks, Ms. Walsh, who had done much
of the initial reporting on that story, became a focus for renewed hostility.
When in the fall of 1989 word of her departure from the Journal reached the
American Club, some of the freelancers involved called for drinks all round.

Such attitudes did not encourage evenhanded reporting. Little attention was
given, for example, to the involvement of rebel commanders in the opium traffic,
though it had been known in Peshawar for years. Nor, until his murderous attacks
on other rebel groups attracted Washington's condemnation in 1989, did the
Peshawar-based reporters - or American diplomats - pay much attention to the
sinister nature of Mr. Hekmatyar, the dominant figure among the rebel leaders
and the recipient, for years, of the lion's share of American money and weapons.
But stories had long circulated in Kabul and Peshawar of how, as a Kabul student
leader during the early 1970's, he had dispatched followers to throw vials of
acid into the faces of women students who refused to wear veils.

Such selective reporting extended to the war itself. When in November 1988 the
rebels executed more than 70 Government officers and men after they had
surrendered at Torkham, the story was missed by many Peshawar-based American
reporters. And there was little coverage in the United States, either, of
massacres that occured in areas taken by the rebels, not even when Western
human-rights groups offered well-documented accounts, as they did after the
rebels engaged in a frenzy of rape and pillage in Kunduz in late 1988.

AS THE YEAR passed, it became increasingly common to find among Westerners
following the war a conviction that making clearcut moral and political choices
between the two sides no longer made sense, from the point of view of
Afghanistan or of the West's future standing there. A restiveness with what one
Peshawar-based diplomat described as the ''evil empire'' approach was broadly
detectable among Western officials following the war from Pakistan and other
regional capitals, including some Americans. It surfaced, too, in the attitudes
of Western human rights and relief agencies, many of which had contributed
powerfully, through their pronouncements and publications during the course of
the war, to the grim image of the Kabul Government and its Soviet backers.

In public, agencies of the United Nations and organizations like the
International Committee of the Red Cross maintained a posture of impartiality.
But by this winter, Westerners working for these organizations in Peshawar and
Kabul, including some whose Afghan duties involved dealing with policy makers in
Washington and Moscow, had come to a broad consensus - that the Western
interest, as well as that of the Afghan people, required urgent steps to end the
war, even if this required negotiations with Kabul.

Last fall, one senior international diplomat returned from a trip to Washington
dismayed by the lack of interest that he had found in the State Department and
other United States Government agencies in such a political initiative. ''They
sat there and talked about the need for another 'season' of fighting, just as
though they were talking about baseball,'' the diplomat said. ''And when I spoke
to them about civilian casualties and human rights, they had their answer.
'Don't talk to us about human rights in Afghanistan,' they said. 'Go and talk
about that in Moscow.' ''

Now, with last month's Kimmitt mission and this week's meeting between Mr. Baker
and Mr. Shevardnadze, this attitude may be changing. State Department officials
briefing reporters before the Kimmitt trip told them that one option was a plan
involving a cease-fire and an arms cutoff by both the United States and the
Soviet Union - a plan that sounded remarkably like Mr. Gorbachev's proposal of a
year ago, although the American officials made no mention of it.

As Mr. Baker prepared to head for Moscow, it seemed unlikely that the United
States would agree to direct negotiations involving Mr. Najibullah, since the
rebel leaders have sworn to fight on against the Kabul leader with or without
American support. But a wide variety of diplomatic options are available to
Moscow and Washington if, at last, they can agree that the war must end.

The two superpowers might play the role of umpires in the transition to a new
government led by the exiled King, Mohammed Zahir Shah; or they might agree to
give more active backing to the United Nations in a revival of the intermediary
role it played in arranging the Soviet troop withdrawal. In any event, since
peace is the professed goal of some of the more moderate rebel groups, and of
almost all ordinary Afghans, inventive diplomacy would begin with a better than
even chance.

But for those who witnessed the carnage of 1989, the conundrum of the American
policy will remain. Was it simply a matter of momentum - of a new Administration
with close links to the one that espoused the rebel cause failing to adjust to
new realities? What role was played by President Bush's reluctance to provoke
the Republican right, with its passionate commitment to a war that offered the
United States an opportunity to confront and humiliate the Soviet Union, at
virtually no cost in American lives? Or was there a deeper message, one that
laid bare the cold-war reflexes of an American Government that enters the 1990's
struggling to cope with a world that seems less and less amenable to the foreign
policy approaches that have served it for more than two generations? These will
be questions for the historians to ponder. But in Afghanistan this winter, they
are matters of life and death. In the country's dusty cities and towns, and in
the deep valleys that spread like fingers through the Hindu Kush, millions of
people are listening this winter for the terrifying whistling of the rebel
rockets, and wondering when the men who fire them - and their enemies in Kabul -
will be subjected to a new kind of influence from the superpowers; one that,
instead of prolonging the killing, prevails on the combatants to stop it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cover photo: Afghan refugees, on their way to Pakistan, rest on the
scorched earth of Danau, about 20 miles from Kabul (Tony O'Brien); photos:
Sandstorm at rebel-held checkpoint on the road to Kandahar, a route used by
Afghans escaping to Pakistan. Some 3.5 million have fled the country.
(Christopher Morris/Black Star) (pg. 22-23); Above: A rebel surveys the damage
outside Kandahar. There, as in many other cities, Soviet bombers leveled whole
districts. (Christopher Morris/Black Star) (pg. 25); Far left: A Government tank
passes young Afghans as it heads to a base in Kabul. Soviet weapons come to the
city in a daily airlift. (Allan Tannenbaum/Sygma) (pg. 24); Left: A bombed-out
village on the outskirts of Jalalabad, a strategic city that withstood a
four-month attack by the rebels. (S

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Better Driver Training Saves Lives on Roads

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 225 words


To the Editor:

Although I'm sure most people would agree that the efforts of the National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration and American car makers to improve
occupant safety in side-impact collisions is necessary and will save lives
(''Debate Over Dummies Delays Car Safety Rule,'' front page, Jan. 22), the
fundamentals of traffic safety are repeatedly overlooked.

In my nine years as a New York City paramedic, I have often witnessed the
carnage on our streets and highways. I believe the most prominent contributing
factor to traffic accidents is poor driving skills. The adage that most
accidents are avoidable is true. In New York, the Emergency Medical Service has
for 10 years required its employees to complete a weeklong driver training
course, with a resulting reduction in number of serious accidents per mile
driven, despite rapid expansion of the fleet and number of employees (other
fleets across the country have had similar experiences).

The most effective action Federal highway officials could take would be to make
states require greatly improved driver training as a condition for receiving
Federal highway money.

Remember that the number of people killed each year on our streets and highways
is nearly equal to the number of troops killed in the Vietnam War.

STEPHEN V. K. FRIEDMAN
  New York, Jan. 22, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MUSIC VIEW;
WESTERN CIVILIZATION, 30 SECONDS AT AT TIME

BYLINE: By DONAL HENAHAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 31, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 946 words


Even as the Spenglerian twilight descends on Western civilization, it is good to
know that youth is already sharpening its musical sensibilities in preparation
for a new dawn. You may think this a suspect statement, but evidence to
corroborate it does exist. At hand is an article that recently appeared on the
Op-Ed page of The New York Times entitled ''We're Talking the Wrong Language to
'TV Babies.' ''

The author, reporting from a base deep inside the rock culture, discloses that
children who have grown up watching 30-second advertising bites on television
''receive and process information'' differently from older folk. These children
- some of whom would be in their 40's - do not read a magazine article or book
from beginning to end, if indeed they read at all. They do not even watch a
television commercial straight through unless it is presented in a fragmented,
nonlinear style. Instead, they absorb ideas by a kind of paraliterate osmosis,
through rapidly changing pictures and body language, preferrably conveyed by
howling androgynes.

Nothing new about that concept, of course. Marshall McLuhan proclaimed it many
years ago as the foundation of a revolutionary society, the global village. In
this brave new McLuhanville, people were to sit around the communal TV set
receiving and processing information and making sublingual noises of approval or
dismay. I have seen the future, McLuhan said in effect, and it grunts.

Now, writes Robert W. Pittman, as if passing on an insight, ''creators of media
and advertising are learning to speak the language of this post-TV generation.''
That makes it ''critical to us as a society that public-service campaigns catch
on and catch on quickly to this new way of communicating.'' These tasty if
less-filling bites of information should be used creatively in classrooms, he
argues with an advocate's fervor. The essayist himself, luckily, communicates in
an old-fashioned linear fashion to people who tend to read articles straight
through, no matter what the temptation to turn the page. He contends there may
be no better method than the information bite for getting through to a
TV-suckled generation on issues like ''discrimination, crime, AIDS and the
environment.'' This public-service announcement about education's direction is
not, you may be surprised to discover, entirely disinterested: Mr. Pittman is a
senior executive of Time Warner Inc. and creator of the MTV (music television)
cable network.

What I admired most about Mr. Pittman's article, however, beyond the vision it
conjured up about the future of Western culture, was his succinct analysis of
1960's politics - a knothole view, but one carved out of a child's wide-eyed
experience. In his own youth, he found that members of ''the first wave of this
TV generation'' received a different message about the Vietnam War than their
parents did, while watching the same newscasts: the old folks, mired in their
page-by-page thinking, were for it; TV-trained youth was against it. The
disparity in perceptions is really amazing, unless you remember that youth was
draftable in those years and creaky elders were not. When the threat of the
draft faded, if I recall, so did most of the youthful opposition to the Vietnam
War.

We are also assured once again that these TV babies ''really can do their
homework, watch TV, talk on the telephone and listen to the radio all at the
same time.'' Thus Mr. Pittman dismisses with another sweeping cliche the
embarrassing evidence that his may be the most poorly educated generation of
Americans since Horace Mann made public schools respectable. Even rock music,
the lingua franca of the TV generation, must be getting more difficult to pay
attention to. The rock star and actor Sting complained the other day that
''rock-and-roll is a bit like Las Vegas now, with guys dressed up in their
sisters' clothes, pretending to be rebellious and angry.''

Mr. Pittman modestly avoids claiming that the primary source from which youth
absorbs its information, attitudes, consumer preferences and values is televised
rock, but he must hope so. MTV may or may not be a valid weathervane of cultural
change, but it certainly is an enterprise that stands to profit in direct ratio
to the public's shortening attention span.

While I am on the subject of cliches, here is another: except perhaps for a few
visionary geniuses, all of us see the world refracted through our own narrow
experience. It is thus impossible for some older listeners to understand why the
sociological phenomenon of rap needs to be discussed and analyzed as if it were
music. Try as they may, these codgers cannot overcome a stubborn feeling that
prose is prose. Experience may not be the greatest teacher, but it is a great
tyrant.

In that regard, it was revealing the other day to read an interview with
Giuseppe Sinopoli, the avant-garde composer turned big-time conductor.
Discussing the apparent withering of his composing career, he wondered if ''the
period of Western musical composition is finished. It's possible. It has been
300 years.'' Mr. Sinopoli, though an introspective man, did not bring up the
possibility that his creative juices may not run as freely as they once did.
Interpreting personal experience as an accurate reflection of the universe, he
confessed to a feeling that ''all the good materials seem to have been used.''

Such an end game is possible, of course. Civilizations do rise and fall. But Mr.
Sinopoli's reflections seem more plausible as one blocked artist's rationale for
taking up a lucratve second career than an epitaph for Western music.
Composition's loss, he must hope, is the podium's gain.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 5, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Business and the Law;
A Paper Spill Due In the Valdez Case

BYLINE: By Laura Mansnerus

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 847 words


THE Exxon Valdez case is coming - ''one or two million pieces of paper,'' by one
lawyer's estimate - and it is already testing the courts' ability to adjudicate
for thousands of people at a time.

Fishers, seafood processors, environmental groups, coastal villages and many
others who filed suit after the oil spill in Prince William Sound in March are
now represented by a small bureaucracy. The ''case management team'' of 17
lawyers was appointed six weeks ago by a joint ruling of the state and Federal
courts in Anchorage, which consolidated about 150 lawsuits against the Exxon
Corporation, its subsidiaries and its partners in the Alaska pipeline.

In a case of this magnitude, lawyers note, that is how it has to work.
''Otherwise the court system would be absolutely paralyzed, with 79 law firms
and potentially 7,000 or 8,000 plaintiffs,'' said David W. Oesting of Davis
Wright Tremaine in Anchorage, one of two lawyers appointed as lead counsel.

Committee management of disaster litigation and product-liability cases has
plenty of precedent, including the injury claims from the Bhopal, India,
chemical leak; the Vietnam veterans' suits against the makers of Agent Orange,
and the cases brought by Dalkon Shield users.

But that does not mean the courts are well suited to the task. ''I don't think
the Founding Fathers in their wildest dreams imagined litigation involving
thousands of claims, thousands of plaintiffs and multiple defendants,'' said
Kenneth R. Feinberg, the Washington lawyer appointed by the court to fashion an
accord in the Agent Orange case. ''These cases are not well processed.'' The
Exxon Valdez case presents another twist: while liability is not expected to be
an especially difficult issue, the plaintiffs have potentially divergent
interests in whatever damages the group may collect. Fishing and tourist
businesses, for example, must calculate individual losses, while municipalities
and the state represent more diffuse public interests. Environmental groups want
funds for research and protection of other resources. But all the plaintiffs,
except the State of Alaska, are lashed together until judgment or settlement,
which is not going to be soon.

Even for individual plaintiffs, damages might be gauged in many ways. ''There's
some non-economic loss in intrinsic value of the resources lost,'' said Macon
Cowles, a committee member from Boulder, Colo., who originally filed suit on
behalf of several environmental groups. ''One of the policy questions raised by
the contending claims is whether we're any better off if each fisherman gets
$100 or $1,000 for this non-economic loss or if it's better directed to a fund
used to enrich the environment for everyone.''

While members of the case management team insist that their main job is putting
together a lawsuit, not mediating among plaintiffs, Mr. Feinberg said the most
pressing issue would be ''who's going to pay, how soon they're going to pay and
who's going to get the money.'' The committee members note that first they must
hack their way through pleadings, depositions and exchanges of documents,
pretrial motions at every turn and probable appeals of rulings on the motions.
Jerry S. Cohen, the co-lead counsel and a partner in the Washington firm of
Cohen Milstein Hausfeld & Toll, said that in the two main issues at a trial -
establishing negligence and arguing for punitive damages - the plaintiffs would
have common goals.

Still, even at this stage there must be provision for those dissatisfied with
the committee's representation. Already a small group has tested this rule,
complaining that the committee leadership would not be responsive to individual
plaintiffs' interests because both Mr. Cohen and Mr. Oesting are class action
lawyers. The court rejected that argument last week.

Perhaps the nearest precedent to the Exxon litigation is the tangle of suits
growing out of the Amoco Cadiz oil spill off Brittany, in western France, in
1978. These suits were consolidated in the Federal District Court in Chicago,
which established liability in 1984 and assessed damages four years later. Three
months ago, after many challenges, a court-appointed special master submitted
another recommendation.

How the Alaska courts could work more efficiently is not clear. If a trial
resulted in a damage award, a jury or the court might simply ''fill in the
blanks'' for contending plaintiffs, one lawyer said. In the more likely event of
a pretrial settlement, the court could apply its own criteria or appoint a
special master, like Mr. Feinberg, to oversee the plaintiffs' efforts to
allocate the money.

Mr. Feinberg credited the judge in the Agent Orange case, Jack B. Weinstein of
Federal District Court in Brooklyn, with finding ways to handle remedies that
the judicial system was not intended to handle. ''We created our own
administrative system,'' he said.

Does the Exxon case present more potential for conflict? ''Absolutely,'' Mr.
Oesting said. Like the other lawyers in the case, he said he was waiting for the
courts in Anchorage to be inventive.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Pop Life

BYLINE: By Stephen Holden

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words




Music Behind the Action

Reflecting on the craft of film scoring, John Williams, Hollywood's most
successful creator of movie soundtracks, came up with a quote from Tennyson:
''The path of duty was the way to glory.''

''The point,'' Mr. Williams said the other day in a telephone conversation from
Los Angeles, ''is that in composing for film one is doing a specific job that
often represents a clinical response to the question of how to make a film more
effective. If you take my music out of a film and it still sounds like music
then it's a miracle, because most of it wasn't written to engage the listener's
full attention by itself. If it happens to resemble art music as we know it,
that's just an added bonus.''

This week, MCA Records, which has released the soundtrack album of Mr.
Williams's sweeping score for ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' is putting out a
specially edited single of the movie's title theme. Introduced by an elegiac
trumpet solo, the piece is one of the most stirring movie themes in a career
that has included more than 70 film scores, including those for ''Jaws,''
''Superman,'' the ''Star Wars'' trilogy, the Indiana Jones movies, ''E.T.'' and
''Close Encounters of the Third Kind.'' These and other soundtracks have earned
Mr. Williams 4 Oscars, 24 Academy Award nominations and 15 Grammys.

This year, Mr. Williams will also celebrate his 10th anniversary as conductor of
the Boston Pops Orchestra. In his double life, he generally spends three months
of the year in Boston and the rest of the time composing either in Los Angeles
or in London.

''For 'Born on the Fourth of July,' I wanted to convey a sense of requiem for
what the country was before the Vietnam War, for what we've lost and what we've
learned,'' he said. ''For me it was a resonant subject that had to do with all
the unconscious atavism we carry with us from childhood about our language and
culture and music.''

Mr. Williams said his involvement with ''Born on the Fourth of July'' was fairly
typical of his movie-score projects. He first looked at a rough cut of the film
last April and later at subsequent, increasingly shorter cuts. In June, he
finally sat down to compose some 55 minutes of music, about three-quarters of
which was used.

Although he has had serious communications problems with a number of directors,
Mr. Williams said, he found Oliver Stone to be someone ''with a strong response
to music.'' Working with a director, he explained, the hardest thing to do is
describe the meaning of the music in particular scenes. He said he enjoys a
special rapport with Steven Spielberg, whom he described as ''very rhythmic in
his editing.''

Composers who come to film hoping to find full artistic self-expression, he
warned, are likely to find themselves frustrated.

''Like most of my colleagues, I sometimes feel that the best things we write end
up on the cutting-room floor,'' he said. ''You may end up with half of what
you've written ultimately not on the soundtrack, and a third of that may not be
very well heard. You have to write with the idea of the music co-existing with
sound effects and dialogue. You can't, for instance, have three or four strands
of musical counterpoint playing with the sounds of wagon wheels or engine
noise.''

The music for ''Born on the Fourth of July'' is one of his very few film scores
that Mr. Williams said he felt could be adapted into a performable piece of
concert music. Another was ''Close Encounters of the Third Kind,'' for which he
wrote 90 minutes of music.

''These scores are all like one's children,'' Mr. Williams said. ''You love them
all, but there are aspects of them you wish you could improve, though it doesn't
diminish your affection. Having said that, I come back to 'Close Encounters'
with a particular fondness. I think it had a genuine life that was more than the
sum of its parts.''

Poco Together Again

When the country-rock band Poco appears at Radio City Music Hall on Friday and
Saturday evening as the opening act for Richard Marx, it will perform vintage
hits by Loggins and Messina and the Eagles, as well as songs it recorded two
decades ago under the name Poco. That's because Jim Messina and Randy Meisner,
two of the founding members of the group - which reunited last year with its
original 1968 lineup - went on to have greater success with others during the
1970's.

Musically, the biggest difference between Poco in 1968 and the group today, said
Mr. Messina, is that two decades ago, Richie Furay was the band's main
songwriter. Today, its five members - Mr. Messina, Mr. Furay, Mr. Meisner, Rusty
Young and George Grantham, all in their early to mid-40's - are equal musical
partners. Last month, their crisp, tuneful reunion album, ''Legacy'' (RCA),
passed the 500,000 mark in sales.

Twenty years ago, Mr. Messina said, all five members lived in the Laurel Canyon
section of Los Angeles. Today they are scattered, with Mr. Meisner the only
member still living in Los Angeles. Mr. Furay, who became a minister 10 years
ago, makes his home in Boulder, Colo. Mr. Messina lives in Santa Barbara,
Calif., and Mr. Grantham and Mr. Young in Nashville.

''After we decided to get together and met in my studio, my first reaction was,
'My God, who are these people?' Mr. Messina recalled. ''But what started out
feeling like a 20th high-school reunion ended up feeling like a family affair.''


Million-Selling Singles

In spite of the continuing sales decline of pop singles, several recent hits,
all of them either rap- or dance-oriented, have managed to sell over one million
copies, in some cases without a heavy blanket of radio play. In the past two
months, Technotronic's ''Pump Up the Jam'' (SBK), Soul II Soul's ''Back to
Life'' (Virgin), Young M.C.'s ''Bust a Move'' (Delicious Vinyl), Milli Vanilli's
''Blame It on the Rain'' (Arista), and Rob Base and D.J. E-Z Rock's ''It Takes
Two'' (Profile) have all been certified platinum, by the Recording Industry
Association of America for sales over one million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Williams (The New York Times/Angel Franco)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

LONG ISLAND OPINION;
Still Homesick After All These Years

BYLINE: By ERIC J. ADAMS; Eric J. Adams' first book, ''Loss of Innocence: A True
Story of Juvenile Murder and Justice in America,'' will be published next summer
by Avon Books.

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 18, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1496 words


During the turbulent mid-70's, several friends and I just out of high school
bought a used van and traveled west.

We were young and restless refugees from suburbia, angry at society, our
parents, our upbringing, out environs. We undertook the journey with no
destination, traveling west only because that was guaranteed to take us farthest
from the Island.

I remember rigging a pole in the center of our van to support all our belongings
strapped precariously on the roof. We were determined never to return. With our
eight-track recorder playing, we drove the interstate highway through New
Jersey, Ohio, Missouri and the prairies of Kansas until we came to rest within a
valley deep in the Rocky Mountains of Colorado.

Fifteen years have passed since then. Though a few of my traveling companions
have returned to settle permanently in New York, I never have. After remaining
in Colorado for a decade, I moved farther west to San Francisco. I have a career
now, a wife, a son. I think I've grown wiser. I certainly view life differently.

Lately I have been asking myself with more frequency than I'm comfortable with
if the time has finally come to move back to Long Island. I shudder at the idea,
but oddly, I am drawn to it as well.

Once, when my hair was long and I lived in a log cabin in a town with a
population smaller than my graduating class, I could not conceive of returning
to the purgatory of suburbia. It was the worst of all possible worlds for an
idealistic teen-ager searching for the meaning of existence. With its housing
developments, shopping malls, highways and Cadillacs, suburbia lacked the grit
of the city and the reality of the country. Long Island was a limbo-hell without
a soul. What meaning could be discovered in a place whose geographical and
spiritual center was Fortunoffs? For me and many others my age, Long Island was
no place to live in, it was a place to flee from.

Somehow I made it through college, cut my hair, learned that you're obliged to
pay some dues, jump through some hoops. I moved to a city. My values changed.
The times have changed, too. The 70's, which formed my identity, were rife with
political and social upheavals. The Vietnam War was ending. Feminism rising.
Corporate America justly losing a degree of sanctity in the public mind. And
social justice was earning the recognition it deserved. It was an era of change
and hope, of idealists readily swapping what was for what could be.

With the 80's we learned how quickly idealism can tarnish. War was a state of
mind. The ring of the cash registers drowned out accusations of corporate greed.
And in a world saturated with child abuse and crack, how does one measure social
justice anyway?

The country took a shift toward the conservative, the materialistic. Though I
hate to admit it, I guess I did, too. The change in me and the change in times
have made living on Long Island an option again. Suddenly Long Island wasn't the
living hell I had imagined. There are obvious reasons to return. Though I
haven't lived in striking distance of Roosevelt Field for quite some time, by a
quirk of fate I married a woman who grew up just around the corner from me in
Roslyn Heights. We moved to San Francisco independently.

One day, based on our acquaintance as children, we stepped out for a drink. Then
we began dating. We surprised ourselves more than our parents when we announced
our engagement. ''You travel halfway around the world,'' a relative told me at
our engagement party, ''only to marry the girl next door.'' He said it as if his
astute perception implied a greater cosmic message, that I had erred in moving
away in the first place.

It would have been different had I married a spouse from San Diego or Minnesota.
Mine is a big Jewish family and Kathy's a big Catholic family, and if anyone is
looking for a double-whammy of guilt to return home they are invited to move in
with us. Our families are good enough to keep the direct pressure to a minimum,
but their intentions are always clear.

But what's so wrong with living close to the relatives? My mother is growing
older. I see it in the way she walks and talks. My father in no longer around to
help her, and my sister moved her family to Vermont when the Long Island economy
became too much to bear.

Suddenly, I feel both the obligation and the desire to take care of my mother,
to let her know her grandson, and for him to know her before it's too late. She
is a vibrant woman who never lost the mysteries and ebullience of the old
country, a wonderful storyteller and the quintessential grandmother. She still
lives in the house where I grew up and though she is blessed with friends and
relatives, she values her children above life itself. That will never change.
With my sister and I gone, no parade of friends and relatives can make her feel
anything but alone. Meanwhile, the years tick by.

Kathy's family is huge and effervescent and welcoming with an embrace that is
almost smothering. They exude vitality and warmth. They moved recently to a
co-op on the ocean in Long Beach and they spend summers at a country home in
upstate New York. They are continually planning family gatherings and outings
and showering each other with gifts and surprise parties.

I kind of like the idea of our son, Jesse, growing up knowing his families. They
have so much to give and are so willing to give it. San Francisco is a wonderful
city and we have lots of friends there, including many couples like us with
babies. Invariably, however, we lose touch with them or they move away. Our
friendships run wide but rarely do they run deep.

Maybe we could put up with tract housing and Fortunoffs if the deal came
complete with grandparents and aunts and uncles. Maybe we could stand to bear
the Long Island Expressway congestion if we were on our way to visit people who
loved us and our son, unconditionally and forever. Family is family, and if ever
there was a concept endemic to New York, it is this.

For me, perhaps more than Kathy, there is also the desire to come to terms with
the past. I left Long Island an angry young man. On my visits back in subsequent
years, I always viewed it with a certain distaste. I saw it as corrosive and
gray. It was how I imagined Moscow to be, dreary and oppressive. The accents
were thick and the attitudes inhospitable.

By comparison, San Francisco and most major cities west of the Mississippi
seemed undeniably more livable. But New York is my city. I grew up there. It
shaped me. Just as one has to come to terms with one's parents, I feel compelled
to come to terms with my city. Some circle within me would never be completed if
I failed to stare Long Island in the face, forgive its trespasses and asked it
to forgive mine.

That process has already started. Now that I know how difficult it is to save
money to buy a home, those small houses with little backyards don't appear as
ridiculous as they did. Now that I have a son who will be attending school, I
can understand the desire to live in a good school district. Establishing a
family is more work than I ever expected and so I have had to lower my ideals
slightly. Long Island and I are not so far apart anymore.

So, after late-night phone calls with our families, Kathy and I invariably
discuss the merits of moving back to Long Island. It's a hard decision. We are
both very independent by nature and we know that by moving back we would be
forced to endure the unconscious domination of our families.

Our interfaith marriage complicates the matter. In San Francisco, it's easy to
strike a balance between our religions. In New York, we would have to deal with
the pressures of family every Friday night or every Sunday morning, not to
mention every Passover and Easter.

Away from Long Island we have created a comfortable sense of family by
incorporating attitudes and lifestyle decisions that don't make much sense to
our families (What do you mean you don't eat meat?). We've come to enjoy the
freedom and the responsibility to be whatever we choose. In New York, there are
so many roles we would be expected to fill.

When we visit we are welcomed guests. The distance makes us celebrities and we
enjoy that status. When we are apprised of those little family spats that
consume families and pit relative against relative, we thank our stars that we
are long-distance observers to the drama and not players on the crowded stage.

We also love the West. There is a great spirit of optimism and faith in humanity
in San Francisco, a city of unfathomable tolerance. Just as we have embraced San
Francisco, San Francisco has embraced us. Even the earthquake couldn't shake us
out of town. Only Long Island could. Long Island and our families.

Will we move back? We don't know. It seems that when one of us becomes resigned
to returning, the other can't bear the thought of leaving.

Moving away from Long Island was so easy. Why is it so hard to think about
moving back?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 34, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 839 words


Here are some notable releases of the last few months.

BATMAN - Michael Keaton, Jack Nicholson and Kim Basinger star in a ''shapeless,
big-screen reincarnation'' set in a ''nightmare version of megalopolis.''
(Vincent Canby) 1989. Warner. $24.95. Laser disk, $24.98. 2 hours 6 minutes.
Closed captioned. PG-13.

DO THE RIGHT THING - ''From the sinuous and joshing solo dance sequence . . .
until the mournful fadeout 24 hours later'' the film ''is living, breathing,
riveting proof of the arrival of an abundantly gifted new talent.'' (Canby)
1989. MCA. $98.95. LD. $34.98. 2:00. CC. R. THE DRESSMAKER - This small-scale
film is exquisitely acted by Joan Plowright and Billie Whitelaw. (Canby) 1989.
Capitol. $79.95. 1:32. No rating.

EDDIE AND THE CRUISERS II: EDDIE LIVES - This film, starring Michael Pare,
''blithely runs through music-world cliches.'' (Caryn James) 1989. International
Video Entertainment. $89.95. 1:46. CC. PG-13. 84 CHARLIE MOPIC - Patrick Duncan,
a Vietnam veteran, wrote and directed this portrait of war. ''Most of the time
effective and believable.'' (Richard Bernstein) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95.
1:35. R. GHOSTBUSTERS II - This sequel ''has the weight and stylishness of
designer toilet tissue, but it doesn't offend.'' (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia.
$89.95. LD, $24.95. 1:42. CC. PG. GREAT BALLS OF FIRE - This movie, starring
Dennis Quaid, is as oversized and outrageous as Jerry Lee Lewis's scandalous
life. ''Terrific music and outrageous fun.'' (James) 1989. Orion. $89.98. LD,
$39.95. 1:48. CC. PG-13. HOW TO GET AHEAD IN ADVERTISING - Bruce Robinson's
''engaging if slightly overstretched combination of satire, science fiction,
Freud and domestic farce.'' (Canby) 1989. M.C.E.G./Virgin. $89.95. 1:34. CC. PG.

INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE - ''One long, boisterous adventure, full of
storms at sea, exploding boats and breathless escapes. But [Sean] Connery's
presence gives resonance to Indiana's life.'' (James) 1989. Paramount. $24.95.
LD, $24.95. 2:06. CC. PG-13.

LICENCE TO KILL - Timothy Dalton as James Bond ''is beginning to hold his own
with the shadows of his former self.'' (James) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98. LD,
$39.98. 2:11. CC. PG-13.

THE MIGHTY QUINN - Denzel Washington gives a ''smooth, funny, laid-back
performance.'' (Canby) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98. 1:38. R. NEW YORK STORIES - This
anthology offers ''a chance to see three major American directors working in
what appears to be virtually a new theatrical form. . . . It's a near
must-see.'' (Canby) 1989. Touchstone. $89.95. LD, $29.95. 2:06. CC. PG.

RENEGADES - Kiefer Sutherland and Lou Diamond Phillips star in this ''fast,
violent, implausible film.'' (James) 1989. MCA. $89.95. LD, $34.98. 1:45. CC. R.
SAY ANYTHING - This romantic comedy with John Cusack and Ione Skye is ''all
charming performances and grace notes.'' (James) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98. LD,
$39.98. 1:40. CC. PG-13.

STAR TREK V: THE FINAL FRONTIER - It has ''appealing moments. . . . But true
fans may be disappointed.'' (James) 1989. Paramount. No list price. LD, $29.95.
1:47. CC. PG.

TURNER AND HOOCH - Tom Hanks ''is the best part'' of this mismatched-buddy
movie. ''It isn't his fault that the five writers don't come up with five funny
lines or one exciting scene.'' (James) 1989. Touchstone. $89.95. LD, $29.95.
1:40. CC. PG.

UHF - ''The most amusing sequences in Al Yankovic's disjointed farce . . . are
its spoofs of television ads, children's shows and music-videos.'' (Stephen
Holden) 1989. Orion. $89.98. LD, $39.95. 1:37. CC. PG-13.

UNCLE BUCK - ''John Candy is at his best when he is being crafty and, at the
beginning, downright nasty to the children. So is the film.'' (Canby) 1989. MCA.
$89.95. LD, $34.98. 1:40. CC. PG.

WHEN HARRY MET SALLY . . . - Rob Reiner has made ''the sitcom version of a Woody
Allen film,'' starring Billy Crystal and Meg Ryan. (James) 1989. Nelson/Orion.
$89.98. LD, $24.95. 1:36. CC. R. THE WINDS OF WAR - The TV mini-series based on
Herman Wouk's novel ''eventually becomes the equivalent of a good read.'' (John
J. O'Connor) 1983. Paramount. $139.95. 14:43. CC. No rating.

THE WOMEN OF BREWSTER PLACE - The story of several black women ''is good
old-fashioned melodrama, right down to a not-very-believable upbeat
conclusion.'' (O'Connor) 1989. J2 Communications. $79.95. 3:00. No rating.

WOMEN ON THE VERGE OF A NERVOUS BREAKDOWN - Pedro Almodovar's film is an
''entertaining, deliberately benign Spanish farce.'' (Canby) 1988. Orion.
$79.98. LD, $39.95. 1:38. R.


For Children

THE ADVENTURES OF MILO AND OTIS - A picaresque odyssey of a golden-haired cat
and a snub-nosed dog that ''offers a vision of the natural world that is . . .
occasionally fearful, but never terrifying.'' (Holden) 1989. RCA/Columbia.
$89.95. LD, $34.95. 1:16. CC. G.  BAMBI - ''Walt Disney's wizards,'' as a
contemporary critic called them, work their magic. 1942. Disney. $26.99. LD,
$39.99. 1:09. CC. G. THE LAND BEFORE TIME - Five dinosaurs on the road. (Maslin)
1988. MCA. $24.95. LD, $49.98. 1:09. CC. G.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
Some Americans Abroad, a Playwright at Home

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1776 words


In ''Some Americans Abroad,'' which opens tonight at the Mitzi E. Newhouse
Theater at Lincoln Center, a group of college English professors and their
students go on a theater tour of England. The teachers sit at dinner, debating
Shaw, capital punishment, the role of politics on the stage and who should pay
for the wine. They visit Stratford and peruse the list of souvenirs: T-shirts,
shopping bags, the Game of Shakespeare. They walk across Westminster Bridge in
London, recite Wordsworth and sing ''God Save the Queen.''

There is humor, and there are knotty problems: an assistant professor must be
told there will be no job for him next year; an attractive young student runs
away with a boy from Amherst and then accuses a professor of touching one of her
breasts.

''It's small moments and small problems,'' says Richard Nelson, the 39-year-old
American dramatist who wrote the play on commission from the Royal Shakespeare
Company, where it was a hit last summer in London. ''I've called it a comedy of
manners. It may be a dark comedy of manners, because some of the issues are
dark. But it's a comedy. It's about how we act, how we behave, how we try to
deal with problems in our lives - and often very unsuccessfully. And in this
case, these people are in a foreign place, and the awkwardness and the
self-consciousness that we all usually have in a foreign place are very useful
in developing a comedy of manners.''

The play has an ensemble cast that includes Colin Stinton, John Bedford Lloyd,
Bob Balaban, Kate Burton, Frances Conroy, Cara Buono, Jane Hoffman, Henderson
Forsythe, Ann Talman, John Rothman and Elisabeth Shue. It is directed by Roger
Michell, a resident director of the Royal Shakespeare Company who was the play's
director in London.

Mr. Nelson is in the unusual position of being an American playwright who has
had much of his success abroad, especially through his relationship with the
R.S.C. He is best known in this country for writing the book of the Broadway
version of ''Chess,'' a musical that ran for almost three years in London but
closed after less than two months in New York.

When his play ''Principia Scriptoriae,'' about left-wing writers in a Latin
American country, was done at the Manhattan Theater Club nearly four years ago,
it did not attract a lot of favorable attention. His other plays have also not
had great success here. But the story in London has been different. When the
R.S.C. did ''Principia Scriptoriae,'' the production was a hit, so much so that
the company commissioned what turned out to be ''Some Americans Abroad.'' After
last summer's success, the R.S.C. asked Mr. Nelson to write another play. In
August, ''Two Shakespearean Actors,'' which focuses on the bitter rivalry
between two 19th-century performers, one English and one American, is to open at
the R.S.C.'s Swan Theater in Stratford.

Mr. Nelson says he cannot fully explain why his success has come abroad and not
in his native country. ''It's a great mystery to me,'' he says, sitting in an
office at the Newhouse, ''and one that I think I could get too preoccupied
with.''

Part of the answer, he thinks, can be found in the nurturing and encouragement
he has received from the R.S.C. But there is more to it than that, he feels.
''So many of my characters are people who in some way are trying to relate
politically to their world, and having great difficulty,'' he says. ''And often
their concerns and their backgrounds are on the left, and I think the agonies
these days of people on the left are not as fashionable here as they are in
England.''

That said, though, he adds that he is hoping that ''Some Americans Abroad'' -
and his recent ''Sensibility and Sense,'' which was the opening presentation
this season on the PBS ''American Playhouse'' television series - will turn
things around. ''Sensibility and Sense'' dealt with how three 1930's leftists
have fared in the last five decades.

In ''Some Americans Abroad,'' characters express nostalgia for things they did
in the 60's, but the play is not about politics, or leftist politics. It simply
uses politics in its largest sense as an essential element for developing
character, Mr. Nelson says.

''When I write about a character,'' he says, ''what interests me very much is
how his or her friendships, sex life, past history, artistic ambitions, business
ambitions and politics - in the sense of how they see the world in larger
strokes - and their smaller politics, or how they deal with their everyday life,
how all these things are entwined. How it's all knotted together.''

''I think we are social animals,'' he says. ''I think we have social concerns,
and they are a part of our mind and a part of our being. It's what it means to
be a human being. And to cut off that element of a character, or not to deal
with that element - even when the characters themselves don't articulate it, or
have run away from it - is the same as not dealing with their pasts or their
individual emotions.''

For instance, in the play, the chairman of the English department and one of his
senior professors enjoy telling stories about how in their college and
postgraduate days they stopped military recruiters for the Vietnam War. Their
adult lives are very different, however - activism is not a word in their
current vocabularies.

''I think the relation between art and culture and theater and literature and
society and how you work and function in society and deal in everyday life is
one that is very important,'' Mr. Nelson says. ''One way of expressing the
relations and the conflicts that result is through people who have had passions
at one time and who are trying to deal with a world that has blunted those
passions, or blurred their focus.

''In 'Some Americans Abroad' you have people who see great art and great
literature, who are constantly living with the great ideas and the great
artistic and cultural figures of world history, and are not quite able to pull
from this art any lessons or any help for living their lives, even in the most
basic and simplistic ways. They don't know how to draw morality out of their
culture or their art.''

Why has the world blurred their focus? ''For me, 'why' is not the question,''
Mr. Nelson says. ''I just hope that my plays are very descriptive of the time in
which we live. The important thing is describing the situation of people who are
somehow separated from their ability to act in an immediate way.''

The idea of separation, Mr. Nelson says, is a theme that pervades his work.
''It's the situation of the exile,'' he says. ''I think it's a very strong theme
in our century, and it's one that seemed right for me to develop.

''It's very hard not to deal with exile when you're living in the 20th
century,'' he says. ''Just being in New York City, with the sense of all the
people who have moved here. Get into a cab. The sense of the flux in society,
people who have abandoned their homelands, people who are lost in new places.
It's a world I'm very interested in painting, a world I'm very interested in
exploring. In 'Some Americans Abroad,' for example, you have people who are all
in exile, even if it's temporary exile.''

His interest in the exile also accounts in part for his focus on leftists like
the ones in ''Sensibility and Sense,'' he says: ''They are people in the wrong
time. Their beliefs, their thoughts, their ambitions and their needs are
frustrated by a time that does not support them.''

He pauses. There's something more to his delving into the outsider, he says. As
an American abroad when he is working in London and away from his home in the
Hudson River town of Rhinebeck, N.Y., he, too, is a bit of an exile. ''And I
think it perhaps also has to do with the fact that I traveled around a lot as a
child,'' he adds. ''Maybe that's something that relates.''

Mr. Nelson was born in Chicago. ''And I grew up in Gary, Ind. -and outside
Philadelphia, and outside New York, and outside Detroit,'' he says. ''My father
was a businessman, and we moved a lot.''

One place he has never felt like an exile, however, is in the theater. ''My
mother was a dancer,'' he says. ''From when she was 15 to when she was 21, she
was a chorus girl. I never saw her dance, but from the time I was 7 or so, off I
went to musicals. I was stagestruck. The first 20 or 25 things I saw in the
theater were musicals, before I ever saw a play. So I fell in love with the
theater, and when I was 11 or 12 I joined my school's drama society and tried my
hand at acting.''

''But,'' he says, ''I was really, really bad. So I started to write plays.''

At Hamilton College in Clinton, N.Y., about 15 of his neophyte efforts were
staged. Despite the discussions of leftist politics in his plays, Mr. Nelson
says that he was not a major political activist in his college days during the
Vietnam War, although ''like so many of my generation I was involved and
passionate.''

After college, he continued to write and began to submit his plays to theater
companies. ''The first play of mine that was done professionally was chosen from
a slush pile,'' he says. ''It was just a random submission. I got the address of
the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles from a phone book in the Philadelphia Public
Library, and I sent out a play, and Gordon Davidson agreed to do it.''

Mr. Nelson says that in recent years he has sensed an important change in
himself, especially in his reaction to the intricately tied knot of everyday
life that he has described. ''There was a time when I saw that knot as difficult
and confusing,'' he says. ''As I get older, I find the knot to be glorious and
wonderful. How glorious and complicated - to use a word one of the characters in
'Some Americans Abroad' uses - how magnificently complex the world is.''

''About six years ago, three incidents happened very, very quickly in my life
that made me see the knot as fascinating,'' he says. ''First, my mother died.
And then my first child was born. And during those few months I was under
commission to do a new English version of Chekhov's 'Three Sisters' for Liviu
Ciulei at the Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis.

''It was the right play at the right time for me, and one that I think has been
resonating in my work ever since,'' he says. ''Suddenly, these three sisters in
exile became an image for me: these people not quite knowing what to do,
wonderfully deluding themselves, characters in the play talking philosophy for
no real reason, though they think there's a reason. It's a warm view of the
world, sometimes sad, sometimes funny. And I see a real connection between those
feelings and 'Some Americans Abroad.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A scene from ''Some Americans Abroad'' at the Mitzi E. Newhouse
Theater with, from left, Kate Burton, Bob Balaban, Colin Stinton and Frances
Conroy (Brigitte Lacombe) (pg. 5); Richard Nelson-success abroad (Gerry
Goodstein) (pg. 28)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 16, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Bomb Kills Drug Officer In Suffolk

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 477 words

DATELINE: NORTH PATCHOGUE, L.I., Feb. 15


An undercover Suffolk County narcotics detective was killed today after a bomb
exploded in his car parked outside his house here, the police said.

The car bombing of the off-duty detective, Dennis Wustenhoff, 41 years old,
''may be revenge or it may be to frustrate an ongoing investigation,'' the
Suffolk Police Commissioner, Daniel R. Guido, said at a news conference here.

He said the bombing was a ''probable assassination'' that was ''job-related,''
but he did not exclude other possible motives.

Detective Wustenhoff, a highly decorated 19-year veteran, had been assigned to
the narcotics squad since 1984. He was involved in major ''high-level
narcotics-trafficking'' investigations, a police spokeswoman, Cecilia Clausing,
said. He was not involved in street-level narcotics investigations.

Debris Thrown 200 Feet

He served on the narcotics squad from 1974 to 1980. He joined the force in
October 1970, and was promoted to detective in 1980.

The police said that Detective Wustenhoff walked out of his house on Maple
Avenue here at 11:55 A.M., got into his unmarked police car, a white Cadillac,
and a bomb located underneath the front seat exploded, throwing debris 200 feet.
The windshield was blown out and the roof was torn. The police have not
determined where Detective Wustenhoff was going or what type of explosive was
used, but it was a ''sophisticated'' device, said Bob Freudenberg, a Suffolk
Police public information officer.

Detective Wustenhoff, who was conscious when he was removed from the car
wreckage, was taken by a police helicopter to University Hospital in Stony
Brook, where he died at 2:54 P.M., the police said.

No Passengers

There were no passengers in the car and no one else was reported injured by the
blast, which rocked this quiet middle-class neighborhood of well-kept homes. The
police cordoned off a two-block section, and as darkness fell, flooded the area
with lights.

A neighbor, Guy Hlavac, said that he saw Detective Wustenhoff jogging earlier in
the day and that he heard the explosion. ''It was a big bang,'' he said. ''It
shook the house.''

Detective Wustenhoff last worked Monday night and Tuesday morning, the police
said. He normally worked with a partner, who was not immediately identified. A
police spokesman, Randy Jaret, said that it was not known whether Detective
Wustenhoff had received any threats, but that the police would not comment if he
had.

The police would not release Detective Wustenhoff's photograph because of his
undercover work and because it would hinder the investigation and endanger the
lives of other undercover drug officers.

Detective Wustenhoff, who was awarded a Bronze Star in the Vietnam War, is
survived by his wife, Francine; two daughters, 15 and 11, and one son, 13.

He lectured on drug awareness at several local high schools and colleges.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
Peace Dividend: A Dream for Every Dollar

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1176 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


No one knows how much the peace dividend will be or when it will be on the
books, but the debate over how to use it may dominate American politics for
years to come.

In Congress and city halls, in lobbying circles and academic towers, the
politicians and the people who try to influence them are salivating over the
prospect that the electrifying changes in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe
will permit the United States to spend much less money on the military and
create a windfall that can be used elsewhere.

Only in the White House is sand being thrown on the fires of anticipation.
President Bush maintains that the peace dividend is a mirage and that talk about
it leads to false expectations.

Asked at a news conference last Monday whether his military budget was not ''out
of sync'' and whether he was not ''tone deaf as to what's been happening,'' Mr.
Bush responded: ''I think the American people want a cautious approach on this.
I don't think any of us think we can see with clairvoyance what's going to
happen the day after tomorrow.''

But the news last week served only to fan the flames. The day after the
President's news conference, the Soviet Union surprisingly agreed to a Bush
proposal to reduce its military forces in Eastern Europe to a level that will
allow the United States to withdraw 80,000 troops from Europe, reducing troop
strength there by almost a third. Preliminary estimates are that this will save
$7 billion to $8 billion a year, a saving that was not fully counted when the
President sent his budget to Congress late last month.

In that budget, the President proposed that Pentagon spending rise from $287
billion in the current fiscal year to $292 billion next year and to $305 billion
in 1995. While that would be a gradual increase in actual dollars spent, it
would be about 2 percent less each year than what would be needed to keep pace
with inflation.

By the Administration's own figuring, this would mean spending about $40 billion
less in 1995, after taking inflation into account, than is now being spent.

The prevailing view in Congress, among many Republicans as well as Democrats, is
that Mr. Bush is shortsighted. For 45 years, United States military policy has
been based on defense against a Soviet invasion of Western Europe that could
turn into a nuclear holocaust. With each passing week, as the threat from the
Soviet Union lessens and as Communism crumbles in the countries along the
invasion route to the West - East Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary
-that focus seems more anachronistic.

Congress is thus likely to approve much deeper reductions in military spending
than the President wants. The lawmakers have paid close attention to some
recognized military experts, including former Defense Secretary Robert S.
McNamara and William W. Kaufmann, a national security specialist at the
Brookings Institution, who believe the Pengaton budget could safely be cut in
half by the turn of the century.

That anticipates an average cut of 5 percent a year below this year's level,
adjusted for inflation. If that path is followed, an additional $75 billion
would be available in 1995 and $150 billion by the end of the decade in 1990
dollars.

There are basically three alternative uses for the windfall: cut taxes, spend
the money or use the revenue to reduce the budget deficit and, eventually, the
$3 trillion national debt.

Many conservatives favor a tax cut. Senator Phil Gramm, a Texas Republican,
argues that ''the American people paid for the superiority of our system to
emerge'' and should now be rewarded in kind. ''I don't think the benefits from
winning the cold war should go to the Government,'' he declared.

The Heritage Foundation, the conservative research institute, published a paper
last week listing 11 different ways to cut taxes.

And not only conservatives take this approach. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan,
the New York Democrat, argues that a peace dividend could make up most of the
revenue that would be lost from his proposal to cut Social Security taxes.

Many others in Washington and around the country maintain that the United States
now has a golden opportunity to meet problems that were overlooked in the
tightfisted Reagan years.

Lobbyists for social causes envision using the money for education, housing,
drug control and welfare. The General Accounting Office, the auditing arm of
Congress, has prepared a list of ''unavoidable costs'' facing the Government,
from repairing deficient bridges and highways to modernizing the air traffic
control system to cleaning and modernizing troubled nuclear weapons plants. The
United States Conference of Mayors last month called for spending the money on
urban aid. Two conservatives, Phyllis Schlafly and Paul Weyrich, pleaded with
President Bush recently to devote the funds to programs to strengthen the
American family.

Economists for the most part would neither cut taxes nor spend the money but
would use it to lower the Federal budget deficit and to begin paying off the
national debt. Such a policy, says Charles L. Schultze, director of the economic
studies program at the Brookings Institution, would lead to lower interest
rates, more national savings, greater investment and productivity and, as a
result, a much higher living standard for all Americans.

There is little doubt where the American public stands. A New York Times/CBS
News poll last month found that 62 percent of Americans, representing a large
majority of every demographic and geographic group, would spend the money ''to
fight problems such as drugs and homelessness.'' Twenty-one percent would reduce
the deficit, 10 percent would cut taxes and the rest had some other answer or no
answer at all. But the public may be disappointed.  Much of the Pengaton's money
for the next several years has already been obligated. Some long-term savings
like closing military bases, ending weapons contracts and relocating troops from
abroad may actually require additional outlays at first. Lawmakers who want to
cut the military budget in the abstract may find it difficult to do so when
bases and factories in their states and districts are threatened.

Moreover, history has shown that peace dividends do not stretch as far as might
be thought. From 1968, at the height of spending on the Vietnam War, to 1976,
the military budget fell, in 1990 dollars, from $302 billion to $195 billion.
Without a plan or much public debate, most of the money went to increased Social
Security and Medicare payments, and the public hardly noticed it.

Because the economy has grown so much in the ensuing years, the peace dividend
this time will be a much smaller fraction of the gross national product than it
was after Vietnam.

Isabel V. Sawhill, a scholar at the Urban Institute, does not agree with
President Bush that a peace dividend may not materialize, but she cautions
against over-enthusiasm.

''Real defense spending is almost surely on a downward path,'' she said, ''but
it's unlikely to solve most of our problems.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing; graph of military budget projections before and after the
outbreak of peace in late 1989, 1991-95 (Source: Congressional Budget Office)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Anger Over a Pesticide Is Building in California

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1103 words

DATELINE: PASADENA, Calif.


When the helicopters, flying in military formation, come thudding past her home
in the early morning, spraying insecticide over her house, her lawn, her car and
her children's yellow plastic slide, Melinda Wills considers what it means to
her to be an American.

''This is America, and people should have a voice; they should have a say-so,''
she says of the spraying. ''This goes against all the ideals we were taught to
believe in.''

When Government officials assure Mrs. Wills and her friends that the
insecticide, malathion, is harmless and remind her that its use is vital to
protect the state's $16.5 billion agriculture industry from an infestation of
Mediterranean fruit flies, Mrs. Wills is troubled.

''What if we're making a huge mistake and it's going to cost thousands and
thousands of lives down the line, the lives of our children?'' she asks.

Mrs. Wills's doubts and her disillusionment have led her, like thousands of
other normally accommodating people, to join a grass roots movement that its
members portray as reflecting a heightened environmental consciousness along
with an accumulated mistrust of government and a pugnacious defense of
individual rights.

Though it lacks organization, the movement has grown as the fruit flies
increased, arousing protest votes from a score of town and city councils,
leading two state legislators to file bills to halt the spraying, and
threatening to become an issue in this year's gubernatorial campaign. The
independent groups, some of them no larger than a few friends, have names like
Parents Against Malathion, Mothers Against Malathion and Citizens Against
Malathion.

Last month the California division of the Sierra Club, the state's largest
environmental organization, called on the state to halt the spraying until more
chemical research is done.

The protesters got some welcome news a week ago with the disclosure that a
toxicologist working for the Federal Environmental Protection Agency had
recommended further study on the possible health risks of malathion. But an
agency spokesman said most scientists there disagree with this view.

Truth Remains Elusive

The truth remains elusive and as the confrontation over spraying grows, both
sides are accumulating scientific evidence that only widens the gulf.

Mrs. Wills, a 36-year-old unpublished mystery writer, has never before been
roused to protest - not by the Vietnam War, the issue of legalizing abortion or
the environment. But now, she says, she has spoken out on malathion because she
says she simply must.

For days after each spraying, she says she keeps her 9-year-old daughter,
Desiree, home from school and does not allow her 2-year-old daughter, Tarayna,
outside to play.

''People are scared to death,'' says Mrs. Wills, whose husband installs
linoleum, ''and they know nothing about the system. They know nothing about how
to go about it. So I took it on my self to start working through the channels.''

From her living room Mrs. Wills organizes demonstrations and calls radio talk
shows. She speaks at town meetings and in classrooms. On weekends she takes her
daughters to the local mall, where she stops other people with children and
asks: ''You're a parent. Aren't you concerned about this spraying?''

'We Are Not Going to Stop'

''It's a very slow process,'' she says. ''Unless there is an uprising of the
masses, we are not going to stop the spraying.''

The furor is starting to exasperate state officials, who say they have acted
responsibly in the face of the environmental emergency of fruit fly infestation.

''There's a tremendous amount of misunderstanding, and there is also a
tremendous amount of anxiety, and the issue is becoming an emotional rather than
a rational one,'' says Pat Minyard, the emergency program supervisor for the
state Department of Food and Agriculture. ''Of course, malathion is safe. Where
would somebody get the idea that the final word is not in on malathion?''

Nearly 400 square miles of residential area in Los Angeles County and Orange
County have been sprayed so far, many places repeatedly, since the first of the
flies, known as medflies, were trapped last August. Officials say the spraying
will continue at least into the summer, and its frequency is likely to be
increased as the weather grows warmer and many more flies are expected to
appear.

If the program was halted now, said Leon Spaugy, the Los Angeles County
Agriculture Commissioner, the fruit fly would spread and still more pesticides
would be needed to control it and to fumigate produce for export.

No alternative to the spraying is immediately available, Mr. Spaugy said, and,
''based upon the studies by health officials that we have, we don't feel it
poses a significant health risk.''

She Refers to 'Whoops Theory'

The protesters say that is not good enough.

''We've been told too many times that things are safe, and found out later that
they are not,'' said Patty Prickett, a mother of two who lives in Los Angeles
and who founded Residents Against Spraying and Pesticides.

''I call it the 'whoops!' theory of risk assessment,'' she said. '' 'I'm from
the government and I'm here to help you' is no longer a credible line.''

She recalled past Government assurances about the safety of DDT, Agent Orange
and alar, other chemicals whose risks became widely publicized only later.

Mayor Patricia M. Reichenberger of suburban Monterey Park has become a symbol of
what Mrs. Wills called this uprising of the masses.

Last November, Mrs. Reichenberger's 20-year-old son, recovering from a
motorcycle accident, complained of excruciating headaches that a neurosurgeon
said could be a reaction to the spraying.

Mrs. Reichenberger said that she gathered the Government's data on malathion and
that it seemed to be full of holes.

''I began to inquire further and further until it became an out-and-out war
betwen the Department of Agriculture and my city, Monterey Park,'' she said.
''All I kept getting was a slammed door in my face.''

Now other communities invite Mrs. Reichenberger to share her experiences and her
knowledge. Residents seek her help in finding shelter away from their homes
during sprayings. And from the state capital scientists, doctors and emissaries
of government call her to try to calm her fears.

But Mrs. Reichenberger, like others who oppose the spraying, is unswayed.

''They think they are outsmarting us,'' she said. ''Well, a few of us do have a
couple of brain cells in our heads. You fight and you fight and you can't
understand why they won't even listen. I'm beginning to get nasty about it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: ''This is America, and people should have a voice,'' said
Melinda Wills of Pasadena, Calif., who joined a grass roots movement aimed at
halting the spraying of malathion. The insecticide is used to protect the
state's $16.5 billion agriculture industry from an infestation of Mediterranean
fruit flies. (The New York Times/Bart Bartholomew)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Officer Is Questioned as a Suspect In Bombing Death of L.I. Detective

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 815 words


A Nassau County police officer was questioned yesterday as a prime suspect in
the death of an off-duty Suffolk County narcotics detective who was killed last
week in a car bombing outside his home in North Patchogue, L.I., a
law-enforcement official said.

The official, who requested anonymity, would not give details about the
questioning. He said that investigators had not completely ruled out their
original suspicion that revenge by drug dealers was the motive for the killing
of the 41-year-old undercover detective, Dennis Wustenhoff.

But the official said that the officer who was questioned, Robert Horan, knew
that Detective Wustenhoff had been having an affair with Officer Horan's wife,
Nancy. She is a part-time secretary in the Long Island office of the Federal
Drug Enforcement Administration, other law-enforcement officials said.

The officials said Officer Horan was in his 40's and had been on the force for
20 years. They added that he was most recently assigned to the Emergency
Services Bureau but has also worked with a hazardous-materials unit. The
officials said that would have given him a working knowledge of explosives and
how to detonate them.

The disclosures came to light a day after Detective Wustenoff's funeral, which
was attended by more than 5,000 officers from as far away as Utah. They formed a
line of blue nearly half a mile long as a silver hearse carried Detective
Wustenhoff's flag-draped coffin from a funeral home in Patchogue. With black
bands of mourning over their badges, the officers stood at attention as a 21-gun
salute rang out and a bugler played taps.

Yesterday a team of Suffolk detectives went to Cooperstown, N.Y., where Officer
Horan was on vacation, and questioned him, the official said.

Officers from Nassau and Suffolk also converged on the Horans' house in
Bethpage, L.I. As Nassau officers sealed off the house, Suffolk officers arrived
with a search warrant. Bomb-sniffing dogs from Suffolk County were brought in,
apparently to search for evidence of explosives.

Detective Wustenhoff, who won a Bronze Star in the Vietnam War before joining
the Suffolk force in 1970, was killed last Thursday after getting into a white
Cadillac Eldorado he used for undercover work. The car was parked outside the
house where he lived with his wife, Francine, and three children. It was not
clear whether the blast was set off by Detective Wustenhoff's starting the
engine or whether the bomb exploded before he turned the key in the ignition.

Initial Suspicions About Drugs

The police had originally described the bombing as a ''probable assassination''
related to his job as a narcotics detective. Police Commissioner Daniel P. Guido
said then that the bombing appeared to have been aimed at avenging a conviction
or thwarting an investigation that Detective Wustenhoff had been pursuing.

The police said the bomb was a sophisticated device placed under the front seat
or attached to the car's undercarriage. The device blew out the windshield,
showering the street with shards of blackened car parts and rocking the quiet
neighborhood of well-kept homes.

Detective Wustenhoff was conscious when rescuers pulled him from the car. He was
taken by a police helicopter to University Hospital in Stony Brook, L.I., where
he died.

The police said they did not know where Detective Wustenhoff was going when the
bomb exploded. He had been assigned to the narcotics squad since 1984 and was
involved in what the police described as major investigations into high-level
narcotics trafficking rather than street-level deals.

Complaints to Authorities

Yesterday, law-enforcement officials said that the investigation changed
direction over the weekend and that they began focusing on Detective
Wustenhoff's affair with Officer Horan's wife.

A Suffolk law-enforcement official said Officer Horan had complained to the
Suffolk police about Detective Wustenhoff's involvement with Officer Horan's
wife a year ago. When the detective's superiors confronted him, the official
said, Detective Wustenhoff told them that the affair had ended. But the official
added that the affair was apparently continuing at the time of the bombing.

Suffolk investigators last week sent bomb fragments and pieces of the demolished
car to the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms in Washington to
determine the type of explosive used, how the device worked and how much the
bomber might have known about explosives.

A spokesman for the bureau, Jack Killorin, said yesterday that the agency had
discussed its preliminary results with the investigators. But he refused to
disclose what they were. Mr. Killorin said that a complete laboratory analysis
would take additional time.

Mr. Killorin said that in the last 11 years there had been 219 bombings of
police vehicles nationwide, killing three officers and injuring 55 others.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Nassau County police officer was questioned in the bombing
death of Detective Dennis Wustenhoff, whose funeral on Monday was attended by
more than 5,000 police officers (The New York Times/Vic Delucia) (pg. B2)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Army Says Cuts May Mean Losing Some Officers

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 310 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 21


The Army told Congress today that the Bush Administration's plan to shrink the
military might force the Army to dismiss some career officers ''as a last
resort.''

In its annual statement to Congress, the Army said that while it was committed
to recruiting and retaining high-quality soldiers even as overall troop totals
are reduced, it might have to dismiss some of the 375,000 career officers and
noncommissioned officers.

Such reductions would be a new problem for the military. After World War II, the
Korean War and the Vietnam War, it was able to slim its ranks by turning loose
thousands of draftees who were eager to re-enter the civilian economy. Today's
soldiers and officers, however, are all volunteers, and for many the service is
a career.

The Army Secretary, Michael P. W. Stone, presented the statement in a closed
hearing of the House Appropriations Committee's Subcommittee on Defense. Copies
were issued at the Pentagon.

The other branches of the military said it was premature to discuss dismissals
of career officers.

A spokeswoman for the Air Force, Lieut. Col. Peg Bowman, said: ''The Air Force
hopes to accommodate the reductions in force through attrition, early-out
programs, cutbacks in the number of people we are bringing in on active duty and
of the number of civilians that we hire.''

A Marine Corps spokesman, Lieut. Col. Fred Peck, said: ''We don't anticipate any
personnel cuts at this time. We have introduced a voluntary program where
marines near the end of their period of enlistment can end their service up to
90 days in advance.''

In a statement, the Navy said it ''has worked very closely with Congress to
protect personnel accounts from major cuts,'' and added, ''It would be premature
to speculate on the impact to personnel until such time that Congress has made a
final decision on the reprogramming.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

No More 'War on Drugs'

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 470 words


Figures of speech are supposed to enhance understanding; sometimes they impede
it. That's happening with the ''war on drugs.''

War metaphors are common in governmental public relations: War on Poverty, War
on Illiteracy. Why not a War on Drugs? Efforts to smash the drug trade often
look like war. SWAT teams storm crack houses. Coast Guard gunners fire on
suspected smuggler ships. Colombian police board helicopters to chase the
cocaine baron Pablo Escobar.

But there are dramatic differences between police and the military. Police
officers patrol alone or in pairs, using much individual discretion. Soldiers
generally fight against well-defined enemies, using little discretion and
following orders in large disciplined groups.

Likewise, there's a vast difference between war and crime. Real wars are fought
- and thought about - in terms of victory or defeat. To measure drug policy in
those terms invites extreme thinking. Witness those who would like to make
non-homicidal drug dealing a capital crime, like treason.

The careless war metaphor also leads to depressing questions. If drugs continue
to pour into the United States despite substantial resistance, for example, why
continue to fight? Increasingly, the war on drugs looks like the Vietnam War, an
unwinnable waste of resources. Perceiving frustration and defeat, some talk of
legalizing drugs.

But many social problems, however destructive, cannot be conquered - only
managed and, with skill, reduced. That's true of drunken driving, teen-age
pregnancy and venereal disease. And it is also true of drug abuse.

It isn't realistic, or necessary, to make victory the test of a domestic
campaign to control a social problem. Such a campaign succeeds as it reinforces
values and limits damage that people do to themselves for which society must
pay.

In those terms, the current drug policy - tenuously coordinated, ill-funded
initiatives in law enforcement, public health, education and international
diplomacy - has already produced some success. Official focus on the issue has
heightened public concern and helped shift public attitudes against drugs.
Meanwhile, cocaine abuse, at least by ''casual'' users, has begun to decline.

In other words, values are being reinforced; the problem is being contained. And
better coordination, more funds and more time might produce more positive
results even if they can't win the war on drugs.

Honest people can disagree about how much and how best to invest public funds in
the drug containment policy. But the debate can't proceed realistically if the
governing metaphor offers only a simple-minded choice of victory or defeat.

If the task is to win a war on drugs, America is doomed to lose. If it is to
find intelligent and creative ways to manage a social problem, there is much
good to be done.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 32, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 935 words


Here are some notable releases of the last few months.

BATMAN - Michael Keaton, Jack Nicholson and Kim Basinger star in a ''shapeless,
big-screen reincarnation'' set in a ''nightmare version of megalopolis.''
(Vincent Canby) 1989. Warner. $24.95. Laser disk, $24.98. 2 hours 6 minutes.
Closed captioned. PG-13.

CITY OF WOMEN - Federico Fellini's fantasy about a search for the perfect woman,
with Marcello Mastroianni, in top form '' . . . is spellbinding, a dazzling
visual display that is part burlesque, part satire, part Folies-Bergeres and all
cinema.'' (Canby) 1979. New Yorker. $79.95. 2:18. No rating. DO THE RIGHT THING
- The film ''is living, breathing, riveting proof of the arrival of an
abundantly gifted new talent.'' (Canby) 1989. MCA. $98.95. LD. $34.98. 2:00. CC.
R. THE DRESSMAKER - This small-scale film is exquisitely acted by Joan Plowright
and Billie Whitelaw. (Canby) 1989. Capitol. $79.95. 1:32. No rating.

EDDIE AND THE CRUISERS II: EDDIE LIVES - This film ''blithely runs through
music-world cliches.'' (Caryn James) 1989. International Video Entertainment.
$89.95. 1:46. CC. PG-13. 84 CHARLIE MOPIC - Patrick Duncan, a Vietnam veteran,
wrote and directed this portrait of war. ''Most of the time effective and
believable.'' (Richard Bernstein) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. 1:35. R. GREAT
BALLS OF FIRE - This movie, starring Dennis Quaid as Jerry Lee Lewis, offers
''terrific music and outrageous fun.'' (James) 1989. Orion. $89.98. LD, $39.95.
1:48. CC. PG-13.

HOW TO GET AHEAD IN ADVERTISING - Bruce Robinson's ''engaging if slightly
overstretched combination of satire, science fiction, Freud and domestic
farce.'' (Canby) 1989. M.C.E.G./Virgin. $89.95. 1:34. CC. PG.

INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE - ''One long, boisterous adventure, full of
storms at sea, exploding boats and breathless escapes. But [Sean] Connery's
presence gives resonance to Indiana's life.'' (James) 1989. Paramount. $24.95.
LD, $24.95. 2:06. CC. PG-13.  LAST TANGO IN PARIS - Bernardo Bertolucci's
romance, starring Marlon Brando and Maria Schneider, is fascinating for its
topicality. The sex scenes are ''riotous, furious, frenzied celebrations of the
differences between men and women.'' (Canby) 1973. MGM/UA. $19.95. 2:07. R.
(Also 2:10. X.) LETHAL WEAPON 2 - Richard Donner's sequel with Mel Gibson and
Danny Glover '' . . . is so careful to preserve its successful comic-action
formula that it follows the most basic law of sequels. If you liked 'Lethal
Weapon,' you'll like 'Lethal Weapon 2' '' (James) 1989. Warner. $24.98. LD.
$24.98. 1:54. CC. R. LICENCE TO KILL - Timothy Dalton as James Bond ''is
beginning to hold his own with the shadows of his former self.'' (James) 1989.
CBS/Fox. $89.98. LD, $39.98. 2:11. CC. PG-13.

THE MIGHTY QUINN - Denzel Washington gives a ''smooth, funny, laid-back
performance.'' (Canby) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98. 1:38. R. NEW YORK STORIES - This
anthology offers ''a chance to see three major American directors working in
what appears to be virtually a new theatrical form. . . . A near must-see.''
(Canby) 1989. Touchstone. $89.95. LD, $29.95. 2:06. CC. PG.

PARENTHOOD - Ron Howard's bittersweet adult comedy is a ''rich evocation of the
swirl of suburban family life. The key to the movie's heart is Steve Martin's
winning portrayal of Gil.'' (Stephen Holden) 1989. MCA. $89.95. LD. $34.98.
2:04. CC. PG-13.

RENEGADES - Kiefer Sutherland and Lou Diamond Phillips star in this ''fast,
violent, implausible film.'' (James) 1989. MCA. $89.95. LD, $34.98. 1:45. CC. R.
STAR TREK V: THE FINAL FRONTIER - It has ''appealing moments. . . . But true
fans may be disappointed.'' (James) 1989. Paramount. No list price. LD, $29.95.
1:47. CC. PG.

TURNER AND HOOCH - Tom Hanks ''is the best part'' of this mismatched-buddy
movie.'' Unfortunately, ''the five writers don't come up with five funny lines
or one exciting scene.'' (James) 1989. Touchstone. $89.95. LD, $29.95. 1:40. CC.
PG.  UHF - ''The most amusing sequences in Al Yankovic's disjointed farce . . .
are its spoofs of television ads, children's shows and music-videos.'' (Stephen
Holden) 1989. Orion. $89.98. LD, $39.95. 1:37. CC. PG-13.

UNCLE BUCK - ''John Candy is at his best when he is being crafty and, at the
beginning, downright nasty to the children. So is the film.'' (Canby) 1989. MCA.
$89.95. LD, $34.98. 1:40. CC. PG.

WHEN HARRY MET SALLY . . . - Rob Reiner has made ''the sitcom version of a Woody
Allen film,'' starring Billy Crystal and Meg Ryan. (James) 1989. Nelson/Orion.
$89.98. LD, $24.95. 1:36. CC. R. THE WINDS OF WAR - The TV mini-series based on
Herman Wouk's novel ''eventually becomes the equivalent of a good read.'' (John
J. O'Connor) 1983. Paramount. $139.95. 14:43. CC. No rating.

WIRED -John Belushi's story, based on the Bob Woodward book, turns out ''a bit
fuzzy and off-center.'' (Canby) 1989. International Video Entertainment. $98.95.
1:52. R. THE WOMEN OF BREWSTER PLACE - The story of several black women ''is
good old-fashioned melodrama.'' (O'Connor) 1989. J2 Communications. $79.95.
3:00. No rating.

WOMEN ON THE VERGE OF A NERVOUS BREAKDOWN - Pedro Almodovar's film is an
''entertaining, deliberately benign Spanish farce.'' (Canby) 1988. Orion.
$79.98. LD, $39.95. 1:38. R.

For Children

THE ADVENTURES OF MILO AND OTIS - A picaresque odyssey of a golden-haired cat
and a snub-nosed dog is ''occasionally fearful, but never terrifying.'' (Holden)
1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD, $34.95. 1:16. CC. G. BAMBI - ''Walt Disney's
wizards,'' as a contemporary critic called them, work their magic. 1942. Disney.
$26.99. LD, $39.99. 1:09. CC. G.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
A Cockney Rumble in 'Bovver Boys'

BYLINE: By D.J.R. BRUCKNER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 57, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 622 words


People up front at the 45th Street Theater during performances of Willy
Holtzman's ''Bovver Boys'' must wonder when they will get a soccer ball or a
foot in their faces as five of the eight characters kick and butt a ball around
a raked stage that ends almost in the laps of front-row patrons. But their
anxiety might be a blessing in this case.

''Bovver'' is a Cockney word for a rumble, and Mr. Holtzman's theme is that any
attempt to improve the lives of people can be dangerous to them in a society
where mayhem is the shared culture.

The play is set in 1970, when an American conscientious objector to the Vietnam
War turns up as a social worker at a community center in the Scottish city of
Dundee. Mr. Holtzman has explored the ways of what used to be called the
underclass in several plays, and this setup is a natural.

The teen-age skinheads who hang around the community center have no
understanding of or sympathy with pacifism, even if its devotee is a Quaker, and
this American Quaker's efforts to improve the morals of these youths is often
dangerously wrongheaded. Two older workers at the center utter dire warnings
about the consequences, but he persists and in the end an innocent victim
suffers as a result of his efforts.

But none of the conflicts in the play, not even the beating and rape of a
15-year-old girl, become really dramatic. Characters kick the soccer ball
around, dribble a basketball, knock one another down, dance, roll on the floor.
But the play is all talk, a kind of back-alley Socratic discussion. And while
the seven actors playing Scots manage to hold their accents without a slip, it
would take more than a Scots burr and a bit of local dialect to make these limp
words fly.

The actors work hard to bring the characters to life, especially Calista
Flockhart as the girlfriend of one of the boys, Jack Gwaltney as the leader of a
gang, Holt McCallany as his rival, and Robert Kerbeck as the American. And John
Pynchon Holms, always an energetic director, keeps everything bouncing. The
ballgames and fights serve his purposes; unfortunately, he also sends the
characters in and out through the aisle, occasionally speaking behind the backs
of half the audience.

Mr. Holtzman has staged works in progress before. In this case one suspects that
if he went back to work, dropped all the cliches and tired jokes (including one
about a biting dog lifted from a Peter Sellers Pink Panther movie) and let his
characters begin to act out their frustrations, suspicions and passions, the
ideas he is toying with here might take dramatic form.

After all, his key characters are young gangsters who fear nothing but their own
tender feelings; a girl who, subjected to appalling violence, is tougher than
any of them, and a stranger who professes he is a Quaker but admits that the war
he fled frightened him into dodging the draft. The possibilities are so
tantalizing that one leaves ''Bovver Boys'' really annoyed. That feeling could
be a kind of tribute to the playwright.

Dribbling and Bashing

BOVVER BOYS, by Willy Holtzman; directed by John Pynchon Holms; set design,
Philipp Jung; lighting design, Mary Louise Geiger; costume designer, Ellen
McCartney; sound design, Tom Gould; stage combat, Jake Turner; associate
producer, Herbert H. O'Dell; general manager, Gordon Farrell. Presented by
Primary Stages Company, Casey Childs, artistic director; Janet Reed, associate
artistic director. At the 45th Street Theater, 354 West 45th Street.

Allie . . . Jack Gwaltney
Jack . . . John Plumpis
Gene . . . Robert Kerbeck
Joyce . . . Leigh Dillon
John . . . Keith Langsdale
Ennis . . . Holt McCallany
Chick . . . Michael Lewis
Christine . . . Calista Flockhart

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Harold Moore 3d to Wed Evelyn Milne

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 55, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 197 words


Mr. and Mrs. Harry R. Milne of Ridge, L.I., have announced April wedding plans
for their daughter, Evelyn Beth Milne, and Harold Gregory Moore 3d, a son of
Lieut. Gen. Harold G. Moore, U.S.A. retired, and Mrs. Moore of Auburn, Ala.

Ms. Milne, 27 years old, graduated form Hartwick College and received an M.B.A.
from Drexel University. She is a vice president at the Bankers Trust Company in
New York. Her father is the transportation director at the Grumman Corporation
in Bethpage, L.I. Her mother, Doreathea Milne, retired as a nurse in the
Longwood school district in Middle Island, L.I.

The prospective bridegroom, 38, is a vice president at U.B.S. Securities in New
York, a subsidiary of the Union Bank in Zurich. A graduate of the Hill School
and Harvard University, he received a master's degree in history from Cambridge
University and an M.B.A. from Stanford University.

His father, who retired in 1978, is a former deputy chief of staff of the Army.
General Moore was the commander of the First Battalion of the Seventh Cavalry,
the commander of the Third Brigade of the First Cavalry Division (Airmobile) in
the Vietnam War, and the commander at Fort Ord, Calif.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Notebook King Is Clever as a Legal Infighter

BYLINE: By PHIL BERGER

SECTION: Section D; Page 27, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 909 words


Is Don King's firm grip on the heavyweight division loosening?

That could depend on how the courts eventually rule on the current legal
imbroglio in which King is involved.

King and the new heavyweight champion, Buster Douglas, are suing each other over
the validity of King's promotional contract. That contract, according to
documents made available yesterday in United States District Court in Las Vegas,
Nev., binds Douglas exclusively to the promoter for three years, starting on
Dec. 27, 1988. Attorneys for Douglas claim the contracts are illegal.

But nobody who has seen King operate is betting against him. There are certain
precedents concerning King's persuasiveness.

In the early 1970's, when King had a managerial share of Earnie Shavers, he
bought out another shareholder, Dean Chance, the major league pitcher, for
$8,000.

''Then,'' said Don Elbaum, a promoter involved with Shavers at the time, ''he
told me he wanted the eight grand back from his other partner, Blackie Gennaro,
a very wealthy paving contractor. I told King he was crazy and that Blackie
wasn't going to give him the money. I was so mad at King I ran down to
Youngstown and told Blackie, 'Absolutely don't give the money back.' ''

A meeting was convened. King painted a rosy picture of Shavers's future and of
the brilliance of all those involved with the fighter.

''Then he told us,'' Elbaum said, ''he needed $16,000 to implement his vision.
Sixteen grand. No one said a word. They gave him $16,000. It was unreal.''

The Color of Money

Ringside at Tokyo was not the first time that King sought a little help from his
friends.

King, who beseeched Jose Sulaiman, the president of the World Boxing Council and
a friend, to declare Mike Tyson the winner after Douglas got a long count after
being knocked down in the eighth round by Tyson, apparently once sought help on
a deal from Jesse Jackson.

''It was back in 1982, when we were trying to make the Larry Holmes-Gerry Cooney
heavyweight title match,'' said Dennis Rappaport, one of Cooney's co-managers.
''A sticking point was that King didn't want Cooney to have parity with Holmes
on the purses, and I insisted there had to be parity. I guess King heard I had
been a civil rights activist because when we were in Chicago working on the
deal, he came up to my hotel room with Reverend Jackson. Reverend Jackson said
to me, 'You could retard the progress of the civil rights movement 30 years, 50
years, if Cooney gets parity.'

''I told him, 'Reverend, with all due respect, this is not a black-white issue.
It's a green issue. The best attractions are beyond the color of skin. Muhammad
Ali and Ray Leonard are bigger than Rocky Marciano or Ingemar Johansson were.
The only reason Larry Holmes is getting as much money as Cooney is because he's
champion. I'm bringing the charisma. Holmes has the personality of a fig
newton.' As I started going over the socioeconomic history of boxing, Reverend
Jackson, winked at King and said, 'God bless this crazy man,' and walked out.''

Tougher Outside Ring

Jorge Paez, the International Boxing Federation featherweight champion, makes
his next title defense against Louie Espinoza on April 7 in Las Vegas, Nev.

Paez, who won a questionable decision from Troy Dorsey earlier this month, had
problems making the 126-pound featherweight limit for that bout and spent the 12
rounds leaning against the ropes, fighting in very occasional spurts. In fact,
Paez probably gave more action about a month before the bout in a Mexicali,
Mexico, bar when he and Manny Leal, who was his manager at the time, got into an
old-fashioned brawl.

''Bottles were thrown and chairs were thrown,'' said Dean Gettleson, Paez's
attorney.

The disagreement involved Leal's objections to Paez's indifferent training and
Leal was annoyed, Gettleson said, by the lack of respect Leal thought Paez was
showing his wife, who happens to be Leal's sister.

''I heard about it from the Mexicali police, who know me from when I promoted
down there,'' said Gettleson about the fighter-trainer brawl. ''No one was
arrested. They were detained and asked to pay for bar damages.''

Fighting for a Cause

Roy Jones Jr., the 1988 Olympic medalist who is undefeated in five pro bouts,
will fight Billy Mitchum tonight in Pensacola, Fla.

Roy Jones Sr., who manages and trains his son, said that the fighter would
donate his purse from the bout to a fund to build a memorial wall in Pensacola
to American soldiers who fought in Vietnam.

''The property is already allocated,'' said Stanley Levin, who has promoted some
of Jones's fights.

Levin said that Jones was a Vietnam War veteran who had ''lost a number of
friends there.''

New Commissioner Named

Herb Washington, from Rochester, the former Olympic sprinter who became a
pinch-runner with the Oakland Athletics for 1974-75, was named commissioner of
the New York State Athletic Commission yesterday by the State Senate in Albany.
He succeeds Jimmy Dupree. The 38-year-old Washington is the owner of four
McDonald's franchises in the Rochester area. . . . Madison Square Garden
Boxing's next card is headlined by the cruiserweights Dwight Muhammad Qawi and
Mike (the Bounty) Hunter in a bout at Essex Community College in Newark, N.J.,
on March 16. On the same night in Brooklyn, the card at Ron Scott Steven's
Gleason Arena will be headlined by a junior welterweight bout between Jake
Rodriguez and Juan Minaya.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Don King (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 2, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Asian Population in U.S. Grew by 70% in the 80's

BYLINE: By FELICITY BARRINGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1073 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1


A sustained wave of Asian immigration in the past decade fueled a 70 percent
increase in the Asian population of the United States from 1980 to 1988, said a
report made public today by the Census Bureau.

The bureau reported that the Asian population grew nearly seven times as fast as
the general population and three times as fast as the black population. Asian
Americans numbered about 6.5 million on July 1, 1988, up from 3.8 million eight
years earlier, the report said.

The increase changed the political and social landscape of California, where
more than one-third of those from Asia and the Pacific islands settled. The rise
is largely due to the influx from the Philippines, China, South Korea and India,
said officials of the bureau and of the Immigration and Naturalization Service.

Asians and Pacific Islanders are in a heterogeneous category, the officials
said. Many are native Americans who trace their descent to China, Korea,
Vietnam, Cambodia, Japan, the Philippines and Micronesia. Some trace their
origins to the Indian subcontinent.

Combining of Statistics

The figures in the census report are extrapolated from data derived from the
1980 census, during which those who participated with the census-takers
classified themselves a white, black, Asian or American Indian and, if
necessary, Hispanic.

These figures were then combined with the Federal Government's annual birth and
death statistics and with immigration and emigration data from the Immigration
and Naturalization Service.

Census demographers assigned racial categories to the immigrants of the 80's
based on the way earlier immigrants from the same countries identified
themselves in the census. For instance, if 95 percent of the Cambodians called
themselves Asians, 95 percent of subsequent Cambodian immigrants would be
considered Asian. Soviet immigrants, for the purpose of the report, were
considered white.

The Census Bureau, for the purposes of this study, considered all Soviet emigres
white. Under Soviet emigration law, the only ethnic groups allowed to leave the
country in the 1980's were Jews, Armenians and ethnic Germans, all of whom would
have been considered white by the Census Bureau.

Although some individuals will be included in a given category incorrectly, the
overall estimates using this inference are statistically sound, experts said. At
least 80 percent of the Asian immigrants of the past eight years were from
China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, the Philippines, Japan, South
Korea, Micronesia and the subcontinent.

'It's an Unusual Migration'

The 1980's Asians, for the most part, have far higher professional and
educational qualifications than most earlier groups, one expert says.

''It's an unusual migration - I don't think there's been anything like it in our
history,'' said Ronald Takaki, the author of ''Strangers from a Different
Shore,'' a book about Asian immigration published last year by Little, Brown &
Company.

''People in earlier migrations were squeezed out of economies in transition from
agriculture to industry,'' Mr. Takaki said. ''What's happenning today is that,
while you do find accelerated modernization in Korea, India and the Philippines,
it is not fast enough to accommodate a large new class of professional
workers.''

Mr. Takaki, who is also a professor of Asian-American studies at the University
of California at Berkeley, said these immigrants tend to choose the United
States, in part, because its policies favor skilled applicants.

Factor of Reuniting Families

But Michael Hoefer, chief of demographic statistics for the Immigration and
Naturalization Service, said most immigrants in the 1980's were admitted under
''family reunification'' priorities. Preference was given to applicants with
relatives in the United States.

Annual Asian immigration figures ranged from 268,000 to 281,000 in the latter
part of the 1980's, and the Philippines, with an average of 50,000 immigrants
annually from 1985 through 1989, was the leading source of Asian and Pacific
Island immigrants. The combined annual figures for China, Taiwan and Hong Kong
in the same period averaged more than 40,000 from 1985 to 1989.

Mr. Hoefer said he expected the rates of Asian immigration to remain high. Since
1975, from 40 percent to 45 percent of all immigrants have come from Asian
countries, including Iran and the Middle East.

The Census Bureau report, by a demographer, Frederick W. Hollmann, is the first
to offer statistics on Asians and Pacific Islanders out of a general ''other''
category including American Indians, Aleuts and Eskimos.

The report says that in addition to 6.5 million Asian Americans, there are 30.5
million blacks and 20 million people of Hispanic descent in the total United
States population of 247.6 million.

The increase in the black population, about 1.8 percent a year in the 1980's,
was ''fueled by a higher fertility rate than that of the general population,''
the report said. There was, however, some immigration from Haiti, Jamaica and
African countries like Nigeria in that period, according to Mr. Hollmann.

Immigration and natural growth were equally responsible for the increase in the
Hispanic population, which grew at an average annual rate of about 3.4 percent
annually from 1980 to 1988, according to the census report.

By comparison, the white population of the country has been growing at a rate of
about 0.7 percent annually, a significantly lower rate than any of the
minorities.

Mr. Hollmann said he was not sure how long the numbers of Asians and Pacific
Islanders could continue to grow at the current rate, in part because it will
take larger and larger numbers of new immigrants or a higher fertility rate
simply to maintain the rate.

Concentration in California

More of this country's Asian and Pacific Islander population is centered in
California. The Los Angeles suburb of Monterey Park has become a Chinese
enclave, Filipinos are one of the largest minorities in Daly City, outside San
Francisco. As of 1985, David Ward, a bureau demographer, estimated that more
than a fourth of San Francisco's population was either Asian, Pacific Island or
American Indian descent.

In Manhattan and Queens, New York City, in 1985, about 7 percent of the
population was of Asian, Pacific Islander or American Indian descent; in
Brooklyn and the Bronx the percentage was from 2 percent to 3.5 percent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 5, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Larry Brown's Long and Rough Road to Becoming a Writer

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1097 words

DATELINE: OXFORD, Miss.


One day nine years ago, a 29-year-old firefighter from Yocona, Miss., named
Larry Brown decided to become a writer. He sat down at his wife's portable
electric typewriter and began seven months of work on a novel about a killer
bear running amok in Yellowstone National Park.

To his amazement, no one wanted to publish a work he now describes as ''horrible
. . . 327 single-spaced pages of sex and man-eating.'' No one wanted the
meandering short stories he churned out next, or the nonfiction pieces about
hunting he sent to Outdoor Life magazine after that.

But when he quit his job as a captain in the Oxford Fire Department in January
to write full time, Mr. Brown completed an astonishing literary odyssey in which
he essentially willed himself to become a serious writer. Now he has two
glowingly received books to his credit and a third book on the way.

Mr. Brown's first book, a collection of stories called ''Facing the Music,'' was
published in 1988 to much acclaim. He followed that with a searing novel,
''Dirty Work,'' that has garnered even stronger reviews. It concerns two Vietnam
veterans from Mississippi, one white and one black. They lie in a ward in a
veterans' hospital; one is a quadruple amputee.

Gritty Southern Voices

Mr. Brown cringes at the obligatory references to Oxford's most famous writer,
William Faulkner. His writing style has little in common with Faulkner's. But if
the South has given the nation many of its most distinctive literary voices, few
have taken such an unusual path or progressed as quickly as Mr. Brown.

''When I first met him, I was struck by his personal commitment,'' said the
novelist Barry Hannah, who teaches at the University of Mississippi here, ''but
at the time I didn't give him a prayer, I really didn't think he had it.

''I think he's become one of America's great stories - how his diligence and his
big backbone won out. Something happened in about five years that's quite a
miracle. He's become his own genius.''

Genius or not, Mr. Brown has created a dark, painful world of gritty Southern
voices, usually those of ordinary people coping with extraordinary pain. One
reviewer described him as ''a choir of Southern voices, all by himself.''

There is little surface evidence of great emotional churning in the small,
quiet-spoken man smoking Marlboros and wearing blue jeans and a blue shirt with
its top four buttons unbuttoned over a T-shirt that reads: ''National Slugburger
Fest -Corinth, Miss.''

Odd Jobs, Then an Odd Notion

Nor was there anything in Mr. Brown's life even to hint at a career as a writer.
The son of a sharecropper who moved too often and drank too much, Mr. Brown
joined the Marines shortly after graduating from high school in 1969. After his
service he returned to Mississippi, tended a family convenience store, cleaned
carpets, installed chain-link fences, cut pulpwood and hauled hay when he was
not working as an Oxford firefighter.

Nearing the age of 30, with no real idea where his life was going, he came upon
an odd notion. An avid reader whose tastes ran to Stephen King, Louis L'Amour
and Harold Robbins, he decided to become a writer. His initial rejections did
not shake his belief he could succeed.

''It was probably a good thing I was so ignorant about everything back then,''
he said recently at Oxford's literary hangout, Square Books. ''If I knew how
many years it would take to publish a book, I might not have kept going.''

As his rejection slips mounted, Mr. Brown underwent a surprising transformation.
Having begun with visions of being the next Stephen King, he decided he would
rather be the next Flannery O'Connor. He began reading novelists like O'Connor,
Faulkner, Raymond Carver and Cormac McCarthy. He read everything he could find
by writers on their craft and the letters they wrote on writing, most notably
O'Connor's ''Habit of Being.'' He took a class at the University of Mississippi,
all the while churning out his own work.

The result was a sophisticated sense of how to craft a story combined with a
natural ear for dialogue and an indelible, rough-edged sense of place.

'Directness and Courage'

In 1982, he published his first story in, of all places, Easyriders, a magazine
for motorcyclists. Later, he had stories printed in Twilight Zone, which
specialized in horror and science-fiction pieces, and in the Mississippi Review,
a literary magazine edited by Frederick Barthelme. In 1987, his second story in
Mississippi Review, ''Facing the Music,'' caught the eye of Shannon Ravenel, an
editor for Algonquin Books, a highly regarded publishing house in Chapel Hill,
N.C.

''He handled that story with the most incredible directness and courage,'' she
said. ''It was one where the writer's eye stayed wide open and never blinked and
never compromised.'' The next year, Algonquin published the collection of
stories, ''Facing the Music.'' Late last year, it published ''Dirty Work.'' As
in much of Mr. Brown's work, the book would have been a disaster if he had not
handled its subject matter well, but again his work was received extremely well.
Rick Bass, writing in The New York Times Book Review, called it ''an
unforgettable, unshakable novel.'' Mr. Brown has since been asked to adapt it
for the stage.

Mr. Brown is equally proud of praise from less conventional critics. ''I got a
letter not long ago from a guy at the Lima, Ohio, Correctional Institute,'' he
said. ''He said he'd been teaching a literature class to convicts there, and
he'd been teaching 'Facing the Music,' and he had never seen his convicts
respond to any of his fiction the way they did to me.''

In the fall, Algonquin is to publish another collection of short stories under
the title ''Big Bad Love.''

Seeking a New Image

Mr. Brown, who lives with his wife and three children, ages 7, 10 and 14, in a
house he built himself before writing ''Dirty Work,'' knows that his career has
not been hurt by being something of a curiosity - the writing firefighter from
Oxford, Miss. He quit the firehouse mostly to give himself more time to write
and to allow him to do readings, book promotions and the other things that go
with a literary career. But he said the move was also a statement about who he
is and what he wants to do with his life.

''I did a lot of interviews at the fire station and had a lot of pictures taken
there, and I got tired of that whole angle,'' he said. ''I don't be want to be
known as Larry Brown, the fireman-writer. I wanted to be known as Larry Brown,
writer. That's what I want to do with my life.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Larry Brown, a former firefighter who has become a writer, in
Oxford. (The New York Times/Hubert Worley Jr.)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The Making of a Senator In the Stealing of an Election

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1011 words



The Years of Lyndon Johnson
Volume II: Means of Ascent
By Robert A. Caro
506 pages. Illustrated. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.

In ''The Path to Power,'' Volume I of his monumental biography, ''The Years of
Lyndon Johnson,'' Robert A. Caro ignited a blowtorch whose bright flame both
illuminated Johnson's early career and badly seared his reputation as a young
man of integrity. In Volume II, ''Means of Ascent,'' Mr. Caro intensifies his
flame to a brilliant blue point.

With it he burns into the reader's imagination the story of the election in 1948
for junior United States Senator from Texas, and how Lyndon Johnson, in Mr.
Caro's words, ''stole it - and in the stealing violated even the notably loose
boundaries of Texas politics.'' In the process Mr. Caro defaces Johnson's image
irreparably.

Everything in this relatively brief volume (for Mr. Caro) is part of the
election story. It covers only seven years, 1941 to 1948, years when Johnson's
power diminished nearly to the vanishing point, until he had to stake everything
on a gamble against impossible odds.

It begins with his stint in the United States Navy, bucking unsuccessfully for a
desk job with power. (He had promised Texas voters during his losing Senate
campaign in 1941 that ''if the day ever comes when my vote must be cast to send
your boy to the trenches - that day Lyndon Johnson will leave his Senate seat to
go with him.'') With no high Navy post forthcoming and not much power to
exercise in the House of Representatives, in 1943 Johnson turned his energies
elsewhere. ''His political acumen and energy were, for the duration, no longer
used for politics,'' Mr. Caro writes. ''They were used for making money.'' They
were used, specifically, for acquiring radio station KTBC in Austin, Tex., and
building it into a broadcasting empire. In detailing this story of political
weight lifting, Mr. Caro demolishes Johnson's later claim that only his wife,
Lady Bird, was involved in acquiring and managing the family broadcasting
interests.

Still, money by itself wasn't power. The Congressman was approaching 40. And he
had the Johnson men's weak hearts to worry about. (''I'm not gonna live to be
but 60,'' he would complain.) A career in the House of Representatives wouldn't
satisfy. ''Too slow.'' he would say. ''Too slow.'' So everything came down to
the 1948 primary campaign for the Democratic Senate nomination - a race in which
he would be pitted against the former governor known as ''Mr. Texas,'' Coke
Robert Stevenson, the state's most respected political figure, a race Lyndon
Johnson could not possibly win.

How he won it, purportedly by stealing it, has been told before, as Mr. Caro is
the first to admit. Indeed, the lore of the crucial ballot box, from Precinct 13
in Jim Wells County, has been told again and again over the years, even during
Johnson's Presidency and after his death.

But never has it been told so coherently as Mr. Caro recounts it. Never has it
been told so convincingly. And never has it been told so dramatically, with
breathtaking detail piled on incredible development, even unto the climactic
moment when, in the darkest hour of his dubious career, Johnson looked around a
room full of the best legal minds in Texas and took the step to save himself
from falling off the cliff by calling for his savior - ''Where's Abe?''
-meaning, of course, the man known as the ''most brilliant legal mind ever to
come out of Yale Law School,''Abe Fortas.

It is an oddly thrilling story to read. It is thrilling because of the research
done by Mr. Caro and his wife, Ina Caro (as he acknowledges in an afterword).
The last rabbit the author pulls out of his hat is to locate an old
Texas-Mexican who was directly involved with the disputed Precinct 13 ballot
box, who entrusts Mr. Caro with the manuscript of his autobiography, written in
broken English, which confirmed how 201 crucial votes were faked.

It is thrilling because it seems to settle the issue of the election once and
for all. And it is thrilling because you find yourself, against all better
judgment, rooting for Johnson to pull off this criminal theft. You root for a
Johnson painted so satanically dark against the angelic brightness of Coke
Stevenson that you inevitably find yourself thinking of Macbeth and how
Shakespeare made you root for him. (Of course, this is far from the first time
comparisons between Johnson and Macbeth have been suggested. There was that
scurrilous yet purgative play some 25 years ago, Barbara Garson's ''MacBird!'')
Comparisons to the tragic Macbeth are probably not what Mr. Caro had in mind in
writing ''Means of Ascent.'' He ends this volume by telling in near-reverential
tones how Coke Stevenson lived happily ever after the election, as if to say
that the good got what was coming to them.

Meanwhile, Mr. Caro writes, the bad went on to become President, to escalate the
war in Vietnam despite his campaign promises, and, with that escalation and that
lying about it, to damage the prestige of the President's office as never
before.

This may come as a surprise to historians of, say, the Grant and Harding eras,
as well as to those conservatives who are now speculating that America's
fortitude in Vietnam may have contributed to the erosion of communism.

But whatever the historical significance of ''Means of Ascent,'' its
psychological implications seem dead on course. Mr. Caro points out that in the
aftermath of the 1948 Senate race, Lyndon Johnson would often make jokes about
his bamboozling of Coke Stevenson. It seems he had to prove how different he was
from his father, Sam Ealy Johnson Jr., a man, in Mr. Caro's words, ''whose
honesty and idealism had led him into ruin and disgrace.''

To judge from this version of events, Lyndon Johnson not only had to prove
himself different from his father; he also had to obliterate him. He seems to
have accomplished that, figuratively speaking, in his treatment of Coke
Stevenson. In the process he murdered any fragment of his father that might have
remained in himself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Robert A. Caro (Joyce Ravid)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 9, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Art;
Sculpture at the Whitney: The Radical Years

BYLINE: By ROBERTA SMITH

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1423 words


''THE NEW SCULPTURE 1965-75: Between Geometry and Gesture,'' which has just
opened at the Whitney Museum of American Art, should temporarily deflect charges
that the museum lacks curatorial direction or courage. Although it is not
without flaws, this is the museum's best and most focused survey of recent art
in several years, and one of the more daring shows to be seen in a New York
museum in a while.

It brings before the public an unusually radical chapter in the history of
American postwar art that is still not completely understood within the art
world, and it does so with a seriousness and depth that tries to reach all
segments of the museum's large audience.

Twenty-five years after its heyday, Process Art or antiform or Post-Minimalism,
as this work is generally called, still exudes a sense of fierce radicality. The
show's contents - more than 90 sculptures and installation pieces by 10 artists
- may unsettle some visitors. Process artists didn't produce indelible
masterpieces on the order of a Jasper Johns flag painting, or beautifully
decorative objects like a Kenneth Noland target painting. In fact, they barely
produced art objects at all.  In this exhibition, viewers can move sideways
through Bruce Nauman's ''Green Light Corridor,'' a 12-inch-wide hallway that is
40 feet long and that provides an experience of space and structure that is
immediate, to say the least. They may scrutinize Richard Tuttle's delicate
''Wire Pieces'' until they distinguish wire from drawn pencil line from shadow
on the wall, or peer into ''Accession II,'' a box sculpture by Eva Hesse in
which countless strands of plastic tubing seem to offer the very image of
infinity. They can look at - and at the same time through - Alan Saret's ''Sun
Register,'' a diaphanous mass of tied-together wire that rises from the floor
like a cloud of faintly green smoke, or consider Robert Smithson's surprisingly
glitzy juxtapositions of fragmented stone and mirrors. In other words, give the
work the time and attention it deserves, and one can come away from this
exhibition with a clearer understanding of American sculpture since the 1960's,
of the new participatory role that this work in particular often proposed to the
viewer and of the way artists develop, both singly and generationally.

Historically, the period under scrutiny was framed by the civil rights and anti-
Vietnam War movements. Esthetically, it was a time when many of art's most
revered traditions were questioned and disavowed. Painting was widely considered
to be dead; the future seemed to lie with sculpture, but sculpture that dealt
with space and materials in a new way. A generation of young artists, responding
to the stern-faced achievement of Minimalism but also looking back to the
spontaneity of Abstract Expressionism and Surrealism, set about dismantling
sculpture and rethinking the medium, sometimes literally, from the ground up.

Their dismantlings are visible in profusion at the Whitney. The show, organized
by Richard Armstrong and Richard Marshall, is laid out in chronological order,
with works dating from 1965 to 1969 on the museum's second floor and works
dating from 1970 to 1975 on its fourth. The exhibition opens with a gallery
devoted to the early ''eccentric abstractions'' of Mr. Nauman, Mr. Tuttle and
Ms. Hesse, whose death in 1970 at the age of 34 robbed Post-Minimalism of one of
its strongest talents. It winds to a close with the tiny cast-iron chairs and
houses of Joel Shapiro, which point toward the widespread emphasis on images in
the art of the late 70's and 80's.

At times, the sculpture is so crowded that the show looks like an argument for
the museum's much-debated new wing; it certainly ignores the greater premium
these artists placed on space. But even the overcrowding has benefits, conveying
a bit of the spontaneous combustion that personified the period itself. The
result is an extensive, if by no means complete, portrait of an art movement,
one that brings together major and minor works, central ideas and tangential
offshoots, rich possibilities and dead ends, in a way that is instructive in
thinking about any period.

In this show, the art proceeds in a series of aberrant distortions or
exaggerations by which one sculptural aspect is emphasized to the exclusion of
most others. Traditional techniques like welding and casting were largely
disdained; the materials of choice were usually flexible and eccentric, easily
scattered, piled or poured onto the floor, or leaned against the wall. As
demonstrated five times here, sculptures that fit one way or another in corners
were virtually de rigueur, a trend within a trend.

As a whole, this show suggests that an unusual combination of purity and
perversity may be this generation's connecting link. For Richard Serra,
sculptural form had to be completely solid - as in his 1967 ''Chunk,'' a hefty
piece of vulcanized rubber that leans against the wall - or else visibly
temporary. His 1969 ''One Ton Prop (House of Cards)'' consists of four
four-foot-square lead plates that lean against one another, forming a precarious
cube.

For Mr. Nauman, sculpture was most often about the body - his or the viewer's -
albeit in a roundabout way. The double steel-mesh structure of his 1974 ''Double
Steel Cage'' allows one to squeeze into a narrow strip of space and feel
momentarily trapped - at once within and yet shut out from the kind of enormous
spatial volume that has traditionally been sculpture's purview.

In Mr. Nauman's earlier work, a near-perfect balance between form and title,
that is, between material and idea, was important, too. His 1966 ''Wax
Impressions of the Knees of Five Famous Artists'' is nothing but a quintet of
rather familiar indentions in a rather luscious piece of ivory-colored
Fiberglas. It pokes fun at the art-world obsession with greatness and at
artists' obsession with themselves, and can make us laugh out loud. But it is
also sweetly reverent, in a Medieval sense, as if the indentions got there by
artists kneeling again and again, praying for fame.

In her wax reliefs and poured latex floor piece, Lynda Benglis proposed
sculpture almost entirely as a matter of pure color, color that has a frozen
liquidity. For Barry Le Va, whose scatter pieces mix rolls, strips and particles
of felt with ball bearings or shards of glass, sculpture is a matter of texture
and horizontality - a field of seemingly random incidents spread out at the
viewer's feet. For Keith Sonnier, sculpture might be an optical environment,
made by combining powdered pigment on sheets of glass in a room illuminated only
by black neon lights; or it might be a matter of pure sound emanating from a
series of radios tuned to different CB channels.

The strongest artists here are Mr. Nauman and Mr. Serra, whose developments
dominate both floors. Certain artists, especially Mr. Le Va, have gone on to
make stronger, more visually engaging work since the mid-70's, as is amply
demonstrated by his current retrospective at the Neuberger Museum in Purchase,
N.Y. (through March 25). Other artists, especially Mr. Sonnier, Mr. Saret and
Ms. Benglis, may have been pushed to do some of their strongest work in the
ferment of this period, but today their art, while often quite beautiful,
suffers from its one-dimensional reliance on materials.

In two weeks, the exhibition will be supplemented by an extensive program of
films and videos made by some of these artists and others from their generation
that will further an understanding of the period. Mr. Armstrong and Mr. Marshall
have also edited a thick square catalogue that offers a marvelous chronology,
integrating reproductions of individual works with installation photographs of
various Process Art exhibitions and reviews and articles written at the time.
The catalogue lacks a single overreaching essay that takes advantage of a
quarter-century's hindsight to rethink the meaning of this work, but it will
serve as an indispensable handbook to the period. In tandem with the show, the
catalogue clocks the birth of an art movement with exceptional vividness. It was
a time when artists set out to shorten the distance between themselves and their
artworks, on one hand, and, on the other, between the viewer and the artwork -
and in many ways they succeeded.

''The New Sculpture 1965-75: Between Geometry and Gesture'' remains at the
Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, through June
3 (the second-floor section of the show closes May 20).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos: ''Double Steel Cage,'' 1974, by Bruce Nauman, at the Whitney
Museum of American Art. (The New York Times/Eddie Hausner) (pg. C1); ''Tori,''
foreground, and ''Sans II,'' works by Eva Hesse, at the Whitney Museum of
American Art. (The New York Times/Eddie Hausner) (pg. C28)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Glimpse Behind The Bamboo Curtain

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF; NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF is the chief of The New York
Times bureau in Beijing.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 25, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2970 words


AS the mists rise each morning, the calm and graceful Nam Khan River in northern
Laos slowly takes shape, ornamented with saffron-robed Buddhist monks on the
banks and naked children swimming in the middle, and destined a few hundred
yards later to end its journey in the embrace of the larger, ever-churning
Mekong River. Above the confluence of these two rivers, the town of Luang
Prabang sheds its sleep: peasants lug their vegetables to the village market,
novice monks begin sweeping the temples and bicycles fill the dirt streets as
the people go to market to buy and sell everything from papayas to owls.

Only about 20,000 people live in Luang Prabang today, but it remains much as it
was when it was the royal capital of Laos hundreds of years ago, before the
French colonialists arrived. There are no television antennas here, but there is
an agrarian charm as well as an extravagant royal palace and scores of temples
and pagodas that dominate the town and the daily life of the residents.

Luang Prabang and other Laotian towns are becoming more accessible to
Westerners, as the bamboo curtain gradually goes the way of the Iron Curtain. It
is not easy (getting a visa can be a challenge in itself), but ordinary tourists
can now visit remote and landlocked Laos for the first time since the Communist
revolution of 1975. Visitors who seek glimpses of traditional Asia may visit
Laos and in particular clamber into the small propeller plane that takes off
several times a week from the Laotian capital, Vientiane, to Luang Prabang.

While Vientiane may be one of the most absurd capitals in the world - the author
Paul Theroux described it, in pre-Communist days, as a place where ''the
brothels are cleaner than the hotels, marijuana is cheaper than pipe tobacco,
and opium easier to find than a cold glass of beer'' - it still is a capital and
has such pretensions to modernism as Western restaurants and televisions and a
diplomatic community. Luang Prabang, on the other hand, is one of the most
authentic windows left on Asia as it used to be. Even more than Myanmar,
formerly Burma, it has been preserved by neglect and by isolation, left in a
charming if frustrating milieu in which nothing works but it doesn't really
matter much.

More an overgrown village than a city, Luang Prabang sprawls along the river
banks, its size disguised by the rolling landscape and the ubiquitous trees.
Dirt and paved roads meander along, connecting temples and clusters of one-story
homes and huts, as people stroll or bicycle about. There are a few cars and
trucks, and a fair number of motorcycles, but legs remain the main form of
transport. The men wear Western clothes, and wear them rather casually, but the
women mostly wear traditional Lao skirts, usually with an elegant silver belt
buckle. A few members of ethnic minorities, such as Thai, Yao and Miao, wear
their own traditional clothing, including colorful headdresses.

Most of the town is not so much sleepy as it is asleep, but the central area
bustles with market activity. Peasants carry baskets of produce on their
shoulders and jostle with women hoping to buy an owl to eat or with rich
entrepreneurs looking for a videocassette to buy. There is no television
reception, but a few wealthy homes have video players to while away the time.
One of the popular video heroes is Rambo, and no one seems to hold it against
him that he is an anti-Communist who dispatches large numbers of people from
this part of the world.

Foreigners inevitably attract attention, particularly from children, but usually
locals believe that any foreigner not in a group must be a Russian. Few Laotians
speak any foreign language, but they are exceedingly friendly. When my wife and
I visited Laos for a week in December, we stumbled upon a family feast in a
village on the outskirts of Luang Prabang, and we were promptly invited to join
in. A few toasts with local wine left us reeling, only partly at the realization
that the dozens of revelers were all sharing the same glasses and nobody was
bothering to wash them between rounds.

Yet perhaps the best example of the mellow attitude is the check-in time for
departing flights at the pasture that doubles as Luang Prabang airport.

''Just wait until you hear the incoming plane approaching in the air,'' a tour
guide explained to me. ''Then hurry to the airstrip and get on the plane. That's
how it's done here.'' Sure enough, on the day we were to go, we waited at our
hotel until there was a whine overhead, and still arrived at the airport in
plenty of time.

Laos remains one of the most mysterious and least-traveled countries in the
world, so isolated that until a few years ago most Laotians were not even
allowed to send mail abroad. Only about 1,600 tourists visited Laos last year,
most of them West Germans on package tours or Soviets looking for sunshine, or
assorted adventurers from France, Australia and the United States. The
Government aims to attract 3,000 tourists this year, and plans are under way for
new hotels to accommodate the tourists of the 90's.

While most expenses are minimal by international standards (as are services and
facilities), the Government is eager for the hard currency that tourists bring.
The eagerness for more tourism is evident, but the country remains in its own
time warp and there does not seem to be any particular policy on issuing visas.
My wife, Sheryl, and I initially sought visas at the Laotian Embassy in Beijing,
but we were told that the embassy there could not issue visas and we would have
to apply to the embassy in Bangkok (other people have extracted visas from the
Laotian Embassy in Beijing). So we sent a telex to the embassy in Bangkok,
asking if we could be issued visas on arrival. A few weeks later the Bangkok
Embassy telexed us to say that visas would be issued as we requested. By the
time we arrived in Bangkok, the embassy staff seemed to have lost any record of
us, but they granted us visas when we flourished the telex they had sent us. We
had indicated we were journalists traveling on vacation, and we never figured
out if we were given visas as tourists or as journalists.

Most visitors to Laos go to Luang Prabang, as it is the most exotic and
interesting city in the country, and normally one is obliged to sign up for a
package tour in Vientiane costing about $200 for three days and two nights.
Sheryl and I paid our money, but the officials refused to issue a receipt or
voucher - ''just be at the airport at 10 A.M. and somebody will meet you,'' they
said. At the airport, we met an Australian couple who constituted the rest of
our tour, but there was no sign of a tourism representative or of our air
tickets. At the last possible moment, when we were sure he had absconded with
our money, the official appeared with tickets, and we ran for the plane. When we
landed on the field outside Luang Prabang, we were - surprisingly - met by a
tourism official who appeared to expect us. However, the tourism official spoke
only Lao, and his interpreter spoke only Lao and French.

''Do you think,'' the interpreter , a delightful 20-year-old woman named Noy,
asked me, ''that if I translate to you in French, you could translate into
English for the others? And so my execrable French was harnessed, behind her
almost equally limited French, to explain to the four of us the joys of Luang
Prabang.

When the Lanexang Kingdom was founded in present-day Laos in the 14th century,
Luang Prabang was made the capital. In its heyday it had close connections with
neighboring kingdoms in Cambodia and Thailand. But since 1560, when Vientiane
became the capital, Luang Prabang has lost its political clout. In the last few
hundred years it has been variously the capital of a subordinate royal kingdom,
the Laotian royal capital parallel to the political capital in Vientiane, and,
lately, a mere provincial city again.

Legend has it that the town was founded by two hermits who were attracted by
Mount Phousi, a jutting mountain that overlooks the town and the confluence of
the two rivers. The mountain is still well worth a visit, for although it is a
steep 30-minute climb it offers a splendid view of the Mekong and Nam Khan
rivers and the countryside. A bit more than halfway up there is a shrine in a
hillside cavern that contains a few Buddhas and offerings. It makes a nice
resting point.

At the foot of Mount Phousi is the grand estate of the old Royal Palace, which
housed the royal family until the Communist revolution. Surrounded by gardens,
the colonial-style palace is surprisingly plush: a reduced version of Versailles
with a Laotian accent. Built in the 1920's, the palace has a front wing that is
cluttered with assorted gifts from foreign leaders, including a bit of moon rock
from the United States. The high point is the throne room in the center: a
gorgeous hall of red with gold trim, with colored glass pieced together to form
mosaics.

A copy of the prabang, the gilt bronze Buddha that lent its name to the city, is
in the palace, while the original is locked away in the national bank. The
original prabang was cast in Sri Lanka more than 1,000 years ago and then taken
to Cambodia, before it was given to a Laotian prince in the 15th century.

Walk in any direction from the palace, and you quickly find a Buddhist temple.
Communism has not dampened the faith, and even the national leaders are devout
Buddhists. Luang Prabang is the Buddhist capital of Laos, and a new temple is
found on every block.

The most elegant Buddhist compound may be Wat Xieng Thong, a monastery built in
1561 and formerly the site of coronations. The style of the buildings, with
roofs that fall steeply almost to the ground, is characteristic of Luang
Prabang. Be sure to visit the chapel of the funerary vehicle, housing the long
wagon used to carry the body of the deceased king. The wagon is beautifully
carved with scenes from the Ramayana epic and is decorated with gold leaf.

Most of the other temples are much more recent, partly because the city was
periodically sacked and plundered, but it is well worth spending a day walking
around exploring the temples and photographing the monks as they beat their
gongs and pray. Among the most interesting are Wat Visoun, now a museum with
Buddhas and other relics; Wat May, with spectacular carved doors, and Wat
Manorom, home to a 12-ton bronze Buddha from the 14th century. Markets are
always a fascinating window into third world life, and Luang Prabang's is no
exception. The large covered market is full of young and middle-aged women
selling their wares, ranging from mangos to Thai shampoo, from owls to dead rats
- the owls and rats both in the food section.

Because of its location, Luang Prabang is full of fishermen and boatmen who can
arrange river trips. As part of our package to Luang Prabang, we took a small
motorboat for a day trip up the Mekong. Accompanied by two boatmen, a cook, a
guide and a translator, we headed north toward China and the Golden Triangle,
where the borders of Thailand, Laos and Burma come together. Luang Prabang is
within 150 miles of not only China, but also Thailand, Vietnam and Burma as
well, although our excursion didn't take us as far as any border.

Boating up the river, surrounded by quiet jungle on either side, occasionally
passing Lao fishermen in their boats, was the high point of our visit. The
Mekong is a remarkable river, for the surface is constantly boiling and
churning, for no apparent reason. The roiling waters added to the sense of
mystery as we boated upriver, past the carcasses of old American military boats
from war days, now beached on the shore like dead whales. The river gradually
narrowed as we moved north, and we watched the encroaching shores for signs of
life but rarely saw any.

After a couple of hours, however, we stopped at a small village on the east bank
where the boat captain wanted to buy a jug of the local liquor. The villagers
are famous for their fiery liquor, which as far as I could tell had more kick
than taste. Several hundred people seemed to live in the huts scattered among
the jungle, and barefoot children chased after us with enormous enthusiasm. Like
any place in Laos, the village had a small temple, which was tended by an aging
monk who showed us how to pound the drum to summon the villagers to the temple.

We spent an hour or so roaming the village and taking photos, and we caused a
minor sensation when we expressed interest in buying an old Chinese vase
unearthed in the area. The villagers immediately came running up to us with old
pottery, most likely taken from the trash heaps. After taking off again, we
continued north up the narrowing river for another two hours, until we reached
the Pak Ou caves on the west bank. The grottos have become a shrine and now are
filled with Buddhas of various quality and epochs. Most are modern, and none are
extraordinarily distinguished by craftsmanship, but collectively they are
impressive in the deep gloom of the cave.

We had a picnic lunch at the Pak Ou grottos, but the food, unfortunately, was
authentic Lao, which is to say not very good. Lao food is built around rather
tasteless gobs of sticky rice, and it is even less appetizing after it has been
shaped by other people's unwashed hands before reaching one's mouth.

In the afternoon, after going a bit farther upstream, we finally turned around
and flowed with the current back to Luang Prabang. The jungle was as mysterious
and impenetrable as ever, but the sun danced on the water and the river bubbled
and boiled, and as we leaned back against the hull we brimmed with contentment.

VISAS, HOTELS AND AIR FARES

Arrangements

The first challenge is getting a visa. The Laotian Embassy in Washington (2222 S
Street N.W., Washington D.C. 20008; telephone 202-332-6416) sometimes gives
tourist visas, though not according to any obvious pattern, and the same is true
of the embassies in Bangkok, Beijing and Canberra, Australia. The most
experienced in giving visas is the embassy in Bangkok, so if you cannot get one
at any other place it is worth sending a telex (82192 LAOEMB TH) giving names
and passport numbers and a date when you will be in Bangkok and would like to
pick it up.

Travel agents generally throw up their hands at the mention of Laos, but some
can arrange tours through Thailand's Diethelm Travel, which has extensive
experience in Laos and Vietnam. Diethelm's address is Kian Gwan Building II,
140/1 Wireless Road, Bangkok 10500, Thailand; 255-9150, fax 256-0248. There are
a couple of agencies in North America that can be useful: Travel Corporation of
America, Post Office Box 2630, Newport Beach, Calif., 92658-2630; 800-992-2003
and 800-992-2004 in California; also H.M.C. Travel, 4066 Drummond Road, Niagara
Falls, Ontario, Canada L2E 6B9; 416-356-3381.

One disadvantage of individual travel is that it is normally impossible to make
any reservations till you have arrived in Laos. On the other hand, while a
prepaid tour package is supposed to handle such things, it may not. In Vientiane
we encountered a Minnesotan who had paid a large sum in Bangkok for his tour but
found, on his arrival in Laos, that no one knew he was coming.

Ask about registering with the police when you arrive. We were never told we had
to register, but when we were at the airport trying to leave the country the
authorities fined us because we had neglected to do so. We protested and after
some negotiations were allowed to board our plane after paying a $30 fine for
the two of us.

All expenses in Laos, including hotel bills and air tickets, must normally be
paid for in cash, with either American dollars or Thai baht, so it is wise to
wear a money belt filled with $100 bills to cover expenses en route. Traveler's
checks are not normally accepted.

Getting There

Most visitors reach Laos by air, traveling from Bangkok to Vientiane on humble
little Lao Aviation propeller planes that are hidden in a distant corner of the
Bangkok Airport. The journey takes 90 minutes. The price of the flight is just
$83 each way. Lao Aviation flies four times a week; Thai Airways flies twice a
week.

After arriving in Vientiane, there are in theory daily flights to Luang Prabang,
but in practice they do not all materialize. Foreigners are not normally allowed
to buy a ticket directly to Luang Prabang (a pity, since the one-way fare is
only $33), but should buy a package from the tourist office that includes
round-trip ticket, two nights in a hotel in Luang Prabang, meals and guided
tours of the area. Any hotel can direct you to the tourism office, in the
northeast part of Vientiane.

The basic cost of the package is $200 a person, based on accommodation at the
Phousi Hotel, but it is a bit more at the somewhat nicer Luang Prabang Hotel.

Hotels

The best hotel in Vientiane is the Lanexang Hotel, and in theory it is possible
to reserve in writing (Post Office Box 280, Vientiane, Laos; telephone 3672). A
double room is $46 a night plus a 5 percent service charge. If the Lanexang is
full, try the new Ambassador Hotel (Prang-Kham Road, Khampaengnakorn, Vientiane,
Laos; 4144), which is $30 for a double.

Restaurants

Most hotels offer principally French food. Indeed, Vientiane has some excellent
French restaurants, such as Le Souriya on Rue Pangkham, where a substantial
three-course meal for two costs $15 or less. Wine, beer and soft drinks are
typically available; water that has not been boiled should be avoided. Malaria
tablets can be obtained from a physician in the United States or at a Bangkok
pharmacy.

Information

It may be worth checking with the United States Embassy in Vientiane (telephone
3570) on the security situation before going upcountry.    - N. D. K.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The main temple building of Wat Xieng Thong, Luang Prabang. Its
architectural style is characteristic of the city; Carved doors at Wat May,
Luang Prabang. The carvings at this temple are some of the finest in Laos; A
family group prepares food on the outskirts of Luang Prabang, which remains much
as it was hundreds of years ago (pg. 25); A villager along the east bank of the
Mekong River. (pg. 45) (Nicholas D. Kristof)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Remember Panama?

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 294 words


Most Americans over age 10 still remember those dramatic televised reports. It
was only 12 weeks ago that U.S. troops invaded Panama, in the largest military
operation since the Vietnam War. President Bush's political stock soared when
the assault brought the capture and removal to Miami of Gen. Manuel Antonio
Noriega, Panama's fallen strongman.

But 12 weeks can be a long time if you're trying to hold together a country
whose army and police force have been shattered, and whose economy has been
devastated by two years of U.S. sanctions and then a billion dollars of war
damage.

Such is the crisis that now presses on President Guillermo Endara's new
Government. Not surprisingly, Mr. Endara hopes that Washington will quickly
approve promised aid and that funds in formerly blocked accounts will soon
become available. But Mr. Bush's $500 million Panama aid package is meandering
through Congress. Emergency funds are only now dribbling through the
bureaucratic pipeline. A cumbersome process involving claims and counterclaims
stalls release of back taxes owed to Panama by U.S. companies.

Meanwhile, Panama's 30 percent unemployment rate makes the Endara Government
reluctant to pare down its reconstituted military force. Yet the presence of
thousands of re-enlisted Noriega veterans could one day imperil democratic rule.
Moreover, the force's unreliability prolongs the awkward role of American troops
as a backstop for police operations on Panamanian soil.

Economic problems also make it harder for the Endara Government to consolidate
popular support and renew its mandate with a fresh presidential vote.
Panamanians who cheered U.S. troops last December never imagined that Washington
could forget their desperate plight by March. Has it?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IDEAS & TRENDS;
Advocates' Tactics on AIDS Issues Provoking Warnings of a Backlash

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 854 words


SOONER or later, anyone whose work involves issues related to AIDS could
encounter the militant tactics of the group called Act-Up. For some scientists
and Federal officials, it happened last August at a public meeting of the Food
and Drug Administration in Washington.

Larry Kramer, a New York playwright, took the floor. ''I helped found Gay Men's
Health Crisis and watched them turn into a sad organization of sissies,'' he
said. ''I founded Act-Up and have watched them change the world.''

Then, in a speech larded with obscenities, came the threats. Mr. Kramer demanded
that people with AIDS be allowed to take experimental drugs ''with as few
strings attached as humanly possible'' while the drugs are being tested.

''If we do not get these drugs, you will see an uprising the like of which you
have never seen before since the Vietnam War in this country. We will sabotage
all of your Phase II studies,'' Mr. Kramer said, referring to the clinical
trials required to test a drug's efficacy. ''Our chemists will duplicate your
formulas.''

Scientists were shocked, said Dr. Paul Meier, a statistician from the University
of Chicago who attended the meeting. Yet Act-Up, the acronym for the AIDS
Coalition to Unleash Power, got its way: The F.D.A. decided to allow drug
companies to distribute experimental drugs to AIDS patients while the drugs were
in clinical trials.

''My impression was that the administrators at that meeting were afraid of
Act-Up and were taking a position to avoid being attacked by them rather than in
the best interests of science,'' Dr. Meier said. ''I find that very
distressing.''

Act-Up, a loosely organized group of AIDS patients and their advocates that
formed in 1987, represents a new element in American science. And its tactics
are causing concern among researchers, government officials, journalists and
others whose work touches on the AIDS problem.

Many scientists say they fear that the immediate gains made by Act-Up will come
at the expense of long-term AIDS research, and will alienate scientists or even
drive them from the field.

''There never was a politically savvy group of sick people before,'' said George
Annas, director of the Law, Medicine and Ethics Program at the Boston University
School of Public Health.

Mr. Annas said that other groups, like cancer patients, ''have never been very
effective'' because ''other than their cancer they don't have anything in
common.'' The gay community, however, has a cohesiveness and a body of experts
in politics, press relations, advertising and law that it deploys to fight for
its agenda.

Mark Harrington, an Act-Up member who said he disagreed with some of Mr.
Kramer's threats, said researchers and administrators ''should be afraid of our
power.''

''The rapidity with which the F.D.A. has changed is a testament to our power,''
he added. ''That's what we intend to do now for the research process itself -
speed it up. It's time for the community to help call the shots.''

Mr. Kramer predicted that the threats and demonstrations will intensify. In this
week's issue of Outweek, a magazine intended for a homosexual readership, he
called for riots at the international AIDS meeting in San Francisco this June.

Government officials and scientists have been harassed when they disagreed with
some of the group's proposals. Jerome Groopman, an AIDS researcher at the New
England Deaconess Hospital, said that when he and Martin Hirsch, a researcher at
Harvard Medical School, gave a lecture two years ago on the AIDS drug AZT,
Act-Up members disrupted the presentation, calling Dr. Hirsch a Nazi for
promoting AZT.

The group now believes that the drug is helpful in slowing the progress of the
disease.

Dr. Groopman said he thinks there is ''nothing wrong with pressure and
gadflies,'' but he believes that Act-Up often goes too far, especially when it
attacks the motives of those ''who genuinely want to develop effective drugs
against AIDS.''

Journalists have also felt Act-Up's wrath. After John Leo, a columnist for U.S.
News & World Report, called Act-Up a ''gangster group,'' he received phone calls
in the middle of the night.

Last November, an article by this reporter in The New York Times quoted
scientists who criticized the F.D.A. for approving the program at the meeting
last August. Soon after, Act-Up members went into action: phone calls to the
office, letters to The Times and to reporters nationwide, challenging not only
the accuracy of the article but also the competency of the writer. Christmas
cards arrived at home, several hundred of them, with such messages as:

''Your misuse of the press to misinform the public is most dangerous.''

Even so, the day-to-day business between reporter and sources at Act-Up goes on
pretty much as before.

In the end, the vitriolic attacks and threats can be counterproductive, Dr.
Groopman said. ''I think they're reaching a point of diminishing returns,'' he
said. ''The concern that many of us have had is that they are so alienating, so
disruptive, that people might leave the field. And if it occurs, it would be
extremely unfortunate.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Larry Kramer, a leader of Act-Up (The New York Times/Chester
Higgins); members of the group demonstrating outside New York City Hall last
year (The New York Times/Sara Krulwich)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Students' Problems Tied to Society's Ills

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 21, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 328 words


The letters in today's Long Island section [Feb. 18] will suggest to some that
lack of dedication on the part of teachers is the reason student performance is
so poor.

It is certainly true that there are many teachers who coast along in their jobs,
including, for example, English teachers who do not assign compositions to
develop writing skills, or do not correct spelling errors if they do collect
compositions from their students. Teachers, like everyone else, are not immune
to the influence of the society in which they live, and today that society
stresses materialist values (as ''tax revolts'' demonstrate) and a basic
philosophy of ''Look out for No. 1.''

Teachers who do try hard to educate are likely to end up burned out from
frustration, particularly if they teach difficult subjects like mathematics and
the sciences. All teachers over the last 35 years have been forced to protect
their jobs and their ability to accomplish some education by a continuous
watering down of curriculum, tests and examinations. Albany has approved this by
allowing the use of more multiple-choice questions in Regents examinations and
so on.

Parents' use of television as a baby sitter and a substitute for parent-child
involvement, the breakdown of the American family, the lack of a national vision
and of leaders who appeal to youth, the crushing of the youth movement in the
1960's by political party hacks, the Vietnam War, the narcotics and alcohol
plague, the pressures for early sex, and other factors have given us children
with low self-esteem and no dreams of achievement tied to a better America.

A few teachers who are highly gifted and exceptionally dedicated can salvage
part, but not all, of the seemingly hopeless psychologically damaged students.
It is deceptive to point to their success as something generally possible.
Society itself must change to restore good results with average teachers.

FREDERICK S. LIGHTFOOT
  Greenport

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWSPAPER COLUMNISTS: LITERATURE BY THE INCH

BYLINE: By KARL E. MEYER; Karl E. Meyer is a member of the editorial board of
The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3406 words


Pick up a newspaper anywhere in the United States and you will be addressed by
insistent strangers known generically as columnists because each occupies, more
or less, a column of newsprint. The term also has an apt association with the
I-shaped pillar from which the columnist can harangue the populace - like St.
Simeon Stylites of Syria, who spent 30 years preaching from the top of a column
in the fifth century. He has come to be the patron of an unruly calling.

Some columnists are local institutions, a few so popular that they are said to
own their cities. Many more are syndicated, so that if you travel around the
country their eyes seem to follow you from passport-style photographs used to
relieve the grayness of Op-Ed pages.

Though the form is common, its pedigree is awesome. Mark Twain and Ambrose
Bierce ascended from the column, as did H. L. Mencken and Ring Lardner. Mr.
Dooley's dialogues, the Uncle Remus tales and George Ade's ''Fables in Slang''
were cradled in newsprint, as was the verse laboriously typed by the cockroach
Archy in Don Marquis's cubicle at the old New York Sun. But in our more prosaic
age, the most influential practitioners deal with what E. B. White, an
occasional columnist, called the political pickle.

Judgments differ on how much influence senior columnists wield. In 1975, when he
himself was still a Washington columnist, Marquis Childs guessed that James
Reston of The New York Times had roughly the power of three United States
Senators. Three seems a lot. Still, a columnist of rank like Mr. Reston enjoys
an obvious advantage over a Senator. Members of Congress are elected; columnists
are more like life peers in Britain's House of Lords. This helps explain the
resentment on the part of successive Presidents over the need to placate these
potentates; there is no two-term limit for a Scotty Reston.

Of modern Presidents, none was more transfixed by columnists than Lyndon Baines
Johnson. He courted them incorrigibly with lavish flattery and
shoulder-squeezing bonhomie. Once, during a White House news session, he saw
Walter Lippmann in the throng; rushing over and grasping him, the President all
but shouted: ''This man here is the greatest journalist in the world, and he's a
friend of mine!'' That was in early 1964, when a good many people would have
agreed with Johnson. Lippmann had been sought out by nearly every President
since Theodore Roosevelt; he was but 26 years old when he drafted Woodrow
Wilson's famous Fourteen Points. In 1958, Nikita Khrushchev invited the
columnist and his wife, Helen, to a hunting lodge in the Soviet Urals to discuss
ways of thawing the cold war (the phrase was introduced by Lippmann). ''Today
and Tomorrow,'' Lippmann's column, appeared three times a week in more than 200
newspapers, and by common consent his lucid treatises were read and pondered by
an influential elite no President could ignore. In his years at the pinnacle, he
was interviewed annually by CBS television, an eminence accorded to no other
journalist, before or since. In his reckoning of columnists, Marquis Childs
described Lippmann as Supreme Pontiff.

Alas, the honeymoon ended badly. That any journalist might differ purely on the
merits with his policies was a notion Johnson never seriously entertained. He
had courted Lippmann's support ardently, attending the columnist's 75th-birthday
party and instructing his aides to show him drafts of forthcoming Presidential
speeches. But Lippmann was a sphere-of-influence conservative who at first
doubted, then dissented from, the Administration belief that vital United States
interests were at risk in Vietnam. As ''Today and Tomorrow'' became increasingly
critical, the President became testier, to the point of having his staff comb
through old columns in quest of blunders by the Supreme Pontiff - these were
then maliciously read aloud at White House dinner parties. By this time, the
White House was scoffing that Lippmann had reverted to isolationism, prompting
an impassioned reply, ex cathedra, that conveys something of Lippmann's grand
manner:

''A mature great power will make measured and limited use of its power. It will
eschew the theory of a global and universal duty which not only commits it to
unending wars of intervention but intoxicates its thinking with the illusion
that it is a crusader for righteousness, that each war is a war to end all war.
Since in this generation we have become a great power, I am in favor of learning
to behave like a great power, of getting rid of the globalism which would not
only entangle us everywhere but is based on the totally vain notion that if we
do not set the world in order, no matter what the price, we cannot live in the
world safely. If we examine this idea thoroughly, we shall see that it is
nothing but the old isolationism of our innocence in a new form. Then we thought
we had to preserve our purity by withdrawal from the ugliness of great power
politics. Now we sometimes talk as if we could preserve our purity only by
policing the globe.''

As such admonitions became more insistent, communications ceased between
President and Pontiff, and soon senior officials boycotted social events at
which Lippmann might be present. On May 25, 1967, Lippmann wrote his farewell
column, explaining that after 36 years of ''Today and Tomorrow'' he no longer
felt the need to find out ''what the blood pressure is at the White House, and
who said what and saw who and who is listened to and who is not listened to.''
Two days later, the Lippmanns sailed for Europe, departing permanently from a
capital that had grown too small for a columnist and a President. The point of
the story is that it could have occurred in no other country. Where else does
any chief of state care that much about the judgment of a journalist? And Walter
Lippmann was scarcely an isolated case; there was also his longtime rival,
Joseph Alsop.

The Indochina war that Lippmann opposed Alsop supported, indeed even helped
start by hectoring successive administrations to take up France's burden after
the fall of Dien Bien Phu in 1954. Lippmann and Alsop appeared on alternate days
in The Washington Post, and their clash provided something like the continuing
duel between Government and Opposition benches in the House of Commons. But
Alsop had an insider's advantage: he was the good friend and Georgetown neighbor
of John F. Kennedy, on whom he had a profound influence. A firm believer in
global policing, Alsop became certain in the late 1950's that a deadly ''missile
gap'' was widening, and that the United States was lagging perilously behind the
Soviet Union in the production of intercontinental ballistic missiles. Kennedy
seized on the issue, and brushed aside President Dwight D. Eisenhower's
protestations that the ''gap'' was grievously overstated. When Kennedy became
President in 1961, he found that Ike was right. It made no difference. The new
Administration proposed and won approval for the biggest peacetime increase up
to that time in defense spending, thereby propelling an arms race that came to
feed on itself without journalistic assistance. It is true that Alsop was not
alone in pressing the missile issue on Kennedy, but the columnist knew better
than others how to get under a politician's skin by turning a strategic argument
into a test of manhood. Lyndon Johnson was once heard to murmur as he ordered
50,000 more troops to Vietnam, ''There, that should keep Joe Alsop quiet for a
while.''

Alsop's younger brother Stewart exerted a different kind of influence, less that
of a public philosopher or needling debater than of a shrewd family lawyer
dispensing good sense. Stewart Alsop initially teamed up with Joseph when the
Alsops launched ''Matter of Fact'' in 1946, then parted a decade later and
eventually conducted his own column in Newsweek, occupying the pulpit that had
been created for Lippmann in 1962. In a turbulent era, he had the knack of
catching a mood and guessing what it meant with ''but-of-course'' reasoning.
During Watergate, he came up with a sound explanation for the strange behavior
of those embroiled in the scandal: ''My theory derives from the peculiar
relationship between two minority categories in the human race - the crazy-brave
and the phony-tough. Most people who have been in a war, and a lot of people who
haven't, have come across specimens of both breeds. The crazy-brave, who are a
lot rarer than the phony-tough, are always doing crazy things that ought to get
them killed, or at least maimed, but nothing seems to happen to them. They also
exercise a kind of hex or double whammy on the phony-tough, and they keep
getting the phony-tough into terrible trouble.''

The Watergate crazy-brave was G. Gordon Liddy, who offered to kill himself when
the break-in misfired, and who once threatened to kill a wide-eyed Jeb Stuart
Magruder if his hand was not instantly taken from Liddy's shoulder. Thus,
Stewart Alsop reasoned, the phony-toughs who dominated the Nixon White House
were too smart to give an unambiguous green light to the harebrained idea of
breaking into Democratic headquarters, but were too craven to stand up to the
crazy-brave. Similarly, Lieut. Col. Oliver North was the crazy-brave Marine
years later who hexed his phony-tough White House superiors during the
Iran-contra affair - or so theorized two professors who had clipped and saved
the Alsop column and quoted its argument in a Washington Post Op-Ed article that
began: ''One of the enduring frustrations of journalism is the short half-life
of the column, with the result that insights provided by the occasional
exceptional column are eventually lost to future generations.''

I understood their lament. My father, Ernest L. Meyer, wrote a column six days a
week for 15 years, first for The Capital Times of Madison, Wis., then for The
New York Post. In Wisconsin, my father was telegraph editor as well, and wrote
his daily piece after locking up the final afternoon edition. He used a copy
pencil for a longhand draft, then typed hunt-and-peck to exact space. He did
something different every day, mixing commentary with light verse, parodies or
recollections of his boyhood in Milwaukee, his first newspaper job (in Warden,
Wash., for $4 a week plus board), his student years at the state university or
whatever. Wherever he went, the column went along: on European trips, summers in
Cape Cod, visits to Washington or Hollywood or with Frank Lloyd Wright at
Taliesin. Like many other columnists, he delighted in exploiting his wife and
progeny - myself, my brother Leonard and sister Susan - as walk-on extras whose
prattling provided the ever-essential ''peg.''

After my father died in 1952, I came into possession of his scrapbooks, the
potter's field of journalism. Some years later, having made my own way into the
same business, I went carefully through these scrapbooks, better able to judge
the skill and stamina that went into writing a fixed quota of literate prose
every day, with no time allowed for indisposition. And it saddened me, not just
on my father's account, to reflect how much first-rate work vanished into the
common dustbin.

So I decided to attempt an anthology. My first surprise was the sheer number of
columnists. By my reckoning, the feature syndicates and major newspapers
distribute the offerings of 200 columnists, most of them writing two or three
times a week. Then there are the local columnists - light essayists,
gossipmongers, specialized writers on chess or cooking, sports columnists,
cracker-barrel wits, political pundits or whatever - on 1,700 daily newspapers,
2,400 weeklies, 14,000 newsletters, 4,700 magazines, 3,000 specialized
international publications, 900 ethnic and foreign-language periodicals, and
nobody knows how many student newspapers, daily and weekly. In America, it is
fair to say, at least 15,000 columnists compose short signed articles at regular
intervals - a truly vast garrulous army feeding on the depleting forests of
Canada.

Its ranks have been swelled by exalted political figures. The two Presidential
Roosevelts, Calvin Coolidge, Barry Goldwater and Ronald Reagan have this much in
common with Eleanor Roosevelt, Jeane Kirkpatrick, Fiorello La Guardia, Henry
Wallace, Harold Ickes and Fighting Bob La Follette - each sought for a while to
improve the American mind through the medium of a newspaper or magazine column
(in Mrs. Roosevelt's case, she did both simultaneously, writing for the
Scripps-Howard newspapers and Woman's Home Companion).

Interestingly, the column continues to flourish, notwithstanding the supposed
decline of the print medium and the rise of electronic journalism. Television,
if anything, has given syndicated columnists more influence, plus a celebrity
status useful in commanding vast speaking fees. During the reign of radio,
Walter Winchell and Drew Pearson hawked their revelations on weekly broadcasts,
and Franklin Pierce Adams enjoyed an autumnal renown as a panelist on
''Information, Please,'' an early-day quiz program stressing wit more than
prizes. But this only feebly adumbrated the star status of columnists who,
beginning in the 1970's, became fixtures on current-affairs talk shows: George
Will, Carl Rowan, Tom Wicker, William F. Buckley Jr., Ellen Goodman, to name a
few. Thus the shrinkage of a literate audience has been offset by the gain in
the columnist's reach and influence.

Columnists, in short, have benefited the land of the free by contributing, as
Lippmann did, to what President Bush has called ''the vision thing.'' More
commonly, they have been energetic advocates exerting influence through the
quality of their arguments and their independence from an electorate that has
learned to put up with them. They have from time to time added sparkle and sense
to the national discourse, disseminating phrases that quickly became commonplace
(''egghead,'' ''middle America,'' ''cold war''). And having been given a license
to be rude, reckless, silly and prejudiced, the columnist can in a single
effusion entertain at breakfast and after dinner provide the stuff for
postprandial argument.

Over the years, to be sure, the column's literary texture has changed. Good
light verse abounded two generations ago; even good doggerel is a rarity today.
Who today can match Ring Lardner's ear for what George Ade called ''the sweet
vernacular''? And there's nobody with the obsessive perfectionism of Don
Marquis, who crowded his ''Sun Dial'' sketches with a host of imagined
characters. ''I got to seeing that column,'' Marquis remarked ruefully, ''as a
grave, 23 inches long, into which I buried part of myself every day.''

Still, it is always the best of times and the worst of times in the world of
journalism, where golden ages tend to be embalmed in memory and unconsulted
archives. Thus E. B. White, ruminating on the excellence of Don Marquis,
declared that the newspaper column had grievously degenerated:

''In 1916 to hold a job on a daily paper, a columnist was expected to be
something of a scholar and poet, or if not a poet at least to harbor the soul of
a transmigrated poet. Nowadays, to get a columning job a man need only have the
soul of a Peep Tom or a third-rate prophet. There are plenty of loud clowns and
bad poets at work on papers today, but there are not many columnists adding to
belles lettres, and certainly there is no Don Marquis. . . . Mr. Marquis's
cockroach was more than the natural issue of a creative and humorous mind. Archy
was the child of compulsion, the stern compulsion of journalism. The compulsion
is as great today as it ever was, but is met in a different spirit. Archy used
to come back from the golden companionship of the tavern with the poet's report
of life as seen from the under side. Today's columnist returns from the platinum
companionship of the night club with a dozen pieces of watered gossip and a few
bottomless anecdotes. Archy returned carrying a heavy load of wine and dreams.
These later cockroaches come sober from their taverns, carrying a basket of
fluff.''

So it seemed to White in 1950, yet one may reasonably wonder if he did not put
his thumb on the scales. For every Don Marquis, there were a hundred third-rate
poets and insipid paragraphers. There were no political columnists with the
grace of a James Reston, the acerbity of a Murray Kempton or the craft of a
George Will. Even as the number of newspapers shrank, the boundaries of
discourse widened, so that a Miss Manners or an Anna Quindlen have been able to
write unblushingly about hitherto unmentionable matters, in and out of wedlock.
And an age rich in B's - Baker, Buchwald, Breslin, Bombeck and Buckley - may in
hindsight be seen as not entirely contemptible, perhaps even as a silver age.

In an anthology of essays compiled long ago J. B. Priestley offered an important
truth:

''To anyone with any knowledge of literary history, there is nothing more
amusing than the not infrequent complaint of critics and reviewers, who imagine
that they are standing for the dignity of letters, against the practice of
collecting contributions to the Press, essays or critical articles, and making
books of them.

''We are always led to infer that this is a new and reprehensible practice, a
mark of a degenerate age. The truth is, of course, that all the best essays in
the language have first seen the light in the periodical press. . . . The
economic influence is easy to understand. What is not so easy to understand is
the influence this periodical work has upon the essayist's attitude of mind. . .
. When a man is writing regularly in one place for one set of readers (and
nearly all the essayists were regular contributors to the Press, appearing in
the same periodical at regular intervals), he tends to lose a certain stiffness,
formality, self-consciousness, that would inevitably make its appearance if he
were writing a whole book alone.

''He comes to feel that he is among friends and can afford as it were to let
himself go, and the secret of writing a good essay is to let oneself go. . . .
It also encourages him to focus his attention upon passing little things that he
might have disdained were he not writing for the next week's paper. He is a
snapper-up of unconsidered trifles, and it is his pleasure and privilege to
glimpse the significance of such trifles, so that for a second we see them,
surprisingly, against the background of the Eternities.''

What Priestley expressed was itself a glimpse of a not-so-obvious truth about
the fruitful communion between writer and audience. There's nothing shameful
about journalism as a venue for letters. Without overstating the claims for what
is at best an uneven popular art, one can say that in the voice of the
columnists one can hear, if at times discordantly, the joyful voice of a free
people.


 This essay is adapted from the introduction to Karl E. Meyer's anthology,
''Pundits, Poets and Wits: An Omnibus of American Newspaper Columns,'' which
will be published next month.



HITLER WASN'T KIDDING

From Dorothy Thompson's ''On the Record'' column, March 15, 1939:

As anyone who reads ''Mein Kampf'' carefully . . . must see, Naziism . . . is
nothing more or less than the kernel of a movement which will theoretically come
to rest nowhere until it has established the supremacy of the Teutonic and
allied races over the earth, reducing the rest to vassalage. . . . For it now
appears that Hitler lays claim to the whole territory of the former
Austro-Hungarian Empire, in which non-Germans outnumber Germans in the ratio of
four to one. . . . He believes that this territory consists of inferior Slavs,
Magyars and other not quite white people who should be ruled by . . . the
Germans.

It is now possible to see . . . that he really means this. . . . There was
Czechoslovakia: a well-organized, on the whole prosperous, well-governed,
liberal state. . . . Since last September this state has been pulverized. . . .
Poland . . . will be, probably, the next state to be smashed. . . . There will
be a continuance of the provocation of the Polish minority in Danzig in the hope
that this will bring retaliations against Germans. . . . There will be a
mobilization on the Polish border; another ultimatum. . . . The whole of
southern and eastern Europe is in for this pulverization and plunder process.

From ''Pundits, Poets, and Wits.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

400 Honor Seegers' Folk Protests

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 407 words

DATELINE: WHITE PLAINS, March 18


The songs of a half century of political protest punctuated the stillness here
today as folk singers and friends of Pete and Toshi Seeger gathered in a
downtown neighborhood center to mark a special occasion.

It was the presentation by a regional political action group, the Westchester
People's Action Coalition, of its annual Peace and Justice award to the Seegers,
who live near Beacon, 30 miles north of here.

More than 400 guests attended, including former members of the Abraham Lincoln
Brigade in the Spanish Civil War and some who had fought for civil rights and
against the Vietnam War.

Corliss Lamont, the 88-year-old author and educator, praised the folk singer for
''using his music as a social weapon'' and said the Seegers ''should be
remembered in our history'' because ''they lived their lives so that the world's
children can see a new day.''

Partners in a Celebrated Contempt

Mr. Seeger and Mr. Lamont had been cited for contempt of Congress in refusing to
cooperate with the House Committee on Un-American Activities in the 1950's when
it was investigating Communist associations, but both were later acquitted on
appeal.

Fred Hellerman, a member of the Weavers, the singing group that included Mr.
Seeger and was blacklisted for its left-wing associations, recalled the
''gratifying times'' of their earlier years together.

Mr. Seeger began playing his 5-string banjo at union halls, in migrant labor
camps and at concerts and rallies in the 1930's. Speakers recalled his concern
for the environment. He is identified with an educational campaign using the
sloop ''Clearwater'' to try to halt pollution of the Hudson River.

Connie Hogarth, director of the Westchester coalition, referred to the Seegers
as ''two rare birds'' who she hoped would not ''become an endangered species.''
She referred to the singer as the ''Pied Piper of our times, seeking simple
justice,'' and lauded his partner of 47 years as ''a visionary with her feet
firmly planted on earth.''

Mr. Seeger, who has said his only real talent is getting people to sing with
him, ended the tribute just that way. Joined on the podium by some of his
grandchildren, he led the packed hall with the stirring message and rising
melody of ''If I Had a Hammer,'' which Mr. Seeger wrote with Lee Hays in the
1940's: ''It's the hammer of justice, it's the bell of freedom, it's the song
between my brothers and my sisters, all over this land.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Pete and Toshi Seeger with their 2-year-old granddaughter,
Moraya, as the couple received the Peace and Justice award from the Westchester
People's Action Coalition yesterday. Mr. Seeger performed ''If I Had a Hammer''
for more than 400 guests. Connie Hogarth was at right. (The New York Times/Vic
DeLucia)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
What Constitution Says vs. What Presidents Do

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 910 words



The Rockets' Red Glare
When America Goes to War
The Presidents and the People
By Richard J. Barnet
476 pages. Simon & Schuster. $24.95.

The Constitution puts it quite clearly: Only Congress has the power to declare
war. But the careful framers did not define the boundaries of war on a continent
still influenced by other powers. A separate clause in the Constitution is a
little more specific: Congress can call out the militia to suppress
insurrections and repel invasions. That language appears to confine such actions
to the defense of the United States.

In a lucid and challenging account of how Americans fought on battlefields
outside the United States during the last 150 years without constititional
sanction, Richard J. Barnet posits in ''The Rockets' Red Glare'' that Presidents
have usurped the powers of Congress. Mr. Barnet, a senior fellow at the
Institute for Policy Studies in Washington and author of several books on
military-political affairs, including ''Roots of War'' and ''Global Reach,''
writes:

''For almost every one of the 45 years since the end of World War II, Presidents
have ordered American soldiers into battle somewhere. The United States has
fought two major Asian wars, but the last time Congress met to declare war was
Dec. 8, 1941. If the President need not consult either the people or their
representatives on such life-and-death decisions for the nation, what role is
left for the people in setting the nation's course?''

Events have moved so swiftly in recent months in this hemisphere that the
invasion of Panama sanctioned by President Bush is not included in the book. But
the same point is made by the author about the military action in 1983 against
the island of Grenada in the Reagan Presidency. Mr. Barnet comments that
although the press was barred from covering Grenada, ''the comic-opera aspects
of the engagement quickly came to light.'' In his view, controlling press
coverage is one of the elements of such military actions that circumvent
Congress and blind the public.

Under Mr. Barnet's guidance, it is interesting to learn that the issue of
foreign intervention engaged the first Presidents of the republic soon after the
Revolution. For 12 years Washington and Adams kept the country out of
Continental wars; as the third President, Jefferson was determined to maintain
neutrality despite waves of public passion against England and France for
interfering with American shipping. Madison did receive Congressional approval
for the war with Britain in 1812 to free American commerce.

The country's first major foreign war, against Mexico beginning in 1846, divided
Congress along political party lines. Even the Whigs who spoke out strongly
against the war were forced by public pressure to vote appropriations for the
troops on the far side of the Rio Grande. Mr. Barnet writes: ''No previous
President had ever committed the country to a major war on his own
responsibility as James Polk did in May 1846, and none would do so again until
Harry Truman dispatched American forces to Korea in 1950 without even informal
consultation with Congress.''

The ''splendid little war'' (as Secretary of State John Hay called the
Spanish-American War) started off with a groundswell of support but ended with
the country divided. The two World Wars had general popular support and a strong
measure of idealism. The undeclared war in Vietnam divided the country almost
from its beginning; it lasted longer than both World Wars combined. The
highlights of these wars are covered by Mr. Barnet, with great emphasis on the
need for Congressional and public approval.

In ''The Rockets' Red Glare,'' covert operations are mixed together with direct
military involvement by American forces, not always in the interests of clarity.
The point of conducting proxy wars has been made more forcefully by John Prados
in ''Presidents' Secret Wars: C.I.A. and Pentagon Covert Operations From World
War II Through Iranscam.''

Anachronisms occasionally creep into Mr. Barnet's generally well-conceived
historical narrative because of his polemical tendencies. For example, writing
about press coverage and analysis in the middle of the last century, Mr. Barnet
makes note of the fact, well known to Civil War scholars, that Karl Marx was a
European correspondent for Horace Greeley's New York Tribune. He then adds that
Marx's style ''would never make it in USA Today.'' The wisecrack comes out of
left field and gives no hint about anything Marx observed from afar, with great
sympathy, about the United States.

Mr. Barnet disputes the notion that the threat of war is a specialized area of
knowledge understood only by Presidents, national security advisers and the
Pentagon. That is one of the most original arguments in ''The Rockets' Red
Glare.''

''The never-ending struggle between people seeking to influence foreign policy
and Presidents who govern by neutralizing, deflecting or co-opting public
opinion has produced seesaw rhetoric and drift in basic policy ever since the
original cold war consensus collapsed in the Vietnam War,'' Mr. Barnet
concludes. ''Presidents treat national security policy as a commodity to be sold
rather than as a set of inescapably controversial ideas to be debated and
understood. The most dangerous result of government by hyperbole, propaganda and
denial is a depoliticized and increasingly shockproof electorate.'' Paramount
Communicationsd(Simon & Schuster)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard J. Barnet (Miguel Sayago)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: CRITICS' CHOICES;
A Movie Teenager With Real-World Problems

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 32, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 300 words


Emily Lloyd doesn't play the sort of movie teenager who worries about what she's
going to wear to the high-school prom or about having a date with the handsome
senior who also happens to be the Harvard-bound captain of the football team.

The English actress is likelier to turn up in films mired in more substantial
problems - and displaying astonishing versatility. The latest example is
''Cookie,'' the Susan Seidelman comedy that cast Miss Lloyd as the
chip-off-the-old block of a Brooklyn gangster (Peter Falk) who has been serving
time while she has been growing up angry. Just released on videocassette, COOKIE
(1989, Warner Home Video, $89.98), with Dianne Weist as the gangster's teary
mistress and Miss Lloyd's what-am-I-going-to-do-with-this-child mother, gives
Miss Lloyd a star turn as a tough, resourceful character to be reckoned with.

For Miss Lloyd at her most riveting and heartbreaking, the film to see is WISH
YOU WERE HERE (1987, Fries Home Video, $79.95), the David Leland drama that made
the actress a star at 16. In the film, set in England in the 1950's, Miss Lloyd
plays another angry teenager, given to outrageous conduct, volatile conflict
with her father and a painful sexual liaison with a much older man. Impressive
is the word for both film and performance.

The actress is also worth watching as an edgy teenager growing up pretty much on
her own in Norman Jewison's ''In Country'' (1989, to be released next month by
Warner). This one co-stars Bruce Willis as her uncle - a Vietnam veteran
psychologically scarred by the war. In ''In Country,'' Miss Lloyd plays a Middle
Westerner, a girl whose father died in the war before she was born and a young
woman facing significant choices about her future. As always, it's a performance
that lingers in the memory.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Emily Lloyd - a star turn as a tough ''Cookie''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Focus Turns To Those Behind The Camera

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2595 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD


Except in obscure publications, cinematographers never get credit for the look
of a movie. It's not that directors deliberately usurp the praise. But parceling
out credit is so complicated that the director becomes the winner by default.

It is true that cinematographers, art directors and costume designers are the
tools of the director. ''Reading a script for the first time, I photograph it in
my own mind,'' says Freddie Francis, the cinematographer of ''Glory.'' ''Then I
try to get into the director's mind. Part of your job as a cameraman is to
translate the director's wishes into images that tell the story the way he wants
it seen.'' Michael Ballhaus, who photographed ''The Fabulous Baker Boys,'' says
the same thing in different words: ''I tried to help Steve Kloves come through
with his dream.''

The five cinematographers nominated for the Academy Award to be presented
tomorrow night - Mr. Francis for ''Glory,'' Mr. Ballhaus for ''The Fabulous
Baker Boys,'' Haskell Wexler for ''Blaze,'' Robert Richardson for ''Born on the
Fourth of July'' and Mikael Salomon for ''The Abyss'' - have photographed more
than 200 movies. Mr. Francis got his first job on a movie set in 1934. Mr.
Ballhaus photographed 50 films, including 15 for Rainer Werner Fassbinder,
before he left Germany for Hollywood in 1982. Mr. Wexler won his first Academy
Award in 1966 for ''Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?'' and his second a decade
later for ''Bound for Glory.''

In comparison, the directors of the movies for which Mr. Ballhaus, Mr. Francis
and Mr. Wexler were nominated are novices. Mr. Kloves had never directed a
picture before ''The Fabulous Baker Boys.'' Although he is well known as a
television director and co-created ''Thirtysomething,'' Edward Zwick had
directed one movie before ''Glory.'' Ron Shelton's only film before ''Blaze''
was ''Bull Durham.''

The cinematographer must bend to the will of the director, massage the egos of
the stars and take command of the crew. A picnic scene in the grass may take two
days to shoot, but the photographer must adjust the lighting and the camera so
that the picnic looks as though it were shot in five minutes at high noon. These
five men are are artists and technician. That duality is expressed in the two
terms that refer to them: the elegant cinematographer and the D. P., blunt
shorthand for director of photography.

The current hot issue among cinematographers, says Mr. Wexler, is trying to get
mentioned in newspaper ads. Studios are willing to credit them only in full page
advertisements in major cities where their names might mean something to
sophisticated filmgoers.

''Studios see D. P.'s as almost interchangeable,'' says Mr. Wexler. ''And when
something goes wrong, the cinematographer is often the scapegoat. A lot of D.
P.'s have been fired in recent years. If a picture is mismanaged and gets behind
schedule, it's hard to fire the actor. Conrad Hall was fired from 'Scrooged'
because they couldn't make up their mind what they wanted to shoot. Fortunately,
Conrad went on to an Academy nomination for shooting 'Tequilla Sunrise.' ''

This year, four of the five nominated cinematographers have moved out of the
shadow of their directors and been nominated independently. Only Mr. Richardson
did a picture, ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' whose director, Oliver Stone,
also received a nomination.

Here are some reflections from all five.

Haskell Wexler
Directing the eye to the proper place

Mr. Wexler says that the most difficult thing he had to do on ''Blaze'' was ''to
get along with the director.''

A lifelong radical who was born rich, Mr. Wexler has never pulled his punches.
In ''Medium Cool,'' the 1969 movie he directed, a fictional story was integrated
with actual police brutality at the 1968 Democratic convention. The film was
given an X rating.

''I like Ron Shelton a lot,'' says Mr. Wexler, ''but he was under so much
pressure that he didn't want to trust me, partly because the star Paul Newman is
a very strong guy who knows a lot about directing.''

Says Mr. Shelton, who chose Mr. Wexler because of his lighting style, ''Haskell
and I butted heads a lot, but butting heads is part of the process. I thought
Haskell's soft richness would be good for the kind of Southern fable I wanted to
tell. Also, he wanted to do the movie, and that's worth something.''

Mr. Wexler - who, in addition to winning the Oscar twice, was previously
nominated for ''One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest'' and ''Matewan'' and who won
the American Society of Cinematographers' award for ''Blaze'' a week ago -
wanted to shoot ''Blaze'' because of its subject, the Louisianian politican Earl
Long. ''He was a populist who took a somewhat enlightened position about blacks
in the south and was opposed by racists,'' says Mr. Wexler. ''I thought the
movie was timely as well as important. At my insistence we shot a scene when
Earl Long was in his coffin, with poor people, black people walking by.''

A cinematographer ''can add to a movie by directing the viewer's eye to the
proper place on the screen,'' he says. ''Photography is not only what you do but
what is in front of the camera.'' In ''Blaze,'' part of Mr. Wexler's job was to
put an inexperienced actress, Lolita Davidovich, at ease. Ms. Davidovich has a
broad Slavic face. Mr. Wexler ''tried to make her eyes work for her and kept
part of her face in shade, which narrows the face.''

At 68, Mr. Wexler is as tall and thin as Ichabod Crane. The turning point in his
life came on Friday, Nov. 13, 1942, when his ship was torpedoed in the Indian
Ocean. He spent two weeks in a lifeboat, catching seagulls and eating them raw.
Two of the other Merchant Marine sailors in the lifeboat died. ''I was 19 years
old,'' he says. ''Up to that time, I thought I was immortal.''

He refuses to consider other cinematographers as competitors. It took him eight
years to get into the camera union, a closed shop. Historically, of all the film
unions that one has been the most hostile to newcomers. Mr. Wexler is one of the
members who recently forced the union to restructure. ''The union is completely
open now,'' he says proudly. ''Within the last year, we've taken in hundreds of
members.''



Freddie Francis
'It doesn't matter if it's beautiful.'

''The most important contribution of any cinematographer is to make things look
right,'' says Mr. Francis. ''It doesn't matter if it's beautiful. When I first
started, a director would ask for something and the cameraman would say, 'You
can't do that.' I realized it was because the cameraman wanted to make a pretty
picture. So I've never told a director, you can't do that. I'll sometimes tell
them it will take a long time, but that's a different matter.''

The 72-year-old British cinematographer is peremptory and emphatic. ''One's got
to be able to take command of the whole unit. One of my jobs is to be as quick
as possible. If I spend all my time making pretty pictures, it gives the
director less time. 'Glory' was very unromantic. Having seven years of my life
wasted in the Army, I think there's nothing worse than war.''

The cinematographer on such British new-wave movies as ''Room at the Top'' and
''Saturday Night and Sunday Morning,'' Mr. Francis won an Oscar in 1960 for
''Sons and Lovers'' and then left cinematography to direct more than 15 horror
films. He returned to shoot ''The Elephant Man'' and ''Dune'' for David Lynch.

His most difficult task on ''Glory'' was shooting the climactic Civil War battle
scene in which a troop of black Union soldiers storm an impregnable fort.
''Because of preservation orders on that beach - I think there were two small
birds mating - we couldn't get any large lights within a quarter mile,'' he
says. To shoot the scene required extremely high-speed film and a special
arrangement of high-powered lights.

Like Mr. Wexler, Mr. Francis had trouble with his director. ''When you go into
the ring with a director, you're like a boxer. You have to find out what his
strengths and weaknesses are. Ed and I grated on each other for a while. I feel
that Ed thought I was giving him the contrast I thought he ought to want rather
than what he wanted. I stuck to my guns. No director has to hire me, but if he
hires me, he has to trust me.''

Mr. Zwick says he hired Mr. Francis ''because I wanted somebody who would be
undaunted by both the canvas and the demands of a piece of the scale of 'Glory.'
Also I felt a British cinematographer would have no preconceived images of what
the Civil War should look like. Freddie was a delightful staunch collaborator,
unflagging, spryly climbing mountains.''

Mr. Francis has one exception to his dictum about pretty images. ''I like women
to look as lovely as they can in life and in the movies,'' he says.



Michael Ballhaus
Most important is the scene's rhythm

The most important thing in cinematography ''is the rhythm of a scene,'' says
Michael Ballhaus. ''You're not just shooting interesting pictures. The way shots
cut together, what comes next, what came before, is the difference between a
brilliant photographer and a cinematographer.''

Of all the nominees, Mr. Ballhaus seems the most content. ''I am not missing
anything by not becoming a director,'' he says. ''I think I have enough
control.'' Now 54, he wanted to be a cinematographer when he was 16 and spent a
week with Max Ophuls, an uncle by marriage, on Ophuls's movie ''Lola Montes.''

''Michael never made me feel stupid,'' says Mr. Kloves. ''There are D. P.'s who
try to usurp the director's authority. Michael was my teacher on 'Baker Boys.'
His contribution was immense. He lights so brilliantly you can see the actor's
eyes even in a very dark frame.''

Pudgy and jovial and swathed in what appears to be a safari jacket, Mr.
Ballhaus, who was also nominated in 1988 for ''Broadcast News,'' describes
cinematography in the service of story. ''When the Baker Boys, Jeff and Beau
Bridges, were playing piano in those cheap bars, we used garish, spotty, cheap
colors, cheap lights, green and pink gels. These guys were at the end of their
rope. When they play the better places, the lighting becomes subtle.''

In an era of realistic cinematography when style changes with every movie, Mr.
Ballhaus has one trademark shot: a 360-degree turn of the camera. He used it in
''Working Girl'' to circle the Statue of Liberty. In ''The Fabulous Baker
Boys,'' his camera circles Michelle Pfeiffer lying on top of a piano.

''A 360-degree is the only move that defines a person in the total way,'' he
says. ''It's the ultimate definition of a person in a room.''



Mikael Salomon
'I get sent a script every week.'

Physically, Mr. Salomon's movie was the most difficult of the five. The Danish
cinematographer, 45, got himself certified as a scuba diver so he could swim
around underwater and position the lights and cameras.

''I expected Mikael to sit up on the dock and look at video monitors,'' says
James Cameron, the director. ''Instead, he almost drowned a bunch of times. And
his attitude never flagged. To work side by side with me for 140 days and not
lose his temper makes him deserve a pair of wings.''

Mr. Salomon was often in the water for three or four hours before the actors
arrived. ''There was no way I could stand above the action for four months
looking at monitors,'' he says. ''But it wasn't only the underwater scenes that
were difficult. The whole environment was hostile. The sets had solid steel
walls to withstand water pressure.'' Because there were no ''wild'' or removable
walls, hiding lights was immensely difficult. ''Water and electricity don't mix
very well,'' Mr. Salomon adds. In one scene, the engine room of the underwater
station Deep Core was flooded by three tanks, each holding 38,000 gallons of
water. ''We had to use underwater lights because regular lights would explode
when the water hit,'' says Mr. Salomon. ''But the scene started dry and
underwater lights can only burn 10 to 20 seconds above water before their seals
blow. We had to shoot without a rehearsal, starting in darkness and having the
water flood in no more than 20 seconds after we called action so the lights
would be safe.''

Mr. Salomon, who speaks seven languages, has been a cameraman since he was 20
but came to the United States less than three years ago. He has no desire to be
a director. ''A director makes a movie every two years and has all the agony,''
he says. ''I have variety. I make two to three features a year. The nomination
and working for Steven Spielberg on 'Always' really put me on the map. Now I get
sent a script every week.''



Robert Richardson
He'd like to be thought a moralist

The youngest of the five nominees, Bob Richardson, 35, has long white hair, a
pointed black beard and eyebrows that give his lean face a Mephistophelean look.
Oliver Stone, for whom he is now making his sixth film, calls Mr. Richardson a
blood brother and says he has eagles' eyes.

The luckiest cinematographers become the eyes of a director whom they respect:
Sven Nykvist and Ingmar Bergman, Gregg Toland and Orson Welles, Vittorio Storaro
and Bernardo Bertolucci. Mr. Richardson, a graduate of the American Film
Institute's cinematography program, had made his own documentary in El Salvador
before he was chosen by Mr. Stone to photograph the movie ''Salvador.''

''Bob was cheap, he was his own camera operator, and he had a passionate
commitment to politics,'' says Mr. Stone.

''Oliver and I have a certain passion for subject matter,'' says Mr. Richardson,
who won his first Oscar nomination for Mr. Stone's ''Platoon.'' ''I'd rather
shoot commercials than take a film I don't believe in. I'd like to be considered
a moralist.''

''Born on the Fourth of July'' - which stars Tom Cruise as a paraplegic Vietnam
War veteran who becomes an antiwar activist - presented a particular problem.
''We're so inundated by horrors today, how do you make the audience feel?'' asks
Mr. Richardson. '' 'Born' wanted to make people feel a break in their lives,
feel the loss.''

Intense camera motion was the tool for forcing the audience to participate.
''The movie provides a vicarious ride,'' says Mr. Richardson. ''We could have
avoided so much camera motion at the beginning, but all that motion sets the
audience ill at ease immediately. They're acclimated to the style of the movie
by the end of the title sequence, so they don't suddenly become ill at ease in
the Vietnam and veterans' hospital sequences.''

Mr. Richardson created the look of the title sequence, where the 10-year-old Ron
Kovic experiences an idealized Fourth of July, from Independence Day parades as
photographed by Life magazine in the 1950's.

Mr. Richardson, who says his hair started to turn gray when he was sent to
boarding school at age 13 because he couldn't get along with his younger
brother, speaks of Mr. Stone as a harsh brother with whom he does not always
agree but to whom he must sublimate himself. ''One has to be a chameleon,'' he
says. ''The story has to come first. I'm not making a wonderful book of still
images.'' A cinematographer, he says, ''must bend to the director's vision,
contend with the crew, massage the actors, listen to the producer telling you
you're spending too much money, and hear your wife complain because you're away
so much.''

No matter what happens tomorrow night, Mr. Richardson said he is assured of an
award. His wife is pregnant, and the baby is expected this week. If it is a boy,
he will not be named Oscar.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: 'Glory' ''No director has to hire me,'' says Freddie Francis
(above), ''but if he hires me, he has to trust me''; 'The Abyss' ''A director
makes a movie every two years and has all the agony,'' says Mikael Salomon. ''I
make two or three features a year''; 'The Fabulous Baker Boys' ''I am not
missing anything by not becoming a director,'' says Michael Ballhaus. ''I think
I have enough control.'' (pg. 1); 'Born on the Fourth of July' ''The story has
to come first,'' says Robert Richardson, above. ''I'm not making a wonderful
book of still images''; 'Blaze' A cinematographer ''can add to the movie by
directing the viewer's eye to the proper place on the screen,'' says Wexler.
(pg. 24)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 26, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Gallipoli Journal;
Echo of Long-Ago Battles Stirs Sleeping Peninsula

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 956 words

DATELINE: GALLIPOLI, Turkey, March 21


The problem with today's youngsters, Feridun Kanten said, echoing a lament that
probably began when Adam and Eve were having trouble with their kids, is that
they want everything easy.

Take the cannery that he runs, Mr. Kanten said.

His family has been canning sardines in Gallipoli for six decades, as have
nearly a dozen other families that form the economic backbone of this small port
on the north side of the Dardanelles strait, in European Turkey, 180 miles
southwest of Istanbul.

But are young people interested in the backbreaking work of loading and
unloading, packing and unpacking? Hah, said Mr. Kanten, who at the age of 35 has
not quite reached the far side of young himself.

''They want to make money quickly,'' he complained. ''They're getting lazy.''
When he was a boy, he told a visitor, ''we could hardly afford to buy shoes.''
Life was even worse for his grandmother, who used to tell horrible tales of how
''small rivers ran red with blood.''

The Stories Live On

Of course, that was a long time ago, when Gallipoli was synonymous with death
and despair. Those stories still are passed on here, Mr. Kanten said - even, he
added, among the good-for-nothing you know who.

To Turks, Gallipoli is known as Gelibolu, where, a bit farther south on this
slender peninsula of fertile farmland and mahogany hills, was fought one of the
epic campaigns of the First World War In 1915 British naval forces tried to
force their way through the Dardanelles strait and capture Istanbul, then called
Constantinople, the hope being to knock out Ottoman Turkey, which was fighting
on Germany's side. It did not work out that way.

By March of that year, the Allies had suffered heavy naval losses on the strait,
which separates Turkey's European and Asian shores. So it was decided, starting
on April 25, to send in British, French, Australian and New Zealand troops to
try instead to secure this western peninsula. For the Allies, Gallipoli was a
monument to poor planning and inept coordination.

In January 1916, with nearly 50,000 of their soldiers dead - nearly the number
of American dead in the Vietnam War - the Allies evacuated their beachheads.
Turkey's death toll was much higher, estimated at up to 250,000, but the
campaign was nonetheless a glorious, if fleeting, victory before ultimate defeat
in 1918 and then the collapse of the Ottoman Empire five years later.

Churchill's Reputation Hurt

Gallipoli made some reputations and tarnished others. Winston Churchill, as
First Lord of the Admiralty, conceived the original plan to push a naval force
through the strait, and was forced out of the Cabinet for several years after
its failure. But the campaign also saw the ascension of the Turkish military
commander, Mustafa Kemal, who as Ataturk went on to become father of the modern
Turkish republic. It also was a pivotal moment for Australia and New Zealand,
which got their first true sense of nationhood here despite the licking that
they took.

These shores are so important to all three countries that they, along with
Britain, are sending their Government leaders and contingents of Gallipoli
veterans for commemorative ceremonias on April 25. The unfaded soldiers are well
in their 90's -a few may even be over 100 - and they may find the beachheads as
arduous now as then. Just in case, physicians will be on hand.

Seventy-five years later, army garrisons still stud the lightly populated
peninsula - Turkey's advance guard facing Greece, only dagger eyes away.

Sedat Ozkaya, a local journalist, says the military presence has made an
industrial backwater of Gallipoli. What company, he asks, would want to set up
business in a potential combat zone? Others are not so sure that the army should
be blamed, but they, too, admit that their peninsula is not about to turn the
industrial world on its ear.

Clear Waters, Clean Air

Then again, it does not necessarily want to, they say. Instead of factories,
Gallipoli's 20,000 residents have enviably clear waters and air so clean it
seems almost scrubbed.

This healthy environment, along with the war monuments strewn across the
peninsula's southern and western shores, have encouraged a steady increase in
visitors, says Mehmet Irdesel, a local historian and tourism official. Tourism,
Mr. Irdesel suggests, may overtake sardines one day in economic importance.
Perhaps 100,000 travelers, both Turks and foreigners, pass through each year, he
says, and enough of them want to spend the night to have encouraged the
construction of several new hotels.

Many of the visitors are Australians and New Zealanders who cannot imagine
coming to Turkey without making a pilgrimage to Gallipoli.

Verna Connelly, of Queensland, Australia, harkened to the call the other day as
she and a group of friends walked in the quiet of a small cemetery at Ari Burnu,
a landing beach for Allied soldiers now called Anzac Cove.

''It may seem peculiar to go on like this about a defeat,'' Mrs. Connelly said.
''But it was a big thing for Australians and New Zealanders. It brought them
together, taking such a pounding.''

'Our Sons as Well'

Where she stepped lay dozens of graves of Australian soldiers, young men with
names like Hancock, Combley and Rawlings, far from home on a grassy knoll facing
the wind-tossed Aegean Sea. Nearby was a simple granite monument, bearing words,
in English, attributed to Ataturk in 1934.

''There is no difference between the Johnnies and the Mehmets to us where they
lie side by side in this country of ours,'' he said, addressing the mothers of
the fallen Allied soldiers. ''Your sons are now lying in our bosom and are in
peace. After having lost their lives on this land, they have become our sons as
well.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Turks in the port town of Gallipoli still talk about the
disastrous 1915 Allied invasion of the peninsula along the Dardanelles strait.
Ceremonies marking the 75th anniversary of the campaign are planned for April
25. Residents gathered recently at a market to buy sardines, the town's primary
product. (The New York Times/Clyde Haberman); map of Gallipoli, Turkey

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 1, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Washington Talk;
For Bush in 1989, the Focus Was Foreign Policy

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 711 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 31


His friends always said George Bush would be a foreign-policy President, but
even they didn't expect this.

In bold contrast to his mentor, Ronald Reagan, Mr. Bush has begun his tenure in
the White House with a year of deep involvement in events beyond the borders of
the United States. By contrast, his attention has seldom been focused for long
periods on domestic policy questions.

There's no evidence that he planned it that way; events in China, the Soviet
Union, Panama, Colombia and Eastern Europe forced his hand.

In the first weeks of his Presidency, Mr. Bush seemed determined to resist the
magnetism of Mikhail S. Gorbachev and his ideas. Never mind how much the Soviet
President and President Reagan had come to trust each other, Mr. Bush told his
associates. Never mind the enthusiasm of the press and the academics and the
Europeans. We're going to wait until we see real evidence of change in the
Soviet Union.

That position proved untenable, partly because Washington (and Paris and Bonn
and even Rome) took it as a sign of weakness and drift in the White House, and
partly because of the pace and degree of change in Eastern Europe (notably, at
that stage, in Hungary and Poland) that Moscow was willing to countenance and
even encourage.

Under attack at home and abroad, Mr. Bush shifted course, or at least tone.
First he developed and sold major arms-control initiatives to the NATO allies.
Then, in a speech at Mainz, West Germany, on May 31, he moved out of the camp of
prudence and vigilance and into that of optimism and movement. Acknowledging
Bonn's critical role, he described the United States and the Federal Republic as
''partners in leadership'' of the Western alliance.

But the image of innovation rapidly wore thin in a world of breathless change.
In the Mainz speech, the President issued two major challenges to Mr. Gorbachev
- open the Berlin Wall and promote political pluralism in Eastern Europe -
implying that American concessions would follow. By the time Mr. Bush went to
Malta to meet Mr. Gorbachev at the beginning of this month, both challenges had
been met, and the President was being accused of lacking the vision to cope with
the revolutions in East Germany, Bulgaria and Czechslovakia.

Once again, he had a series of surprise proposals ready, largely economic, and
once again he was able to regain the initiative, at least in part, from the
whirling dervish in the Kremlin.

Mr. Bush made gestures and concessions to the Soviets, for the express purpose
of easing the way for a Government that has been moving, slowly but steadily, in
the direction of American ideals and policies. But at the same time he caused
widespread resentment by making gestures of reconciliation toward China, in the
form of visits from ranking officials of the Administration, before and not
after the Chinese gave evidence that they would desist from the repressive
policies that led to the slaughter of hundreds of anti-Government protestres in
Beijing in June.

Finally, just before Christmas, the President committed American troops to their
biggest combat operation since Vietnam, sending them to Panama to oust Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega and to give a democratic regime there a jump-start.

Mr. Bush said in Texas the other day that he was finishing this year on a rather
high note. But his moment of satisfaction, however well earned, is likely to be
short.

As the year ends, the President's capacity to surprise and to act boldly are in
no doubt. But the underpinnings of his policy remain unclear. Is he promoting
democracy, whose time seems to have come with such a rush? Or is he merely
acting in the self-interest of the United States, letting realpolitik lead where
it may?

The next 12 months will provide further clues on that large question, and
perhaps answers to smaller ones: Will the United States, which could muster only
an embarrassing $500,000 in medical aid for Rumania, be able to find the large
sums needed to help put Eastern Europe back on its feet? Will major troop cuts
be negotiated? Will progress toward German reunification or rapprochement be
possible without upsetting the stability of Europe?

And will George Bush, in 1990, turn to the detailed domestic policies that he
avoided in 1989?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 1, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: THE WOUNDED;
Some of the Casualties Meet Their Commander

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 940 words

DATELINE: SAN ANTONIO, Dec. 31


Gregory Johnson's Purple Heart was pinned to his pillow, and a three-foot-high
inflatable Santa stood near his bed.

Through clenched teeth, the 24-year-old Marine sergeant from Anchorage, Alaska,
told visitors at Wilford Hall Air Force Medical Center here that it was ''pretty
neat'' to meet the President who had ordered him into battle. Of course, he
conceded, a bullet in the chin the first day of the invasion was ''kind of a
rough way'' to earn the honor.

President and Mrs. Bush traveled early this morning from their house in Houston,
where they are spending the New Year's weekend, to San Antonio to visit some of
the American servicemen wounded in the Panama attack.

Their eyes brimming with tears at moments, they spent about an hour and a half
talking to 27 servicemen at Wilford Hall and 17 more at Brooke Army Medical
Center.

Language of the Troops

''Semper Fi,'' Mr. Bush said to Sergeant Johnson, ellipsizing the Marine Corps
slogan. The sergeant was lying in bed in standard-issue blue pajamas.

''Best of luck to you,'' the President went on. ''It was a great operation.
There are a little post-mortems here and there, but it was a wonderful thing and
we're all very, very proud of you.''

The Marine rifleman, flanked by his parents, Mary and Duane, and his beaming
fiancee, Laura Smith, replied, ''We're proud to be able to do it.''

Sergeant Johnson, whose jaw was broken by the bullet that hit his chin, also has
a gunshot wound in the forehead and a fragment in his left hand.

Twenty-three servicemen and three civilians have died in the invasion, which
began 11 days ago. Administration officials estimate that about 300 Panamanian
troops and 400 Panamanian civilians were killed in the fighting.

Casualties of War

The Bushes saw all those who remained of the 252 servicemen treated at the San
Antonio hospitals. One man's left leg had been amputated; another lost part of
his left foot. Another's wounds had left him a paraplegic.

President Bush asked the men about their hometowns and how they had suffered
their wounds, and he asked if they were coming along all right.

''Where did you get clipped?'' he asked Wallace Brooks, a 19-year-old Army
Ranger from Inwood, W. Va.

''Shoulder, sir,'' replied the redheaded private, sitting in a wheelchair with
his arm in a sling.

After his visits, an emotional Mr. Bush praised the ''gutsy, courageous young
men'' and said he had ''tried to tell them how grateful we are.'' And What About
Noriega?  Mr. Bush was asked what message he had given the wounded about Manuel
Antonio Noriega, the Panamanian leader who eluded American troops to seek
sanctuary in the Vatican diplomatic residence. ''We can tell them he's not out
threatening the lives of Americans,'' he replied. ''That's a good message.''

Barbara Bush told reporters the story of one soldier, a paraplegic as a result
of his wounds, who gave her husband a small American flag and said it was from
all the Americans who had fought in Panama.

''I want you to have this from them,'' the soldier told the President, according
to Mrs. Bush. ''And we thank you for sending us.''

Mrs. Bush had first urged her husband to tell reporters the story, but he
refused. ''You tell them,'' he said to his wife.

The President concedes that he has a hard time expressing emotion in public but
that he cries easily when moved. He considered the moment too charged to talk
about it calmly before the assembled television cameras.

''I'm not too good at that kind of thing,'' he said today. He tried to talk
about a little girl he had met in the hospital, but broke off in midsentence,
his eyes glistening.

Pleasantries in Two Languages

In a ward at Brooke Medical Center, the President had asked Noella Almeida, the
8-year-old daughter of Sgt. 1st Class James Almeida of Taunton, Mass., if she
had had a good Christmas.

''Yes,'' replied the child, standing beside the bed of her father, who suffered
multiple fragmentation wounds.

''What was your favorite present?'' the President asked. ''My daddy,'' Noella
replied. About two dozen protesters lined the motorcade route to Wilford Hall
holding signs that read ''No more Vietnam,'' ''Get out of Panama,'' and ''Bring
Our Men and Women Home.''

Mr. Bush said the invasion would serve a purpose because ''the country will get
some idea of the kinds of kids we've got in the service.''

''The country,'' he added, ''is behind what you did.''

Asked before the President's arrival how he felt about the Panama invasion,
Sergeant Johnson said: ''That's what we do for a living. That's our job. I'd
have liked to stick around and not get shot. It's history and I had a small part
in it.''

Wounded and Proud

In the same room at Wilford Hall with Sergeant. Johnson and his family was the
family of Army Sgt. David Reeves, 25, of Woodstock, Ga., a Ranger who had
gunshot wounds in both shoulders and a purple Heart on his pillow.

Alan Reeves, the soldier's father, cried as he told the President, ''We're proud
of the training they've gotten and the opportunity that they have had to serve
their country. It just makes tears come to our eyes for what they have done.''

Speaking to Violetta Burgess, the Panama-born wife of Sgt. Roy Burgess of
LaBelle, Fla, Mr. Bush asked about the invasion, ''Do you think we did the right
thing?'' Mrs. Burgess smiled and nodded.

Then he tried out his Spanish on her.''I habla a little espanol, poquito,'' he
said, asking her husband, ''Does she have familia'' still in Panama?

At that point, Mrs. Bush interrupted to note, ''She speaks perfect English. We
don't want to hear George's Spanish in public.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Bush with Staff Sgt. Lloyd Johnson (AP)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 1, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

FALTERING DRUG WAR: THE FLOW FROM LATIN AMERICAN - A SPECIAL REPORT;
Battle Against Cocaine Traffic Is Languishing in South America

BYLINE: This article was reported by Joseph B. Treaster, Bernard E. Trainor,
Richard L. Berke and Eric Weiner and was written by Mr. Treaster, Special to The
New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2616 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia


Despite some seemingly spectacular successes, the drug war in South America is
not going well. Critics say the American military attack on Panama, justified in
part as an anti-drug initiative, has only fragmented what is already a largely
ineffective effort.

Despite the lack of sympathy for Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega of Panama, Latin
America was clearly shaken by the latest case of United States military force in
the region. Peru dramatized that reaction by pulling out of an Andean summit
meeting on drugs with President Bush, set for February, and briefly halting an
anti-drug effort with the United States.

Because Peru grows 70 percent of the coca plants processed into the cocaine that
is smuggled into the United States, its withdrawal from the summit talks dashed
hopes for a start on a cohesive regional plan.

Peru Could Become Sanctuary

Colombia and Bolivia, the other two major cocaine producers in South America,
say they still plan to meet with President Bush in February. But without Peru's
cooperation, narcotics experts say, the drug war cannot succeed, because the
country would become a huge sanctuary for growers and drug traffickers pursued
by the two neighboring countries.

Trying to knock Panama off the cocaine-distribution map by taking out General
Noriega, who has long been linked to the drug traffic, was not a fair trade for
the alienation of Peru, critics say. Panama's importance in the drug trade was
waning as tension between General Noriega and the United States grew and drug
traffickers and money launderers left for more tranquil points in the Caribbean,
Mexico, Canada, Europe and Asia.

Mr. Bush's campaign to stop cocaine at its source in the Andes, part of a
broader drug strategy announced in September, includes $2 billion in economic
aid to Peru, Bolivia and Colombia over four years and $261 million mainly in aid
to the military and police in those countries.

But four months into the campaign, the picture is bleak.

Cocaine is flowing as freely as ever to the United States, where the appetite
for crack remains ravenous, and it is becoming increasingly clear that for the
Andes nations themselves, cutting cocaine production and exports is by no means
the No. 1 priority.

Colombia has embarked on a campaign to arrest its major traffickers and seize
their assets, but for every trafficker who falls, another replaces him,
overseeing the processing of the coca leaf at jungle laboratories and arranging
for the shipment of cocaine to North America. And the coca plant continues to be
cultivated in Peru and Bolivia, where poor farmers have discovered its value as
a cash crop.

In an interview, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, the chairman
of the Judiciary Committee, characterized the Administration's campaign as
''little more than a paper initiative.''

''The United States,'' he said, ''must launch a genuine plan for the Andes, not
just a laundry list of disjointed initiatives.''

The Administration's response is that the problem of cocaine smuggling from
Latin America has been building since the early 1970's, and that it will take
time to solve. ''We can show some little successes, but over all it's going to
take several years,'' said a United States official in Peru. ''We're just
getting into the ballgame, just starting to get the resources we need.''

Some Administration officials working on drug issues in Washington say they do
not expect to see any measurable effect on the flow of cocaine into the United
States until late 1990. ''That's just a realistic assessment of how long it
takes government to work,'' one said.

Some Bush aides acknowledged that the Panama invasion has not been a plus for
the drug war, and one said it was ''catastrophically negative'' and indicated
that Washington was holding out hope that Peru would ultimately decide to join
in the Andean summit meeting now that it has resumed its anti-drug program with
the United States. Colombia One Kingpin Down, But Many to Go One of the most
notable successes in the drug fight came in mid-December, when Colombian
security forces chased down and killed Jose Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha, a powerful
and violent leader of the Medellin cartel, which controls much of the world
cocaine market. It was a major accomplishment for Colombia, and it bolstered
public support after drug bosses had repeatedly escaped police raids and
terrorized the capital, Bogota, with nightly bombings.

In the last two weeks drug terrorism has dropped significantly. And there is
some evidence that drug-ring leaders are now fighting each other. But the
American and Colombian authorities say Mr. Rodriguez Gacha's death will have
little effect on the export of cocaine because someone will win the battle to
succeed him and simply pick up the slack.

And Colombian traffickers, who control most of the cocaine industry worldwide,
are moving their jungle factories, where paste from the the coca leaf is
processed into powder. The refineries are being set up in Peru and Bolivia and
even along the frontiers of Brazil and Ecuador, which until now had been
relatively free of drug traffic.

Scores of smaller Colombian drug processers and shippers and some of the major
traffickers who have operated quietly and without violence have been left alone
by the Government. Should the level of terrorism remain low for an extended
period, some Colombian experts predict, the Government will declare victory and
permit the peaceful drug traffickers to go about their business.

In Colombia, as in Peru and Bolivia, political power and economic conditions are
more important concerns.

''We are fighting two wars in Colombia,'' Carlos Lemos Simmonds, the senior
member of President Virgilio Barco Vargas's Cabinet and the President's chief
political adviser, said in an interview, referring to the war against drugs and
the war between drug traffickers and the nation's leaders.

''The deadlier war is the one of the drug barons against our own politicians,
our judges, our journalists,'' he said. ''They want to be the ones who govern
the country. They want to make Colombia into a narco-state, so they can handle
their business more easily. Both wars are urgent. But we have to stop these
people from killing other Colombians. This has priority.'' Peru and Bolivia A
Profitable Habit Hard to Break Presidents Alan Garcia of Peru and Jaime Paz
Zamora of Bolivia argue that the solution to the drug problem lies not in force
but in broad economic development - road building, electrification, agricultural
services, the introduction of industry - along with price supports to make other
crops more attractive than coca.

The high profits from cocaine have made the Bolivian and Peruvian Governments
reluctant to move against it, and few farmers have been willing to switch to
other crops. Some Bolivian farmers have taken United States and Bolivian money,
offered as an inducement for destroying coca plots and cultivating other crops,
and moved to remote fields to plant more coca. In Peru, the Upper Huallaga
Valley is the world's most fertile ground for the coca plant, and farmers there
have virtually halted the cultivation of any other crop.

The $2 billion in economic aid pledged by President Bush to Peru, Bolivia and
Colombia over four years works out to about $166 million a year for each of the
countries, an enormous jump. But Mr. Garcia and Mr. Paz Zamora are talking about
$500 million a year and more.

For Peru, the gravest concern is the Shining Path, a Maoist guerrilla movement
that has been terrorizing the country for nearly 10 years. Mr. Garcia argues
that pressure on coca farmers only provides recruits for the guerrillas, who
exploit the cocaine trade by protecting the farmers and then ''taxing'' both
them and those whom the Shining Path permits to export the drug.

Bolivia's economy has forced many workers to protest conditions. The nation is
under a state of siege, imposed after teachers began demanding raises that would
have upset a long-range restructuring of the economy away from central controls.

Colombia says it needs good prices for its main legitimate export, coffee, and
fewer restrictions on its exports to of freshly cut flowers and textiles to the
United States. But under pressure from American coffee makers for more
advantageous prices and different mixes of beans, the United States has walked
away from an international coffee agreement on price supports.

World coffee prices have plunged, and Colombia says it will lose about $500
million a year unless the agreement is restored. Administration officials say
they are trying to find a way for Colombia to recoup its loss, but the talks
involve dozens of countries and are going slowly.

Senator Biden proposes that to assist the drug-producing nations in reorganizing
or bolstering their economies, a ''debt for drugs'' swap should be made. The
United States would pay off the big foreign debts of the cocaine-producing
countries under the plan in exchange for a program of coca-crop eradication and
encouragement of alternate crops. United States Lack of Agreement And
Coordination In the United States, the Bush Administration is confronted by
competing interests among Washington agencies. Some, like the Commerce
Department, show little active interest in the South American drug problem,
despite the coca crop's inevitable intertwining in Andes economics and trade.
Some, like the Pentagon, are not in agreement on the wisdom of the United States
involvement in the Andes drug problems.

Critics say the Administration's efforts are disjointed. At least six United
States Government agencies, including the Central Intelligence Agency, the Drug
Enforcement Administration and the State Department, are working against drugs
in the three countries.

Each agency has its own procedures and intelligence sources. Theoretically, the
United States ambassador coordinates the drug war in his country. But in
practice, central direction is weak and each agency goes its own way.

''We are far from having a strategy,'' said Representative Charles B. Rangel,
Democrat of Manhattan, chairman of the House Select Committee on Narcotics.

William J. Bennett, the nation's drug-policy director, has been criticized by
politicians and experts in drug treatment for failing to take his advisers'
counsel and take charge of an overall drug plan. A Government expert said,
''Bennett has done fine on the bully pulpit talking about the drug problem, but
he seems unwilling to seize the power needed to really do anything.''

Donald R. Hamilton, the chief spokesman for Mr. Bennett, said the director had
exerted sweeping influence on how the United States is dealing with drugs. ''He
has good access to the President and when he's gone to the President he's gotten
his way almost every time.''

Within the United States armed forces, opinion is divided over whether the
military should be involved in the drug war in South America. Many officers,
remembering Vietnam, worry that the military will be drawn into an unwinnable
war.

''We will be down there 20 to 40 years,'' said a senior planning officer in the
United States military headquarters in Panama.

Some officers think the armed forces could become a scapegoat if the anti-drug
war fails. ''It is easier for politicians to shift the burden to the military
than to get tough with their own drug-using constitutents,'' said a Pentagon
officer who bitterly oppposes using servicemen in the drug war.

Despite the misgivings, the Defense Department has ordered stepped-up training,
reconnaissance, intelligence sharing and logistical support in the three Andean
countries. The Andes The Divisive Issue Of Who Will Fight Mainly because of
unextinguishable bad memories of gunboat diplomacy, the leaders of Colombia,
Bolivia and Peru oppose the presence of American combat troops on their soil,
and they want strict limits on any American military presence.

Of the three countries, only Colombia has been willing to mount a real armed
offensive of its own. Peru and Bolivia continue to equivocate on waging any kind
of warfare on an industry that provides an income for hundreds of thousands of
peasants.

A key to the United States strategy is to engage the armies of all three
countries in the drug war, but these forces have historically insisted that drug
trafficking is a criminal matter for the police to confront. Friction between
the police and the armed forces runs deep; they seldom work together, and when
they do they blame each other for what goes wrong.

In Peru the army actually prevents the police from operating in the Upper
Huallaga Valley. Disturbing the coca farmers, the army says, would help the
guerrillas by driving the farmers into rebel ranks. But tantalized by the
potential of as much as $40 million in United States military hardware for an
anti-drug campaign, the army now contends that through its war with the
guerrillas it should be regarded as actually fighting cocaine.

While drugs have been a police concern, most police officers have been assigned
to other duties. Of the 80,000 members of the police in Colombia, for example,
only about 3,500 are assigned to anti-drug units. In Peru, there are about 500
anti-narcotics police officers, and in Bolivia there are 700 to 800. Mexico New
Way Stations South of the Border A United States official in Bogota who
specializes in narcotics estimated that cocaine shipping from Colombia was still
down about 25 percent from what it was before the Government of President Barco
declared war on the drug traffickers last August.

But he said new processing centers in Peru and other countries, especially
Mexico, may have lifted the region as a whole back to where it had been.

As United States patrols and radar networks have slowed traffic in the
Caribbean, cocaine smugglers have been funneling their goods into the United
States through Mexico. The Colombian cartels have formed alliances with Mexican
smuggling gangs that have long dealt in marijuana and heroin. ''You have
organizations on both sides of the border who have been involved with smuggling
for decades,'' said a United States official in Mexico.

Drug Enforcement Administration officials estimate that 50 percent to 70 percent
of all South American cocaine entering the United States goes through Mexico, as
opposed to 30 percent only a few years ago.

Nearly 300 planes were seized in the raids in Colombia, but American officials
say the traffickers have replenished their fleet by buying and stealing
replacements all over the hemisphere. One of the most popular smuggling planes,
the officials said, is the Gulfstream Aerocommander 1000, a twin-engine
turboprop plane that can carry up to 2,000 pounds of cargo.

Most of Mexico does not have radar coverage. Planes land at hundreds of dirt
airfields and often keep one engine running as the cocaine is unloaded. Usually,
the drug is hidden at the airfield for a few days, then smuggled across the
border by truck.

The United States has been putting up a barrier of radar balloons along the
Mexican border; seven are to be up within weeks. The balloons can detect a plane
as far away as 150 miles.

In all three Andes countries and in the United States, politicians as well as
scholars and economists talk of what they regard as the impossibility of
significantly reducing the production and export of cocaine as long as demand
remains strong.

The most optimistic analysts estimate 5 to 10 years of heavy spending and
perhaps much bloodshed, not to eliminate cocaine in South America but to contain
it until consumption falls.

''We're buying time,'' said one United States Embassy official here.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Central and South America (pg. 9)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Aid for Khmer Rouge Is Repugnant

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 415 words


To the Editor:

I have just returned from two years in Cambodia, where I worked for a British
charity on the Phnom Penh water supply. As a result of that experience, I see
the Cambodian problem very differently from Winston Lord (''Peace Without the
Khmer Rouge?'', Op-Ed, Dec. 10).

Since 1979 and the end of the Khmer Rouge reign of terror, the Cambodians and
the Hun Sen Government have struggled in isolation to rebuild a nation from the
ashes. They have succeeded to an amazing degree, despite the efforts of the
Chinese and Western governments, Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the Khmer Rouge to
make them fail. I disagree with the Hun Sen Government on a variety of issues,
but United States foreign policy recognizes and supports many governments a
great deal worse.

Over the last two years, efforts to reach a diplomatic solution have foundered
on a single issue: Is there to be a role for the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia's
future? If Prince Sihanouk could bring himself to break with the Khmer Rouge, a
settlement with Phnom Penh would almost certainly result. Prince Sihanouk, China
and the Western powers have insisted that the Khmer Rouge take part in an
interim government. Given the Khmer Rouge record, this is equivalent to
demanding a role for the Nazis in the establishment of post-World War II
Germany; it is a moral outrage. Why is this the position of our government? I
can only hazard the most fearful of guesses.

The Chinese Government knows that insistence on a Khmer Rouge role will assure
the failure of negotiations; it can then continue its policy of punishing
Vietnam through regional war and international isolation. (That six million
Cambodians are hostages to such a policy is merely a regrettable side effect.)
Prince Sihanouk may be afraid that without Chinese backing, he can't win power
from a government that has a fair degree of popular support after a decade of
struggle against the Khmer Rouge (his ''allies''). The Bush Administration
wishes to minimize conflict with China under any circumstances (as demonstrated
by our response to Tiananmen Square), and so we accept China's line on Cambodia.

I would be most grateful if the Administration could offer a plausible, less
cynical explanation of its Cambodia policy. After two years in that
long-suffering country, I believe that the only legitimate position for our
government is to reject any role for the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia's future.

PETER J. KOLSKY
  Providence, R.I., Dec. 11, 1989

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Kawaguchi Journal;
Fellow Asians, Yes, but Where's the Fellowship?

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words

DATELINE: KAWAGUCHI, Japan, Dec. 29


The Mayor of this drab factory town north of Tokyo is upset that some people
viewed recent statements of his as racist, especially his comment that with so
many dark-skinned foreigners in town, Japanese were having trouble seeing them
at night.

''I am a big defender of the rights of foreigners,'' the Mayor, Yoji Nagase,
said in an interview the other day. ''I only meant my comments as a kind of
joke. We in Japan must open our doors to immigrants and give them proper
training and education.''

But the Pakistanis, Bangladeshis and other foreigners who work in Kawaguchi,
almost all of them in violation of Japanese immigration laws, are not laughing
at Mr. Nagase's comments or at other recent developments seen as a threat to the
well-being of immigrants in Japan.

''We are hated because we are from a poor country,'' said a 19-year-old
Pakistani named Abdul. ''Our poverty is hated, and our skin color is only one
factor. But I would like to ask that Mayor how the Japanese would feel about
their racial pride if others made comments like that about them.''

A Disturbing Police Memo

The thousands of Pakistanis who have come to Japan on temporary visas and then
stayed on illegally after the visas expired to take jobs are feeling especially
vulnerable these days.

A month ago, for example, the National Police Agency acknowledged that it had
circulated an internal memo to police stations asserting that Pakistanis working
in Japan ''have a unique body odor,'' carry infectious skin diseases and tell
lies ''under the name of Allah.''

Disclosure of the memo embarrassed the Tokyo Government, which is trying hard to
erase the old image of Japan as hostile to outsiders. Police officials retracted
the document and apologized to the Pakistani Embassy.

In addition, a public high school outside of Kawaguchi became embroiled in
controversy in the fall when a teacher brought a young English-speaking
Pakistani to his night-school class to help teach English.

After complaints from other teachers about the presence of a ''suspicious
person'' in the classroom, the school barred the Pakistani and a school official
was quoted in the press as having said, ''There are a lot of communicable
diseases and crime among Pakistanis.''

'Kind of Racist Society'

Tetsu Yatabe, the teacher who took the Pakistani to school, has been waging a
campaign to bring the matter to the public's attention as a human rights
violation and an example of racism harbored by many Japanese toward
darker-skinned fellow Asians.

''Japan is a kind of racist society, but the problems here are complicated,''
said Raees Siddiqi, a businessman with a working visa who is president of the
Pakistan Association of Japan. ''As the Japanese admit, their society is not yet
internationalized.''

More generally, this has been a season of Japanese difficulties in handling the
foreigners who have come here for work.

The number of foreign immigrants in Japan without legal permission to work is
officially estimated at 100,000, but some experts think it may be as many as
three or four times that.

The immigrant problem came into focus especially after the arrival of 3,000
''boat people'' from Vietnam in 1989. The Vietnamese were allowed to remain in
accordance with international agreements signed in Geneva, but hundreds of
Chinese who came in with them are being sent back to China.

'Grave Situation' Envisioned

After the arrival of the boat people came an outpouring of newspaper and
magazine articles centered on the international pressures on Japan to allow
foreigners in to do the work that, increasingly, young Japanese seem unwilling
to do.

''Japan has an obligation to accept these people - so some people say,'' Kanji
Nishio, a literary critic, wrote in Chuo Koron, a highly respected journal of
opinion. ''But there is a possibility of a grave situation in which Japan is
overwhelmed by them if Japan is not careful.''

Mr. Nishio recommended blood tests, intelligence tests and criminal
investigations before permitting immigrants to enter. He also expressed concern
that once foreigners start to take certain menial jobs, young Japanese will be
even less willing to work in them.

Responding to concerns about immigrants, the Japanese Government tightened its
laws in 1989, restricting immigrants only to those with particular professional
skills. The Government is also holding businesses liable if they are found to
have hired illegal immigrants.

The new law, combined with the fact that Japan is issuing only two-week visas to
visiting foreigners and refusing to renew them when they expire, is cutting down
on the number of immigrants from many countries.

Kawaguchi, a city of nearly a half million people, has been a scene of problems
relating to Pakistanis because, Mayor Nagase said, its economy rests on
thousands of small cast iron, machinery and metal-working factories that depend
on foreign labor.

'It's Tough Over Here'

''This is the sort of work that is hated by younger Japanese,'' said Koji
Suzaki, owner of a local cast iron factory here. ''But this industry is vital to
Japan's survival. To survive, businessmen are turning to alien workers, and they
are finding that foreigners do work of very high quality.''

A group of five Pakistanis, all working in violation of the law, gathered here
to discuss the matter with a journalist and agreed that in some cases, such as
working near hot furnaces, they are doing work that Japanese refuse to do.

The Pakistanis earn only about five or six dollars an hour, but they say they
can save more than half their salaries to send home. Several live crammed into
small rooms in cheap apartments in the industrial suburbs of Tokyo. ''As far as
I'm concerned, it's tough over here,'' one Pakistani said.

The Pakistanis also say they fall prey to crime and internal gang warfare, and
what Mr. Siddiqi of the Pakistan Association called blackmail and extortion by
Japanese and by other Pakistanis precisely because their illegal status prevents
them from going to the police.

''A lot of the problem is the Japanese media,'' Abdul said. ''Whenever they
write about other Asians, they write about criminals. It has gotten worse in the
last 12 months. Now when you walk through the streets, people watch you with
suspicious eyes. If you say you're from Pakistan, they don't talk to you
anymore.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Pakistanis and other foreigners working in Japan, most in violation of
immigration laws, are upset about what they consider racial discrimination. A
Pakistani, above, works at a cast iron factory in Kawaguchi. (NYT)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1257 words



INTERNATIONAL    A2-13

All of Rumania's former Politburo is in detention, the new Government announced.
More than three dozen members of the ruling body commanded by Nicolae Ceausescu
were arrested after the dictator's execution.    Page A1



For Jews in Rumania, coup is a mixed blessing    A12


Reporter's Notebook: Rumanians ask, Where to now?    A12



Vaclav Havel visited both Germanys in his first foray abroad since being sworn
is as President of Czechoslovakia last week.    A13



Riots have broken out in Azerbaijan, the southern Soviet Republic rocked by
ethnic conflict. The Soviet press agency Tass reported ''barbarous'' actions and
rising tensions along the Iranian border.    A13



Poles were shaken but optimistic as the Government's economic program to move
Poland toward capitalism went into full force - even as the price of bread
jumped 38 percent yesterday.    A13



$1 billion fund set up to back Warsaw's currency plan    A13



Two nuns were killed in Nicaragua by gunmen who ambushed their car. An American
bishop and another nun were wounded. The Nicaraguan Government said U.S.-backed
contra rebels were responsible for the attack.    A1



The Panama Canal's administrator is now a Panamanian for the first time in its
75-year history. Fernando Manfredo took over administration of the canal Jan. 1
under a stipulation of the Panama Canal treaties.    A6



Bush appoints a new Ambassador for Panama    A6


Israeli sought in Panama may have been alerted to invasion    A6



Printing of Argentina's currency, the austral, was halted by the Government of
President Carlos Saul Menem in an effort to turn back the nation's rampant
inflation.    A2



Luxury car production in Japan poses a new and costly challenge to Detroit. A
new mix of robotic technology and traditional craftsmanship enables Japan's auto
makers to build first-rate luxury cars for less money.    A1



A split in the Likud-Labor coalition that governs Israel was averted when party
leaders reached a compromise that suspends Labor's independent-minded minister,
Ezer Weizman, from the inner cabinet, but not from Government.    A3



Widespread labor strife in Lebanon threatens to further strain the nation's
political and military tensions after the Government of President Elias Hrawi
ordered a wage increase for workers that merchants say they cannot meet.    A3



Chemicals sprayed on oil slick off Morocco to save coastline    A3



A U.N. environmental accord, reached at the 1989 General Assembly session, has
committed the 159 member nations to drafting a treaty on stabilizing the earth's
climate and convening a world conference in Brazil in 1992.    A5



NATIONAL    A14-17

The history of the hydrogen bomb is being revised, downplaying the role of a spy
in giving the Soviet Union the crucial secret and the role of Edward Teller in
inventing the weapon.    A1



The decline of America's rural towns and counties poses economic and ethical
dilemmas for state governments. Since the farm crisis, states have directly or
indirectly promoted economic development in some and let the weaker ones die.
    A1



The White House budget for 1991 will be submitted a week late, Bush
Administration officials told the Democratic leadership in Congress.    A14



Pittston strike leaves deep vein of anger in coal country    A14



A Louisiana chemical workers union has raised the state's environmental
consciousness during its 5-year labor dispute with BASF Corporation, union
leaders say.    A16



Evidence links the rash of bombings aimed at the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
11th Circuit and civil rights groups, suggesting it is the work of the same
person or group, the F.B.I. said.    A17

Jury in California views tape of Senator accepting $3,000 check    A17


Eastern Airlines announces new discount fares    A15


William Roper named head of Centers for Disease Control    A16



The Dow Jones average rose 56.95 points, to its highest level ever at 2,810.15.
The advance came on a late burst of buying and a surge by the dollar.    D1



Testing for drug abuse becomes a booming business    D1


A new rival for the personal computer    D1



REGIONAL    B1-4

An environmental bond issue to preserve New York State's open spaces is expected
to be announced by Gov. Mario Cuomo in his annual State of the State message
today.    A1



State of the State: Cuomo's well-laid plans for 1989    B2



Representative Robert Garcia, who faces sentencing on conspiracy and extortion
convictions, has resigned. Democratic leaders in New York are expected to back
Assemblyman Jose Serrano to fill his seat.    A1



Mayor David Dinkins went to work yesterday, holding a series of talks with
aides, politicians and financiers that focused mainly on the budget gap New York
City faces.    B1



Bronx Councilman in line for top post on Land Use Committee    B3



Joseph A. Fernandez's first day as chancellor of New York City's schools
underscored his intention to reshape the system by involving teachers,
principals and parents in running schools.    B1



Lean times face military contractors throughout New York, New Jersey and
Connecticut as Washington talks of smaller defense budgets. No drastic cuts are
expected soon, but contractors are preparing for an uncertain future.    B1



Connecticut faces a budget deficit of $65 million for the fiscal year, officials
said. The announcement comes six months after the state enacted the largest tax
increase in its history to solve last year's budget woes.    B2



The prominent AIDS protest group Act-Up has helped keep the disease in the news,
often using methods many people find rude, disruptive, rash and effective.    B1



New Yorkers met the fare increase prepared and with resignation yesterday. Long
lines expected at subway token booths and bus stops never materialized in most
cases; most riders had stocked up on tokens before the fare changed.    B3


NEEDIEST CASES    B4

BUSINESS DIGEST    D1

The Living Section

Last word on dieting: don't bother    C1


Trouble among the epicurean elite    C1



Arts/Entertainment



Film directors' biographies: tales of youths as outsiders    C13


Music: New Salzburg director    C13


''Turandot'' at the Met    C13


Public Enemy at the World    C15


Word and Image: Vietnam medic's memoirs    C17



EDUCATION    B6-7



Northeast compact on teachers gets mixed review    B7



SPORTS

Basketball: Suns beat Knicks    B9
Column: Vecsey on who's No. 1    B9


Football: Miami ends at top    B9


Soccer: Goalie with no nerves    B9



OBITUARIES    D19

Lawrence Alloway, art critic, historian and curator

EDITORIALS/LETTERS/OP-ED

Editorials    A18


Poland's brave plunge
Felix Bloch, still in limbo
The mosaic thing
O'Neill's commuter war

Letters    A18


Flora Lewis: Tale of two dictators    A19


Russell Baker: Is this justice necessary?    A19


John R. Silber: Don't roll back ''Roe''    A19


Robert Schaeffer: To Lithuania - Stay put    A19


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Hollywood Registers A Bonanza For 1989

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 887 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Jan. 3


Americans flocked to the movies in 1989, and spent more money at the box office
than ever before. Seven films sold over $100 million worth of tickets each, the
first time so many have achieved blockbuster status.

Based on industry estimates, admissions at the nation's movie theaters rose from
1.08 billion in 1988 to 1.12 billion, the highest total in five years.
Moviegoers spent more than $5 billion, smashing last year's box-office record of
$4.45 billion.

Nevertheless, as the 1990's begin, Hollywood is shivering with as much dread as
anticipation.

The Christmas movie business was a disaster, with ticket sales dropping 23
percent from 1988. Although theaters were thronged over the New Year's weekend,
the crowds did not give much of a hint of what January and February would bring.

Next weekend - the all-important post-holiday weekend - will indicate how well
the Christmas movies will hold up and whether the box-office expansion that
began in June 1986 will be continuing or coming to an end.

Three and a Half Years of Growth

Art Murphy, the box-office analyst for the trade paper Variety, said the current
three-and-a-half-year expansion was one of the two longest in the last 40 years.
Typically, a three-year expansion is followed by a box-office recession.

Among the year's seven blockbusters, the runaway leader was ''Batman,'' with
Jack Nicholson as the deadly Joker. Because his contract gives him a share of
merchandising revenue and a fat chunk of the film rentals earned by Warner
Brothers, Mr. Nicholson may make as much as $40 million for his performance.

According to Variety's figures, ''Batman'' sold more than $251 million worth of
tickets, followed by Paramount's ''Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade,'' with
$196 million, and Warner Brothers' ''Lethal Weapon 2,'' starring Mel Gibson as a
wild cop, with $147 million.

It only takes a couple of blockbusters to make a year, and ''Batman'' and
''Lethal Weapon'' were enough to lift Warner Brothers into first place among the
studios. Universal came in second on the strength of such solid hits as
''Parenthood,'' ''Field of Dreams,'' ''Uncle Buck'' and the sequel to ''Back to
the Future.'' Bringing up the rear among the studios were 20th Century-Fox and
Orion.

Disney Comedy in Fourth Place

The movie in fourth place for the year was a surprise, Disney's ''Honey, I
Shrunk the Kids.'' The comedy about four children the size of bread crumbs
grossed $130 million. United Artists' ''Rain Man,'' which starred Tom Cruise and
Dustin Hoffman as a car salesman and his autistic savant brother, grossed $129
million during 1989. The Academy Award-winning best movie of 1988, ''Rain Man''
has grossed a grand total of $172 million.

The success of Tri-Star's ''Look Who's Talking,'' about a baby who tries to find
a husband for his unmarried mother, was another surprise. The movie, which was
initially rejected as a dumb idea by some Hollywood studios, has grossed $115
million so far. The movie has also been a windfall for Bruce Willis, who plays
the voice of the baby. Mr. Willis took little salary but asked for a share of
any profits. His reward will be $10 million.

Columbia's ''Ghostbusters II,'' although tremendously expensive to make at more
than $40 million and considered a box-office disappointment, nonetheless grossed
$112 million and is in seventh place. Another movie that is likely to make over
$100 million is Universal's ''Back to the Future Part II,'' which has topped $95
million already, although the film is showing little of the stamina of its 1985
predecessor.

An interesting trend in 1989 was the success of movies about children, or aimed
at an audience of children. Just as the aging of the movie audience began to be
reflected in more serious themes and more sophisticated comedies two years ago,
last year the nesting habits of the baby boom generation was being portrayed on
the screen and filling seats in the neighborhood multiplexes.

A Comeback for Animation

In addition to ''Honey, I Shrunk the Kids'' and ''Look Who's Talking,''
Universal's ''Parenthood'' - a comedy about the pitfalls of raising children -
was the eighth most successful movie of the year, grossing more than $95
million.

Animated films have made a comeback as part of this trend. Disney's ''Little
Mermaid,'' has grossed nearly $50 million, including more than $9 million last
weekend, and is well on its way to overtaking last year's ''Oliver and Company''
as the top-grossing animated feature. Despite bad reviews, Don Bluth's ''All
Dogs Go to Heaven'' has grossed $21 million. And Orion's low-budget ''Prancer,''
a small, live-action picture about a reindeer who may or may not belong to Santa
Claus, has sold a solid $18 million worth of tickets.

Among the movies that have fared poorly are Orion's big Christmas movie
''She-Devil,'' starring Meryl Streep and Roseanne Barr; ''We're No Angels,'' a
comedy starring Sean Penn and Robert De Niro, and ''Family Business,'' with the
triple star power of Sean Connery, Dustin Hoffman and Matthew Broderick. Others
included Clint Eastwood's ''Pink Cadillac''; Sylvester Stallone's ''Lock Up'';
Brian DePalma's Vietnam film ''Casualties of War''; Jane Fonda's ''Old Gringo,''
and ''Great Balls of Fire,'' one of the many failures that left Orion in last
place.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jack Nicholson as the Joker in the movie ''Batman,'' which is
said to have sold more than $251 million worth of tickets for Warner Brothers.
Mr. Nicholson may make as much as $40 million for his performance.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Upheaval in the East: Czechoslovakia;
A Casualty of Amnesty: A Plant Using Convicts

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1129 words

DATELINE: MLADA BOLESLAV, Czechoslovakia, Jan. 3


When President Vaclav Havel declared an amnesty for 20,000 prisoners on New
Year's Day, he obviously was not thinking about what the effect would be on the
country's biggest automobile factory.

But officials of the sprawling Skoda plant here, which exports 50,000 cars a
year to Western markets, say that it is temporarily paralyzed because it is
losing nearly all 1,600 of its most valuable workers - prisoners who had been
serving jail sentences in the factory.

''It's like a medieval plague,'' said Frantisek Brodsky, the state-owned
company's public-relations official, ''because 1,551 people are suddenly
missing'' - a 10th of the labor force. The plant had been dependent on convict
labor for 20 years, he said, adding that the factory's director, Petr Dedek, had
told him to make a clean breast of the factory's past to three visitors who
arrived unexpectedly at lunch time today.

Mr. Dedek was in Prague today, consulting Government ministries to figure out
how to keep the plant going without forced labor.

Weeks of Prison Unrest

Apparently Mr. Dedek was not the only plant director strained by the quality of
mercy. According to a report on national television tonight, the Agrozet farm
machinery plant in Brno was paralyzed because 320 ''employees'' doing time had
been released. Another one in Roudnice, as well as the Sklounion glassworks in
Chuderice, where the Skoda's windshields are made, the Prefa
prefabricated-housing plant in Kopisty and the Panelarna concrete-panel factory
in Most would also have their routines disrupted because of the amnesty, the
trade-union newspaper Prace reported this morning.

Mr. Havel, a political prisoner for more than 5 of the 21 years since the Warsaw
Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, said Sunday night that the amnesty he
was announcing was relatively broad, and asked people to be open-minded about
those returning to their midst. Sentencing was harsh under the hard-line
Communist Government and in the weeks since its demise, a score of prisons
around the country have been racked by unrest.

Some of it continued beyond bars after the prisoners began going free this
weekend. In Pilsen, a locomotive engineer refused to start a train Tuesday when
drunken prisoners smashed in the windows at the railroad police office at the
station. In Jicin, near the notorious Valdice Prison, extra police officers
patrolled the streets to reassure the jittery local population. In one prison in
southern Bohemia, so many prisoners were released that guards had to pitch in in
the kitchen and the boiler room.

Revealing that the Skoda factory had decided to employ prisoners 20 years ago
because of a national labor shortage, Mr. Brodsky asserted that none of those
there until now had been sentenced for political crimes. ''They were all
prisoners of the so-called 'second group,' serving sentences of under five years
for things like fights, nonpayment of alimony, or being chronically
unemployed,'' he said.

Offers of 'Very Good Wages'

At the guarded, fenced-in barracks where the prisoners lived, Mr. Brodsky
introduced a couple of men in uniform who declined to be photographed. ''Can you
find us jobs?'' one of them said. ''A third of the prisoners will be back soon
enough anyway,'' the second reassured his colleague.

Outside, as the shifts changed, Josef Bocek was keeping a lonely vigil in a
little trailer, a recruiting booth set up to try to entice some of the departing
prisoners into staying on on the outside.

''Dear Colleagues'' a typewritten appeal handed out to the prisoners said.
''Think about your work after you return to civilian life. The automobile
industry throughout the world offers advantageous job opportunities. Remain at
work with us at Mlada Boleslav. The automobile-production plant is interested in
your work. We offer you work in various capacities by mutual agreement and can
provide good housing, food, health care and cultural and sports facilities. We
offer you very good wages.''

As Jan Ferencz's sister came up to inquire why her brother had not been released
yet, Mr. Bocek acknowledged that although he had been sitting in the trailer
since Saturday, when the plant first learned of the coming amnesty, only two or
three prisoners had expressed any interest in staying on.

Mr. Brodsky, checking with the guards inside the prison dormitory, said that as
of this afternoon, 170 prisoners had been released; the rest were still being
processed. Skoda advertised on television Tuesday night for workers from Prague,
offering them an express bus from the city's main railroad station to bring them
directly to the plant, 38 miles away, in 45 minutes.

Metal Presses Without Operators

''We've had amnesties in the past,'' Mr. Brodsky said. ''But never such an
extensive one as this.'' The amnesty, the Government press agency reported
today, would free 20,000 of the 31,000 people in Czechoslovak jails on New
Year's Eve.

Mr. Brodsky said that workers doing time had been paid regular wages, just like
non-convict employees. Taking his visitors inside the factory's fenced-in
pressed-metal shop to reveal that the guardhouse inside - and the giant metal
presses - were without operators, he said the assembly line was still. The
spray-paint shop had also been ''100 percent staffed by prisoners,'' he said.

''We have to produce 190,000 of the new Favorit models in the last year,'' he
said, referring to the latest Skoda, which was named Car of the Year in its
mid-sized class last year in Denmark, where it sells for about $7,500 before
tax. ''We're trying to round up painters from our repair shops scattered around
the country so we can get the production line rolling full time again,'' he
said.

''Maybe the army can provide recruits for us,'' he said. ''It would be easy
enough for us to take down the barbed wire and the fences and transform the
prison house into a respectable type of housing unit.''

Plan for Army Volunteers

Several hundred workers from Vietnam were cheerily streaming past the head
office on the way to their six- and eight-story concrete dormitories, which abut
a Soviet troop garrison that adjoins the factory grounds. It was hard to tell
which buildings belonged to the factory and which to the Soviet base.

Mr. Brodsky said one idea that Mr. Dedek was taking to Prague for draftees from
the Mlada Boleslav region to volunteer to come back here and do their army
service working in the plant. ''We're playing around with the idea,'' he said.

Mr. Brodsky said the factory executives realized there would be a problem as
soon as they heard the news that there would be an amnesty, just before New
Year's weekend.

''What I hated before was that I couldn't tell the truth,'' he said. ''Now there
are no limits.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The amnesty declared for Czechoslovak prisoners on New Year's
Day spelled paralysis for the Skoda automobile plant in Mlada Boleslav nearly
1,600 of its most valuable workers were prisoners serving sentences at the
plant. ''It's like a medieval plague,'' said Frantisek Brodsky, above, the
state-owned company's public relations man, ''because 1,551 people are suddenly
missing.'' (NYT/Craig R. Whitney); map of Czechoslovakia showing location of
Mlada Boleslav (NYT)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Noriega's Surrender: Army;
For First Time, a Woman Leads G.I.'s in Combat

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 751 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 3


An Army woman led an attack against troops of the Panamanian Defense Forces last
month, the first time a woman has commanded American soldiers in battle,
Administration officials said today.

Pentagon officials said Capt. Linda L. Bray, the commander of a military police
unit, was assigned to lead a force of 30 soldiers to capture a kennel holding
guard dogs that turned out to be defended by the Panamanian Defense Forces.

''It was heavily defended,'' Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said
of the firefight on Dec. 20, the first day of the American invasion. ''Three
P.D.F. men were killed. Gunshots were fired on both sides. American troops could
have been killed.''

'An Outstanding Job'

''It was an important military operation,'' Mr. Fitzwater said. ''A woman led
it, and she did an outstanding job.''

Women are barred from serving in direct combat roles, but can serve in military
police units, Pentagon officials said. They said that as a practical matter,
however, there was no hard and fast distinction between combat and military
police roles in Panama.

''There is no front,'' an Army spokesman said. ''You don't know where the enemy
will be at any given time and soldiers are dispersed all around the area. Under
those circumstances you have to be prepared to defend yourself at any time and
that is what she did.''

Representative Patricia Schroeder, a Colorado Democrat who is chairman of the
House Armed Services subcommittee on military installations, said the operation
headed by Captain Bray demonstrated that women should be allowed to carry out
direct combat roles.

Ms. Schroeder said she plans to introduce legislation enabling Army women to
assume all military roles, including direct combat, in a test unit for four
years. Army regulations now bar women from serving in infantry platoons, armored
units, paratrooper units and special forces units, which are likely to be
directly involved in combat.

Distinction 'Really a Joke'

Ms. Schroeder said such regulations damage the prospects of women advancing as
officers. ''This distinction between combat and noncombat units is really a
joke,'' she said.

Ms. Schroeder said Captain Bray, 29 years old, was sent to capture the kennel
after intelligence reports indicated that it was not defended. But the lawmaker
said the intelligence reports turned out to be wrong. She said the incident
underscored the difficulty of isolating women from combat.

An Army spokesman said about 620 Army women were stationed in Panama before last
month's attack, serving in a variety of military police and support roles, like
maintaining equipment.

Once the attack was launched, about 170 more women were sent to Panama. The
spokesman said the Army women had not suffered any casualties. Twenty-three
American soldiers were killed in the Panama attack.

Eight American women lost their lives serving in Vietnam, the Army said.

An Army spokesman said the 123-member 988th Military Police Company commanded by
Captain Bray was sent to Panama from Fort Benning, Ga., days before the
invasion.

In a Firefight

The force of 30 she commanded in the attack on the kennel included women as well
as men, the spokesman said.

''They were supposed to secure the kennel and found themselves in a firefight,''
the spokesman said.

While the Pentagon offered no further details, an account from Panama by the
Scripps Howard News Services described a fierce firefight in which Captain Bray
crashed through a kennel gate in a jeep.

''I joined the Army for the excitement, the challenge, experience and loyalty to
my country,'' she told Scripps Howard. ''I haven't been let down a day.''

Other press accounts said women in military police units were directing traffic
and performing other tasks that made them vulnerable to attack.

''Anyone wearing a uniform was fair game,'' an Army official said.

A Range of Opinion

One Army official said there was a range of opinion within the service about
women assuming combat roles.

The official cautioned against drawing conclusions from Captain Bray's mission
about the desirability of using women in such roles. The official said there
were important differences between the training a military police officer like
Captain Bray receives and that given combat officers.

But the official added, ''What has been demonstrated is the ability of women to
lead, for men and women to work together as a team without distractions and for
women to react in an aggressive manner.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Capt. Linda L. Bray, commander of a military police unit,
apparently became the first woman to command American troops in battle when she
led 30 soldiers in an attack against Panamanian forces last month. (AP)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Noriega's Surrender: Overview;
NORIEGA GIVES HIMSELF UP TO U.S. MILITARY; IS FLOWN TO FLORIDA TO FACE DRUG
CHARGES

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1365 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 3


President Bush announced tonight that Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega had
surrendered to the United States military authorities in Panama, giving the
President the final victory he had been seeking in the invasion of Panama.

General Noriega, who had defied American efforts to drive him from power for
more than four years, was removed under cover of night from the Vatican Embassy
in Panama, where he had taken refuge 10 days ago. He was then flown by United
States military helicopter to Howard Air Base in Panama City, where he was
arrested by agents of the United States Drug Enforcement Administration.

The general is under indictment in two Federal courts in Florida on drug
trafficking charges and Mr. Bush has made bringing him to trial in the United
States a major justification for invading Panama on Dec. 20 and an important
aspect of his Latin American policy in general.

Bush Thanks the Vatican

Mr. Bush appeared in the White House briefing room at about 9:40 P.M., less than
an hour after General Noriega surrendered, to announce that the deposed
Panamanian strongman was aboard an Air Force C-131 transport plane bound for
Homestead Air Force Base in southern Florida.

Thanking the Vatican for its ''evenhanded, statesmanlike assistance'' in getting
General Noriega into American hands, Mr. Bush told reporters at a hurriedly
called White House briefing that the general would be arraigned in Federal
District Court in Miami on the drug charges filed in Miami in 1988. He was also
indicted in Tampa.

An Administration official who asked not to be identified said that the White
House had been expecting a breakthrough in the negotiations for several days,
but that General Noriega's final surrender came without warning.

General Sets 3 Conditions

The general had sought assurances earlier in the week that he would not face the
death penalty if he surrendered and had been told that the charges against him
did not carry the death penalty, the official said.

Tonight, General Noriega informed the United States through Vatican
intermediaries that he was ready to surrender. The official said the general had
set three conditions: he wanted the press to be kept away from the Vatican
mission when he left, he wanted to be able to contact family and friends by
telephone before being flown out of the country and he wanted to be able to wear
his uniform when he surrendered.

The United States, acting through the Vatican diplomats, agreed to those
conditions, the official said.

General Noriega left the mission at 8:48 P.M. and was aboard the C-131 transport
plane by 9:08 P.M. His surrender followed a demonstration by an estimated 20,000
Panamanians who filled five blocks near the Vatican Embassy carrying signs
denouncing him, including one that read ''No Mercy'' in six languages.

In an interview on the ABC News program ''Nightline,'' Archbishop Marcos McGrath
of Panama said the demonstration might have nudged General Noriega into making
his final decision to surrender.

Archbishop McGrath said the Papal Nuncio, Msgr. Sebastian Laboa, had met more
and more frequently with General Noriega in recent days seeking to persuade the
general to leave the Nunciature, where he had been kept isolated in a room on an
upper floor.

In the end, the Archbishop said, General Noriega's choices ''came down to
sitting indefinitely in the Nunciature surrounded by a hostile nation and the
armed forces of the United States, or turning himself over to one or the
other.''

Archbishop McGrath said that the Nuncio was determined not to ''push him out the
front door,'' but that it had made it increasingly clear in recent days that the
Vatican wanted General Noriega to leave the Embassy building, and that when he
finally surrendered, despite his erect bearing, he seemed ''a broken man.''

A Turning Point

General Noriega's surrender marked a critical turning point in the largest
American military operation since Vietnam.

The general's surrender eliminated a major obstacle to establishing the legal
and military authority of the new Panamanian Government and bringing to a
conclusion an invasion that had threatened to bog down in the negotiations over
his fate. By foiling an attempted coup in October, General Noriega had put
intense pressure on Mr. Bush to make good on his often-repeated vow to ''bring
Manuel Noriega to justice.''

Administration officials have said they hoped that by capturing General Noriega
they could encourage more countries to recognize the new Panamanian Government
and eliminate the possibility of prolonged resistance to the invasion.

But Mr. Bush still faces uncertainties in the legal proceedings against General
Noriega. The general's lawyers have said they will seek documents detailing his
long association with the Central Intelligence Agency, including the period when
Mr. Bush was Director of Central Intelligence.

Four U.S. Objectives

Mr. Bush said General Noriega had turned himself over to United States
authorities ''with the full knowledge'' of the new Panamanian Government that
was sworn in at the start of the Dec. 20 invasion.

''On Wednesday, Dec. 20,'' Mr. Bush said, ''I ordered U.S. troops to Panama with
four objectives: to safeguard the lives of American citizens; to help restore
democracy; to protect the integrity of the Panama Canal treaty, and to bring
General Manuel Noriega to justice.''

''All of these objectives have now been achieved,'' he declared.

Mr. Bush said he was ''committed to providing General Noriega a fair trial.''

''Nevertheless,'' he said, ''his apprehension and return to the United States
should send a clear signal that the United States is serious in its
determination that those charged with promoting the distributing of drugs cannot
escape the scrutiny of justice.''

'Good News,' Dole Says

Mr. Bush's announcement drew a quick reaction from Senator Bob Dole of Kansas,
the Senate Republican leader, who called it ''good news for our war on drugs.''

''It proves American won't give up or cave in to anyone, no matter how powerful
or corrupt,'' Mr. Dole said. ''Noriega will finally have his day in court, which
is more than he gave the people of Panama.''

The surrender of General Noriega marked the culmination of intensive
negotiations among officials from the United States, Panama and the Vatican
since he took refuge in the Vatican mission on Dec. 24, four days after the
invasion by 12,000 American troops who had been sent to Panama to reinforce the
12,000 already stationed in that country.

On Sunday, the United States sent Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the Deputy Secretary
of State, to Panama on what was ostensibly a mission to discuss economic aid to
the new Panamanian Government, whose leaders had claimed victory in May
elections that General Noriega later nullified. The announcement of General
Noriega's surrender tonight suggested that Mr. Eagleburger's mission may have
been crucial in the negotiations.

'The Decision Was His'

A senior Administration official said the Papal Nuncio in Panama had informed
Maj. Gen. Marc Cisneros, the second-in-command of American forces in Panama, at
about 6 P.M. that General Noriega was ready to surrender tonight. President Bush
was told of the decision by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney at about 6:30, when he
returned to the White House after a racquetball game.

At first, Administration officials were cautious, since there had been other
promising indications of a solution to the stalemate. ''It could have happened
every day,'' the official said. ''The Vatican was trying to talk him into
leaving and sometimes we would get rumblings that the Nuncio thought he was
ready to do it and it didn't happen.''

Gen. Maxwell R. Thurman, commander of the American troops in Panama, told
reporters in Panama City tonight that General Noriega appeared fit when he
surrendered, and added, ''The decision was his and his alone.''

General Thurman declined to answer questions about the whereabouts of General
Noriega's wife and the rest of his family and also refused to provide any
details about how the deal was struck to get the general out of the Vatican
Embassy and into American custody.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush as he announced the surrender of General Noriega
(AP); Thousands of Panamanians marched through downtown Panama City last night
to celebrate after news spread that Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega had surrendered
to the United States (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 5, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Operation Just Begun

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 495 words


President Bush can now fairly and proudly claim success for the military phase
of his Panama policy. The surrender of Manuel Antonio Noriega to U.S. custody is
a personal triumph for the President and a great relief to most Panamanians.

But it is nonetheless an interim success. The U.S. intervention has provoked
nervous, even angry criticism around the world. Only the clear recovery of full
Panamanian sovereignty in the coming months can secure an enduring triumph.

What, many Americans wonder, is the criticism all about? General Noriega ruled
thuggishly and stands accused of selling out his country to drug racketeers . .
. the American legal system assures him of a fair trial . . . the invasion saved
more Panamanian lives, arguably, than it cost . . . and America's lawful
military rights under the Panama Canal treaties make this a special case.

The President says he intervened for honorable ends - protecting lives,
restoring democracy, uprooting drug dealers and bringing an indicted suspect to
trial. The U.S. shows no desire to occupy Panama permanently or to revoke the
canal treaties. Why can't other countries appreciate this?

Because of painful experience. They know how often, regardless of sovereignty or
international law, big countries invade smaller countries. Latin Americans
cannot forget a history of Yanqui invasions built on flimsy pretexts. For
Africans and for Asians, the struggle to wrest independence from colonial
overlords is a living, burning memory.

The qualms aren't limited to foreigners. Many Americans have their own memories
- of Vietnam, the Nicaraguan contras and years of intelligence cooperation with
a man named Manuel Antonio Noriega. On present evidence, Operation Just Cause,
as the Bush Administration calls its Panama invasion, corresponds to none of the
above. But its most critical tests lie ahead.

President Endara's new Panamanian Government still appears more legal fiction
than political fact. Its mandate, based on last May's annulled election, needs
early reaffirmation at the polls. It still depends on U.S. forces to keep order.
It hid behind Washington's skirts while others decided General Noriega's fate.
''Why bother to play a leading role when somebody else is willing to do it for
you?'' a Panamanian official said Wednesday night.

''Somebody else'' cannot reclaim Panama's mortgaged sovereignty. Only
Panamanians can. The U.S. has honorably pledged to help the Panamanian economy
revive. For now, American help is also needed to assure order. The only
immediate alternative is to recreate the Panamanian Defense Forces. That would
risk reviving tyranny without the tyrant named Noriega. But to prolong U.S.
military patrols risks more outrages like last weekend's attack on the
Nicaraguan Ambassador's residence.

President Bush deserves credit for bringing Manuel Noriega to account before the
law. Whether he deserves credit for more is unsettled: Operation Just Cause has
just begun.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FOOD;
A Dinner to Showcase a Fragrant Thai Curry

BYLINE: By FLORENCE FABRICANT

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 18, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 820 words


ALTHOUGH curry usually brings to mind Indian food or dishes flavored with a
premixed packaged spice blend, the term is actually an umbrella for a variety of
preparations. They do have in common a collection of spices, notably turmeric,
cumin, coriander, ginger and pepper. These are the main components, but the list
can be expanded with many others.

Indian curries differ from region to region, with those prepared in the south
often the more incendiary. But curries are also typical of the cuisines of
Burma, Malaysia, Thailand, Vietnam and even parts of China.

Thai curries are extremely fragrant, using fresh herbs, fresh ginger, garlic and
often coconut milk. They frequently derive their heat from fresh green cherries.
The following recipe illustrates a typical Thai curry. It follows the basic
curry principle in that the aromatic fresh and dried spice ingredients are
sauteed first, before any liquid is added. This eliminates any raw taste the
spice may have.

The fish is sauteed initially, then marinated briefly. This method permits the
fish to brown more attractively. Had it been marinated before searing it would
have been too wet to brown.

A fragrant seasoned rice dish and a cooling cabbage and cucumber salad are all
it takes to complete this main course part of the dinner for six to eight.
Spring rolls or dumplings, either homemade or purchased, would be a suitable
first course and a simple fruit tart - lemon or orange perhaps - would round out
the dinner nicely. Beer or a fruity white wine such as riesling would be a
suitable beverage to serve.

Mako in Thai Curry

Preparation time: 15 minutes

Cooking time: 20 minutes
2 pounds mako shark steaks (swordfish or monkfish may be substituted)
2 tablespoons peanut oil
 Juice of 1 lime
2 tablespoons Chinese oyster sauce
1 tablespoon finely minced fresh ginger
2 teaspoons finely minced garlic
1 jalapeno pepper, seeded and finely minced
1 teaspoon ground turmeric
 1/2 teaspoon ground cumin
 A 14-ounce can unsweetened coconut milk (available in health-food stores or
Asian groceries)
2 tablespoons light soy sauce (or to taste)
 Cayenne pepper or red pepper flakes to taste
1 teaspoon cornstarch dissolved in 1 tablespoon cold water
2 tablespoons finely minced fresh coriander leaves.

1. Trim the skin and any dark areas from the fish. Cut the fish into uniform
one-inch cubes. Dry them on paper towel.

2. Heat one tablespoon of the oil to very hot in a large nonstick skillet. Add
the fish cubes and sear them until lightly browned but not cooked through. Do
not crowd them in the pan. You may have to sear the fish in more than one batch.
Remove the fish cubes as they are seared to a bowl.

3. Toss the seared fish cubes with the lime juice and oyster sauce and set
aside.

4. Heat the remaining oil in the skillet, add the ginger, garlic and jalapeno
pepper and saute until lightly browned. Stir in the turmeric and cumin, then add
the coconut milk. Bring to a simmer then add the soy sauce and pepper to taste.
Stir in the cornstarch mixture and cook briefly until the sauce has thickened
somewhat.

5. Stir in the fish cubes along with the lime juice and oyster sauce marinade.
Simmer for five minutes. Taste for seasoning, adding more soy sauce and red
pepper if necessary. Stir in the coriander leaves and serve with seasoned rice.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

Seasoned Rice

Preparation time: 5 minutes

Cooking time: 20 minutes
2 tablespoons peanut oil
 1/4 cup finely chopped shallots
1 teaspoon five-spice powder (available in Asian groceries)
1Y cups long-grain rice
2 cups water
 Salt
 1/2 cup golden raisins.

1. Heat the oil in a heavy saucepan. Add the shallots and saute until just
beginning to brown. Stir in the five-spice powder and the rice. Cook, stirring,
about three minutes until the rice begins to look white.

2. Stir in the water, bring to a simmer and season with salt. Stir in the
raisins. Cover and cook over low heat for 17 minutes, until the water is
absorbed. Remove rice from the heat and set aside, covered, 5 to 10 minutes
before fluffing with a fork and transferring to a warm serving dish.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

Cucumber, Cabbage And Scallion Slaw

Preparation time: 15 minutes

Cooking time:

None
2 medium-size cucumbers
4 scallions
2 cups finely shredded Chinese cabbage, preferably the leafy top part of the
cabbage
4 tablespoons rice vinegar
 Pinch of sugar
2 tablespoons Chinese sesame oil
1 tablespoon peanut oil
1 teaspoon light soy sauce.

1. Peel the cucumbers, cut them in half lengthwise and scoop out the seeds.
Slice them thin.

2. Trim the scallions, chop them and mix them with the cucumbers. Toss in the
cabbage.

3. Mix the remaining ingredients together and toss with the vegetables. Allow to
marinate at least one hour before serving.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FOOD;
A Dinner to Showcase a Fragrant Thai Curry

BYLINE: By FLORENCE FABRICANT

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 14, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 820 words


ALTHOUGH curry usually brings to mind Indian food or dishes flavored with a
premixed packaged spice blend, the term is actually an umbrella for a variety of
preparations. They do have in common a collection of spices, notably turmeric,
cumin, coriander, ginger and pepper. These are the main components, but the list
can be expanded with many others.

Indian curries differ from region to region, with those prepared in the south
often the more incendiary. But curries are also typical of the cuisines of
Burma, Malaysia, Thailand, Vietnam and even parts of China.

Thai curries are extremely fragrant, using fresh herbs, fresh ginger, garlic and
often coconut milk. They frequently derive their heat from fresh green cherries.
The following recipe illustrates a typical Thai curry. It follows the basic
curry principle in that the aromatic fresh and dried spice ingredients are
sauteed first, before any liquid is added. This eliminates any raw taste the
spice may have.

The fish is sauteed initially, then marinated briefly. This method permits the
fish to brown more attractively. Had it been marinated before searing it would
have been too wet to brown.

A fragrant seasoned rice dish and a cooling cabbage and cucumber salad are all
it takes to complete this main course part of the dinner for six to eight.
Spring rolls or dumplings, either homemade or purchased, would be a suitable
first course and a simple fruit tart - lemon or orange perhaps - would round out
the dinner nicely. Beer or a fruity white wine such as riesling would be a
suitable beverage to serve.

Mako in Thai Curry

Preparation time: 15 minutes

Cooking time: 20 minutes
2 pounds mako shark steaks (swordfish or monkfish may be substituted)
2 tablespoons peanut oil
 Juice of 1 lime
2 tablespoons Chinese oyster sauce
1 tablespoon finely minced fresh ginger
2 teaspoons finely minced garlic
1 jalapeno pepper, seeded and finely minced
1 teaspoon ground turmeric
 1/2 teaspoon ground cumin
 A 14-ounce can unsweetened coconut milk (available in health-food stores or
Asian groceries)
2 tablespoons light soy sauce (or to taste)
 Cayenne pepper or red pepper flakes to taste
1 teaspoon cornstarch dissolved in 1 tablespoon cold water
2 tablespoons finely minced fresh coriander leaves.

1. Trim the skin and any dark areas from the fish. Cut the fish into uniform
one-inch cubes. Dry them on paper towel.

2. Heat one tablespoon of the oil to very hot in a large nonstick skillet. Add
the fish cubes and sear them until lightly browned but not cooked through. Do
not crowd them in the pan. You may have to sear the fish in more than one batch.
Remove the fish cubes as they are seared to a bowl.

3. Toss the seared fish cubes with the lime juice and oyster sauce and set
aside.

4. Heat the remaining oil in the skillet, add the ginger, garlic and jalapeno
pepper and saute until lightly browned. Stir in the turmeric and cumin, then add
the coconut milk. Bring to a simmer then add the soy sauce and pepper to taste.
Stir in the cornstarch mixture and cook briefly until the sauce has thickened
somewhat.

5. Stir in the fish cubes along with the lime juice and oyster sauce marinade.
Simmer for five minutes. Taste for seasoning, adding more soy sauce and red
pepper if necessary. Stir in the coriander leaves and serve with seasoned rice.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

Seasoned Rice

Preparation time: 5 minutes

Cooking time: 20 minutes
2 tablespoons peanut oil
 1/4 cup finely chopped shallots
1 teaspoon five-spice powder (available in Asian groceries)
1Y cups long-grain rice
2 cups water
 Salt
 1/2 cup golden raisins.

1. Heat the oil in a heavy saucepan. Add the shallots and saute until just
beginning to brown. Stir in the five-spice powder and the rice. Cook, stirring,
about three minutes until the rice begins to look white.

2. Stir in the water, bring to a simmer and season with salt. Stir in the
raisins. Cover and cook over low heat for 17 minutes, until the water is
absorbed. Remove rice from the heat and set aside, covered, 5 to 10 minutes
before fluffing with a fork and transferring to a warm serving dish.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

Cucumber, Cabbage And Scallion Slaw

Preparation time: 15 minutes

Cooking time:

None
2 medium-size cucumbers
4 scallions
2 cups finely shredded Chinese cabbage, preferably the leafy top part of the
cabbage
4 tablespoons rice vinegar
 Pinch of sugar
2 tablespoons Chinese sesame oil
1 tablespoon peanut oil
1 teaspoon light soy sauce.

1. Peel the cucumbers, cut them in half lengthwise and scoop out the seeds.
Slice them thin.

2. Trim the scallions, chop them and mix them with the cucumbers. Toss in the
cabbage.

3. Mix the remaining ingredients together and toss with the vegetables. Allow to
marinate at least one hour before serving.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FOOD;
A Dinner to Showcase a Fragrant Thai Curry

BYLINE: By FLORENCE FABRICANT

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 12, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 820 words


ALTHOUGH curry usually brings to mind Indian food or dishes flavored with a
premixed packaged spice blend, the term is actually an umbrella for a variety of
preparations. They do have in common a collection of spices, notably turmeric,
cumin, coriander, ginger and pepper. These are the main components, but the list
can be expanded with many others.

Indian curries differ from region to region, with those prepared in the south
often the more incendiary. But curries are also typical of the cuisines of
Burma, Malaysia, Thailand, Vietnam and even parts of China.

Thai curries are extremely fragrant, using fresh herbs, fresh ginger, garlic and
often coconut milk. They frequently derive their heat from fresh green cherries.
The following recipe illustrates a typical Thai curry. It follows the basic
curry principle in that the aromatic fresh and dried spice ingredients are
sauteed first, before any liquid is added. This eliminates any raw taste the
spice may have.

The fish is sauteed initially, then marinated briefly. This method permits the
fish to brown more attractively. Had it been marinated before searing it would
have been too wet to brown.

A fragrant seasoned rice dish and a cooling cabbage and cucumber salad are all
it takes to complete this main course part of the dinner for six to eight.
Spring rolls or dumplings, either homemade or purchased, would be a suitable
first course and a simple fruit tart - lemon or orange perhaps - would round out
the dinner nicely. Beer or a fruity white wine such as riesling would be a
suitable beverage to serve.

Mako in Thai Curry

Preparation time: 15 minutes

Cooking time: 20 minutes
2 pounds mako shark steaks (swordfish or monkfish may be substituted)
2 tablespoons peanut oil
 Juice of 1 lime
2 tablespoons Chinese oyster sauce
1 tablespoon finely minced fresh ginger
2 teaspoons finely minced garlic
1 jalapeno pepper, seeded and finely minced
1 teaspoon ground turmeric
 1/2 teaspoon ground cumin
 A 14-ounce can unsweetened coconut milk (available in health-food stores or
Asian groceries)
2 tablespoons light soy sauce (or to taste)
 Cayenne pepper or red pepper flakes to taste
1 teaspoon cornstarch dissolved in 1 tablespoon cold water
2 tablespoons finely minced fresh coriander leaves.

1. Trim the skin and any dark areas from the fish. Cut the fish into uniform
one-inch cubes. Dry them on paper towel.

2. Heat one tablespoon of the oil to very hot in a large nonstick skillet. Add
the fish cubes and sear them until lightly browned but not cooked through. Do
not crowd them in the pan. You may have to sear the fish in more than one batch.
Remove the fish cubes as they are seared to a bowl.

3. Toss the seared fish cubes with the lime juice and oyster sauce and set
aside.

4. Heat the remaining oil in the skillet, add the ginger, garlic and jalapeno
pepper and saute until lightly browned. Stir in the turmeric and cumin, then add
the coconut milk. Bring to a simmer then add the soy sauce and pepper to taste.
Stir in the cornstarch mixture and cook briefly until the sauce has thickened
somewhat.

5. Stir in the fish cubes along with the lime juice and oyster sauce marinade.
Simmer for five minutes. Taste for seasoning, adding more soy sauce and red
pepper if necessary. Stir in the coriander leaves and serve with seasoned rice.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

Seasoned Rice

Preparation time: 5 minutes

Cooking time: 20 minutes
2 tablespoons peanut oil
 1/4 cup finely chopped shallots
1 teaspoon five-spice powder (available in Asian groceries)
1Y cups long-grain rice
2 cups water
 Salt
 1/2 cup golden raisins.

1. Heat the oil in a heavy saucepan. Add the shallots and saute until just
beginning to brown. Stir in the five-spice powder and the rice. Cook, stirring,
about three minutes until the rice begins to look white.

2. Stir in the water, bring to a simmer and season with salt. Stir in the
raisins. Cover and cook over low heat for 17 minutes, until the water is
absorbed. Remove rice from the heat and set aside, covered, 5 to 10 minutes
before fluffing with a fork and transferring to a warm serving dish.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

Cucumber, Cabbage And Scallion Slaw

Preparation time: 15 minutes

Cooking time:

None
2 medium-size cucumbers
4 scallions
2 cups finely shredded Chinese cabbage, preferably the leafy top part of the
cabbage
4 tablespoons rice vinegar
 Pinch of sugar
2 tablespoons Chinese sesame oil
1 tablespoon peanut oil
1 teaspoon light soy sauce.

1. Peel the cucumbers, cut them in half lengthwise and scoop out the seeds.
Slice them thin.

2. Trim the scallions, chop them and mix them with the cucumbers. Toss in the
cabbage.

3. Mix the remaining ingredients together and toss with the vegetables. Allow to
marinate at least one hour before serving.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FOOD;
A Dinner to Showcase a Fragrant Thai Curry

BYLINE: By FLORENCE FABRICANT

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 18, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 820 words


ALTHOUGH curry usually brings to mind Indian food or dishes flavored with a
premixed packaged spice blend, the term is actually an umbrella for a variety of
preparations. They do have in common a collection of spices, notably turmeric,
cumin, coriander, ginger and pepper. These are the main components, but the list
can be expanded with many others.

Indian curries differ from region to region, with those prepared in the south
often the more incendiary. But curries are also typical of the cuisines of
Burma, Malaysia, Thailand, Vietnam and even parts of China.

Thai curries are extremely fragrant, using fresh herbs, fresh ginger, garlic and
often coconut milk. They frequently derive their heat from fresh green cherries.
The following recipe illustrates a typical Thai curry. It follows the basic
curry principle in that the aromatic fresh and dried spice ingredients are
sauteed first, before any liquid is added. This eliminates any raw taste the
spice may have.

The fish is sauteed initially, then marinated briefly. This method permits the
fish to brown more attractively. Had it been marinated before searing it would
have been too wet to brown.

A fragrant seasoned rice dish and a cooling cabbage and cucumber salad are all
it takes to complete this main course part of the dinner for six to eight.
Spring rolls or dumplings, either homemade or purchased, would be a suitable
first course and a simple fruit tart - lemon or orange perhaps - would round out
the dinner nicely. Beer or a fruity white wine such as riesling would be a
suitable beverage to serve.

Mako in Thai Curry

Preparation time: 15 minutes

Cooking time: 20 minutes
2 pounds mako shark steaks (swordfish or monkfish may be substituted)
2 tablespoons peanut oil
 Juice of 1 lime
2 tablespoons Chinese oyster sauce
1 tablespoon finely minced fresh ginger
2 teaspoons finely minced garlic
1 jalapeno pepper, seeded and finely minced
1 teaspoon ground turmeric
 1/2 teaspoon ground cumin
 A 14-ounce can unsweetened coconut milk (available in health-food stores or
Asian groceries)
2 tablespoons light soy sauce (or to taste)
 Cayenne pepper or red pepper flakes to taste
1 teaspoon cornstarch dissolved in 1 tablespoon cold water
2 tablespoons finely minced fresh coriander leaves.

1. Trim the skin and any dark areas from the fish. Cut the fish into uniform
one-inch cubes. Dry them on paper towel.

2. Heat one tablespoon of the oil to very hot in a large nonstick skillet. Add
the fish cubes and sear them until lightly browned but not cooked through. Do
not crowd them in the pan. You may have to sear the fish in more than one batch.
Remove the fish cubes as they are seared to a bowl.

3. Toss the seared fish cubes with the lime juice and oyster sauce and set
aside.

4. Heat the remaining oil in the skillet, add the ginger, garlic and jalapeno
pepper and saute until lightly browned. Stir in the turmeric and cumin, then add
the coconut milk. Bring to a simmer then add the soy sauce and pepper to taste.
Stir in the cornstarch mixture and cook briefly until the sauce has thickened
somewhat.

5. Stir in the fish cubes along with the lime juice and oyster sauce marinade.
Simmer for five minutes. Taste for seasoning, adding more soy sauce and red
pepper if necessary. Stir in the coriander leaves and serve with seasoned rice.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

Seasoned Rice

Preparation time: 5 minutes

Cooking time: 20 minutes
2 tablespoons peanut oil
 1/4 cup finely chopped shallots
1 teaspoon five-spice powder (available in Asian groceries)
1Y cups long-grain rice
2 cups water
 Salt
 1/2 cup golden raisins.

1. Heat the oil in a heavy saucepan. Add the shallots and saute until just
beginning to brown. Stir in the five-spice powder and the rice. Cook, stirring,
about three minutes until the rice begins to look white.

2. Stir in the water, bring to a simmer and season with salt. Stir in the
raisins. Cover and cook over low heat for 17 minutes, until the water is
absorbed. Remove rice from the heat and set aside, covered, 5 to 10 minutes
before fluffing with a fork and transferring to a warm serving dish.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

Cucumber, Cabbage And Scallion Slaw

Preparation time: 15 minutes

Cooking time:

None
2 medium-size cucumbers
4 scallions
2 cups finely shredded Chinese cabbage, preferably the leafy top part of the
cabbage
4 tablespoons rice vinegar
 Pinch of sugar
2 tablespoons Chinese sesame oil
1 tablespoon peanut oil
1 teaspoon light soy sauce.

1. Peel the cucumbers, cut them in half lengthwise and scoop out the seeds.
Slice them thin.

2. Trim the scallions, chop them and mix them with the cucumbers. Toss in the
cabbage.

3. Mix the remaining ingredients together and toss with the vegetables. Allow to
marinate at least one hour before serving.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BASEBALL;
Gooden Upbeat for 90's After Up-and-Down 80's

BYLINE: By JOSEPH DURSO

SECTION: Section 8; Page 1, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1034 words


Dwight Gooden, who came out of the 1980's with a sore right shoulder and
lingering memories of his ordeal with drugs, reports that he is entering the
1990's with no qualms, no fears and no demons and says, ''I couldn't be more
upbeat.''

''I'm putting the 80's behind me, the good and the bad,'' Gooden said the other
day. ''The 80's were great. I made the one mistake, but recovered from it. The
main thing for me in the Nineties is to be healthy. If so, I look forward to
pitching all 10 years in this decade, hopefully all with the Mets.''

Gooden began his countdown to spring training last week at his home in St.
Petersburg, Fla., where he exercised his shoulder lightly, tossed a baseball
softly and reflected on his six years in the big leagues and the decade beyond.
He will take a longer stride this week, when he goes to a park and starts
tossing to Greg Pavlick, the Mets' bullpen coach, who lives nearby. But he will
not ''air it out,'' he said, until he reaches camp in six weeks.

As he enters a new season and a new decade, the ace of the Mets staff is
accompanied by one or two unknowns but is otherwise surrounded by the trappings
of success: He turned 25 in November but has already won 100 games, he makes
$2.2 million a year in salary plus a couple of hundred thousand more in
endorsements, he and his wife are expecting a child in April and he is providing
for the support of his mother, father, sister, stepbrother and an increasing
number of charities.

''I've been with him since 1982,'' said Gooden's agent, James Neader of St.
Petersburg. ''I've seen him go from a high school senior to a grown, mature
adult and an asset to the community. He's faced the realities of life, and he's
handling them with grace and character.''

One of the realities of life was his involvement with drugs three years ago. He
was suspended from baseball, missed two months of the 1987 season, underwent
rehabilitation and seemed much older and wiser when he returned.

''I'd rather not even think about it,'' Gooden said by telephone from his home.
''Once in a while, I think about it, and it hurts. I wonder: How did it happen?
Why me? But it taught me: Don't take anything for granted.''

Now he is trying to cope with the realities of life that confronted him last
July 1, when he stopped pitching after two innings in a game in Cincinnati. The
diagnosis: a torn muscle in front of the right shoulder. He pitched only twice
after that, both times in relief, and went home on Oct. 1 with great
expectations but no guarantees.

Then he began a winter of rest and exercise. Most days, he played catch in the
backyard with his nephew, Gary Sheffield of the Milwaukee Brewers. Last month,
the Mets' physicians sent him to Boston for a further medical scan by Dr. Arthur
Pappas, the team physician for the Boston Red Sox, who is a specialist in
shoulder injuries. It was the seventh time that Gooden had a magnetic resonance
imaging (M.R.I.) scan, and Dr. Pappas detected continued improvement. Sometime
in the next two weeks, he will return for another scan, probably the final one
before spring training. The shoulder is healing, but is not yet fully recovered.

''We have to go carefully,'' said Dr. James C. Parkes, the Mets' surgeon. ''It's
healing nicely, and I think by the first game of the season, he'll be fine. He's
not a limited pitcher. Gooden doesn't think he's a limited pitcher, either. And
he has no intention of thinking like one.

''I don't want to get too anxious and develop a mental block, or I'll pitch as
though I had a sore shoulder,'' he said. ''And that would be as limiting as an
injury.

''I never panicked when it happened. At first, I thought it was just a stiff
shoulder. But I never thought it was going to end my career. When I came home, I
took three weeks off, then started soft-tossing with Gary in the backyard and
later moved back for some long-tossing. Now I'll start throwing off the mound.
Just 10 to 15 minutes every other day, maybe play a little catch in between. I
have no doubt I'll have a normal spring.''

If the Mets are keeping their fingers crossed, the reasons are compelling: In
six seasons, Gooden has won 100 games and lost only 39, allowed fewer than 3
earned runs a game, pitched 52 complete games and 19 shutouts and he struck out
1,168 batters in 1,290 innings. In less than half a season last year, before
tearing the tissue in his shoulder muscle, he won 9 games, lost 4 and struck out
101 batters in 118 innings.

''The 80's were mostly great for me,'' Gooden said. ''They were a dream come
true. I wanted most of all to make the big leagues, and a year and a half out of
high school, I was pitching for the Mets.

''My rookie season was six years ago, but it seems like yesterday. Darryl
Strawberry and I are the two old men of the Mets now.''

As he grew older, Gooden grew more involved with his family and community. He
now presides over a household that includes his mother, Ella; his father, Dan,
who requires kidney dialysis treatment; his sister, Betty; his son, Dwight Jr.,
and his wife, Monica. Also, his stepbrother, Derrick, who is 5 years old and who
was gravely injured when he was struck by a car last June.

''It was the day I won No. 100,'' Gooden remembered. ''He was in a coma for a
few days, and a wheelchair ever since. But he talks now, slowly, and he's taking
steps, and the doctors say he'll be normal again in a year and a half.''

These realities of life probably convinced Gooden to become involved in
charities, notably the National Kidney Foundation and the All-Children's
Hospital in St. Petersburg. He sponsored the first Dwight Gooden softball game
last month in Tampa and was joined by some of his baseball friends, including
Roger McDowell, whose brother, Bruce, lives in Tampa and suffers from kidney
disease. Later, Gooden walked through the All-Children's Hospital and passed out
Christmas gifts. He also donates $1,000 to a different children's hospital
whenever he wins a game.

''You don't realize all the things you can do that help people,'' Gooden said.
''Five minutes of your time can mean a lot to a child. There's more to life than
doing your work and then going home to your family.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dwight Gooden has become more involved with charities. Last
month he presented a check to the Vietnam Veterans Center. (St. Petersburg
Times/Kathleen Cabble)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Claim Assault on Major City

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 13, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 199 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sunday, Jan. 7


Khmer Rouge guerrillas claimed today they had attacked Cambodia's second-largest
city, setting it ablaze and forcing Government troops to call for
reinforcements.

If confirmed, the reported battle for the provincial capital of Battambang would
be one of the biggest clashes in the 11-year-old war against the
Vietnamese-installed Government. Most claims by the Khmer Rouge have proven
false, although the guerrillas have scored significant victories in recent
months.

The Khmer Rouge army radio said the guerrillas hit the northwestern city at
midnight on Friday.

Battambang, the second-largest city after the capital, Phnom Penh, is in the
province of the same name. The province borders Thailand and contains some of
the main mountain strongholds of the Khmer Rouge.

The attack would be the most significant since the guerrillas seized the rich
gem-mining town of Pailin, 45 miles southwest of Battambang, on Oct. 22.

The war broke out after Vietnam invaded Cambodia in December 1978 and replaced
the Khmer Rouge with a Vietnamese-backed Government. The Khmer Rouge were
responsible for the deaths of more than a million people during their rule from
April 1975 to early January 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 997 words



INTERNATIONAL/3-16



The downfall of Nicolae Ceausescu was probably brought about by his own
arrogance as much as by bullets and jeering crowds.          Page 1



The Soviet-Rumania border will be opened, and oil and gas will be provided to
Rumanians to turn on their heat for the first winter in years, pledged Foreign
Minister Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union.          1



An elite Soviet training school for Communist apparatchiks is trying to adjust
to the transformation of Soviet politics. Its curriculum is being rewritten to
reflect a more honest party history and two-thirds of the faculty is being
replaced.          14



Crowds raid Soviet-Iran border           14



Thousands of Slavs continue anti-Turkish protests           14



Berlin Communists urges troop cuts           16



In reaction to Rumania, a hardening in Beijing           16



A Japanese aid package for Poland and Hungary that will include more than $1
billion in loans and guarantees will be announced next week, Japanese officials
said.          16



The economic woes of Argentines include not only the immediate problem of coping
with roller-coaster inflation, but also a general decline in their standards of
living.

3



Attacks on African villagers in Sudan by Government-supported Arab militiamen
have resulted in the deaths of between 300 and 1,500 villagers, reports from
Western officials in Khartoum say.          12



Vietnam allows more prisoners to leave for U.S.           3



2 Korean parties seek an alliance            9



Philippine rebels kill mayor and threaten G.I.'s           13



Paper in India closes in a dispute over wages           4



Renewed Muslim-Christian battle in Beirut kills 3           5



Iran rejects Iraqi offer of talks as a 'deception'           8



English is making a comeback in Sri Lanka           6



Archie Bunker's South African cousin has TV debut            12



NATIONAL/18-25



U.S. plans for the war on drugs in Latin America were dealt a setback this week
when Colombia balked at a crucial part of the plan - the stationing of United
States vessels off its coast, Administration officials said.           1



Cocaine ring's latest move: kidnapping wealthy Colombians           22



Booty from drug cases enriches police coffers           18



Prosecutors in the Noriega case, depending on an indictment that draws heavily
on the testimony of convicted drug traffickers, are scrambling to make deals
with co-defendants and searching for new evidence to fortify their case.
          1



Key figures in proceedings against Noriega           19



In Panama, life after Noriega seems surreal           20



For Panama's inmates, a prison like Devil's Island           19



An ambitious space shuttle mission scheduled to begin tomorrow involves the
rescue and bringing back to Earth of a bus-size satellite that is slowly falling
out of orbit.          1

The strain on the student-athlete to strike a proper balance between academics
and a demanding sports regimen is becoming a growing problem in college
baseball, hockey, golf and tennis programs as well as high-profile basketball
and football programs.           1



Officials investigating the bombings in the Southeast met this week to
coordinate their efforts. The officials, who come from three states, said no new
letters were received from the suspected bombers.          18



The story of Carol and Charles Stuart has become an outrageous tale of murder.
Still, it is a story that people who knew the couple - or thought they did - say
they cannot comprehend.          24



The trial of the computer expert accused of illegally gaining entry to dozens of
computers on a nationwide network is scheduled to begin in Syracuse on Monday.
          18



Illinois and Kentucky at odds over a disputed river border           23



REGIONAL/26-29



The school system's headquarters would go through a sweeping reorganization
under a plan announced by Chancellor Fernandez to eliminate 14 bureaus and 218
jobs.          28



The Williamsburgh Savings Bank, based in the landmark Brooklyn building of the
same name, plans to change its name to the Manhattan Savings Banks after its
merger with that bank. To some Brooklynites, the change is something of a
slight.           28



Harrison Goldin has begun a new life as the head of a financial consulting
concern specializing in advising financially troubled companies after his fourth
term as City Comptroller ended last Monday.          29



Immigrants are swelling English classes and waiting lists.           26



Cuomo confuses advocates on both sides of abortion issue           27



Healthy economy is seen for farms            27



Patient overflow alarms hospitals           28



Gramercy Park residents return home to new horrors           28



Neediest Cases/29



Arts/Reviews/49-50



Music: Cantonese comic opera           49



Campus Life/35-37



LeMoyne-Owen College reaching out to serve neighbors           35



Fashion/44-45



Life Style/38-41



There's more to coin laundries than getting the wash done           38



Obituaries/30



Arthur Kennedy, actor

Louis A. Schuker, educator

Pastimes/51-52



Stamps           51



Coins           51



Weddings/46-49


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SUMMARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 8, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Report Attacking Battambang

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 202 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 7


Khmer Rouge guerrillas said today that they had attacked Cambodia's
second-largest city, setting it ablaze and forcing Government troops to call for
reinforcements.

If confirmed, the reported battle for the provincial capital of Battambang would
be one of the biggest clashes in the guerrillas' 11-year-old war against the
Vietnamese-installed Government. Most claims by the Khmer Rouge have proven
false, although the guerrillas have scored significant victories in recent
months.

The Khmer Rouge army radio said the guerrillas hit the northwestern city at
midnight on Friday.

Battambang, the second-largest city after the capital, Phnom Penh, is in the
province of the same name. The province borders Thailand and contains some of
the main mountain strongholds of the Khmer Rouge.

The attack would be the most significant since the guerrillas seized the rich
gem-mining town of Pailin, 45 miles southwest of Battambang, on Oct. 22.

The war broke out after Vietnam invaded Cambodia in December 1978 and replaced
the Khmer Rouge with a Vietnamese-backed Government. The Khmer Rouge were
responsible for the deaths of more than a million people during their rule from
April 1975 to early January 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 9, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE U.S. AND PANAMA: THE MILITARY;
Pentagon Looks for Ways To Stave Off Budget Cuts

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1130 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 8


As the annual ritual of presenting and selling the Defense Department budget to
Congress approaches, the Pentagon is searching for new ways to help justify its
spending plans.

Government and private experts agree that the threat of war with the Soviet
Union is diminishing. As a result, the nation's military services argue that a
portion of the Pentagon budget in the 1990's must be devoted to combating drugs
and being prepared to bring American military power to bear in the third world.

Specifically, Pentagon officials say politically popular actions like the
invasion of Panama and the dispatch of a Navy aircraft carrier to the coast of
Colombia to detect planes carrying drugs are harbinger of a new era and
arguments against sharp cuts in the Pentagon budget.

In addition, the officials say, the Soviet military forces, as now constituted,
continue to represent a formidable opponent that must be matched, even if the
prospects of a confrontation are at a low point.

'A Real Soul-Searching'

Representative Les Aspin, the Wisconsin Democrat who is chairman of the House
Armed Services Committee, said in an interview last week that only massive
repression in the Soviet Union and a complete change in its foreign and security
policies could reverse the momentum in Congress toward cuts in the military
budget.

''The military,'' Representative Aspin said, ''is going through a real
soul-searching. They are looking for a mission.''

''I know the Pentagon thinks that Panama is going to change the outlook on
defense spending,'' he continued. ''They're looking at this as a way to argue
for a robust defense budget. In fact, it's marginal. I don't think it will
change the size of the budget, but it may change the shape.''

Indeed, some independent analysts said in interviews that the Army's success in
Panama, using mobile, lightly armed troops, suggests the possibility of larger
troop cuts from a military largely trained and armed for a strike in Europe by
Soviet troops using conventional weapons.

Pentagon officials disagree. One official said Panama is a good example for the
budget debate because ''it proves we're worth the investment.'' The Panama
operation, another official said, will be an important illustration when Defense
Secretary Dick Cheney explains his new vision for the military.

Pentagon officials, who all spoke on condition of anonymity, noted that although
the Soviet threat may be lessening, countries like Iran, Iraq and Syria have
begun an ambitious arms buildup that includes ballistic missiles and chemical
weapons. Syria, for example, has 4,000 modern battle tanks and a formidable air
force, while Iraq late last year tested its first intermediate-range missile.

New Uses for Old Weapons

As the United States reorients its military thinking, Pentagon officials see new
uses for old weapons. Battleships intended for shore bombardment in a
conventional war might be used to launch a cruise missile strike at terrorist
training bases, they said.

The Bush Administration's budget for the 1991 fiscal year, which begins Oct. 1,
asks Congress for $295 billion, about $4 billion more than was approved this
year but about $6 billion, or 2 percent, less than what would be needed to keep
up with inflation. The Administration is expected to propose its budget to
Congress on Jan. 29.

Despite Presidential requests for more money each year, Congress has reduced the
Pentagon's budget by an average of 2 percent, after accounting for inflation,
each year since 1985.

Senator William S. Cohen, a Maine Republican who is a member of the Senate Armed
Services Committee, warned that the Pentagon will have to do more than explain
the success of the Panama operation to deflect the pressure for deeper cuts.

'What Is Driving the Strategy?'

''We want to know what is driving the strategy,'' Senator Cohen said. ''Is there
a conceptual rationale to support why we arrived on a 2 percent cut? If there's
not, we're going to have trouble on the Senate floor because some will argue,
'If you can accept 2 percent, why not 4 percent?' ''

Representative Dave McCurdy, an Oklahoma Democrat who serves on the Armed
Services Committee, said in an interview today that the real test will be how
Mr. Cheney presents the case for the Pentagon's expensive, strategic weapons
systems, like the B-2 bomber.

''If he says we need to have the B-2 to be secure as a nation, I think he will
lose,'' he said.

The lessons of Panama are being interpreted in various ways.

Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Armed
Services Committee, said at a news conference last week that he believed Panama
was not instructive as Congress considers the future direction of the American
military.

''It's unique in the sense that we had people on the ground,'' he said. ''We had
bases there. We had 13,000 people permanently deployed there. We knew where all
the facilities were. We knew exactly what we were facing in terms of the
materiel and equipment. We had the ability of getting forces in there in
advance.''

Senator Nunn said the Panama operation had two clear lessons: the need for
better intelligence gathering and the usefulness of lighter weapons. He noted
that the Army moved its older, lighter tanks into Panama rather than the more
modern M-1 battle tank.

Potential for Deep Cuts Is Seen

Lawrence Korb, a Pentagon official in the Reagan Administration who is now at
Brookings Institution, a research organization in Washington, said the success
of lightly armored Army troops in Panama points up the potential for more
far-reaching troop cuts than the Pentagon envisions.

Mr. Korb, who has emerged as a prominent advocate of budget stringency, said:
''This was the biggest American military operation since Vietnam. How many
troops did we use? Twenty-five thousand. If that's the case, why do we need more
than 1.5 million men and women in uniform? Why do we need a B-2 bomber? We
didn't even use an aircraft carrier in Panama or the M-1 tanks.''

In response, a Pentagon official said the troops sent to Panama were appropriate
for that operation and that the military still needs to have on hand the
firepower to counter countries with heavy armament. He said several countries,
including the Soviet military, retain such capabilities.

As the focus shifts from the Soviet threat to the problems of instability in the
third world, the military services, particularly the Navy, have moved to gain a
share of the money from the drug interdiction programs, which are one of the
only growth areas in the Federal budget.

Mr. Korb recalled: ''I couldn't get the services to do anything. Now that
there's no Soviet Army to speak of, people look around and see it has become
much more palatable.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 9, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: TRADE BLOC;
Soviets and Partners Say Comecon Needs Repair

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 817 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Jan. 8


The Soviet Government agreed with its Eastern European trading partners today
that there is ''no dynamism'' in their Comecon trade bloc but insisted that the
association was needed and could be repaired.

''We believe there must be radical measures to restructure the mechanism of
cooperation,'' Gennadi I. Gerasimov, spokesman for the Foreign Ministry, said at
a news conference in which he offered only a qualified defense of the trading
bloc from the increasing criticism of Eastern European nations that have been
undergoing popular democratic rebellion.

In recent days, Czechoslovakia's new Government has declared Comecon obsolete,
while Poland and Hungary have called for the replacement or transformation of
the Soviet-dominated bloc.

The national ministers of Comecon, the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance
designed to be Communism's answer to the European Community, are meeting this
week in Sofia, Bulgaria, to ponder their future in the light of the rapid
collapse of Communism in the Kremlin's Eastern European allies.

'There Is Not Dynamism'

Mr. Gerasimov said the 10-nation group suffered when policies designed to
control trade among Soviet-allied nations were poorly effected.

He conceded: ''There is no dynamism. There is no sign of improvement in the
trade structure. There is no technological progress.''

But he added, ''As far as the direct answer to whether we need Comecon or not,
yes, we need it.''

Pressed by the European Community's plan to streamline trade barriers by 1992,
Soviet officials have begun proposing that their trade bloc begin moving toward
the world market by introducing trading in hard currency at market prices. They
envision a ''united market of socialist countries'' able finally to move beyond
the bloc's current strictures of dealing in currencies that are not convertible
in the world market.

Subsidizing the Allies

In pursuit of its own domestic economic resurgence, the Soviet Union has been
seeking ways to ease back from its traditional dominant position of subsidizing
the economies of the other Comecon members, which include Bulgaria, Cuba,
Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, Rumania and Vietnam.
Moscow has typically offered valuable oil and gas to the members but received in
return relatively inferior products with little world market value.

President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has complained that his Government has been
subsidizing a process that permits other member nations to trade their better
goods with the West and dispose of the rest through Moscow in return for needed
fuel supplies.

In 1988, the Soviet Union exported more than 75 million tons of crude oil to
East European allies, a role that economists feel guarantees it a dominant voice
in whatever changes might be made in the bloc's policies. At the same time, the
wave of democratization sweeping Eastern Europe has caused some politicians to
raise the far more basic question of whether Comecon can be reformed at all,
since the economies of several member nations are themselves shifting radically
in directions as yet unclear.

At the very least, the changing governments are becoming more outspoken in
criticizing the once monolithic bloc. Today, for instance, Aurel Munteanu, a
spokesman for the ruling Rumanian Council of National Salvation, said in
Bucharest that Comecon had to eliminate an inequity that finds ''the Soviet
Union on one side and the small brothers on the other.''

Some Ideas Emerge

While the member nations are expected to spell out their dissatisfactions with
Comecon at the conference in Sofia beginning Tuesday, some ideas have already
emerged.

Vaclav Klaus, the new Finance Minister of Czechoslovakia, who is viewed by
Western diplomats as a free-market economist, has said the bloc cannot
realistically continue operating under the existing agreements. He said his
nation would suggest scrapping all binding agreements and recommend this course
to other partners.

New, realistic trade agreements, negotiated nation by nation, should replace the
bloc's multi-party approach, in Mr. Klaus's view. He said he would seek
''gradual steps'' to work toward using fully convertible currency to settle
trade accounts.

Polish officials also have called for a ''more flexible'' trade bloc directed at
free-market movement in the world economy. Hungarian officials have talked more
radically, proposing a free-trading arrangement with other East bloc members and
at the same time seeking market agreements with West European nations at a far
more rapid rate than Moscow officials have contemplated.

Even before the wave of Eastern bloc political rebellion, Comecon was recognized
as hobbled as a world economic force by deep problems of currency
nonconvertibility, weak labor productivity, backward technology, deep debt
imbalance and the basic rigidity that comes of centrally planned economies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Big British Fight Shapes Up On Hong Kong Emigre Plan

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Jan. 9


Some members of the British Parliament, including many Conservatives, have begun
a major battle against Government plans to offer refuge in Britain to 50,000 of
the most successful people in Hong Kong and their families before China takes
over the colony in 1997.

So many members of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's Conservative Party are
against the proposal, which would require a change in immigration laws, that
there is a risk that the measure will fail after it is introduced in the House
of Commons this spring.

The opposition Labor Party opposes the proposal on the grounds that it is
elitist. The Conservatives say that such arguments are hypocritical, and some of
them make no bones about the reason why they oppose the change.

''We've had a massive amount of immigration for 30 years, and people have had
enough,'' said Tony Marlow, a Conservative, who represents the Midlands
constituency of Northampton North. ''Most people are uneasy,'' he said. Asked
why he was opposing his own party leadership on the issue, he said the members
of the Cabinet ''have taken leave of their senses.''

Most recent immigrants to Britain, from the Poles who came during World War II
to the Bangladeshis who came in the early 1970's, have not been assimilated but
live in ethnic ghettos. In neighborhoods like Brick Lane in East London, Bengali
has replaced Cockney as the language of the streets, and in cities in the
industrial north like Bradford, mosques have replaced churches as community
centers.

In Europe only France, with its own colonial legacy, has anything like Britain's
immigration situation; West Germany took in 842,227 refugees last year, but most
of them were ethnic Germans from East Germany and other countries of Eastern
Europe.

Politically, Mrs. Thatcher's increasing political vulnerability after 10 years
as Prime Minister is another reason that many back-benchers are willing to raise
their heads above the parapets on the immigration issue now. The leader of the
revolt in the House of Commons is Norman Tebbit, chairman of the party from 1985
to 1987, who is clearly one of Mrs. Thatcher's possible successors.

''The public feels,'' Mr. Tebbit said, ''that they were never asked their
opinion about whether these people should come here - they were foisted on
them.''

Prospect of 250,000 Immigrants

Britain was not a multiracial society until its empire began to crumble after
World War II. By 1961, there were nearly 300,000 nonwhite people living in the
United Kingdom, and by 1987 there were about 2.4 million, 4.5 percent of the
total population of 57.1 million, according to a sample survey carried out in
the two preceding years.

What upsets people now is the prospect of another quarter of a million Chinese -
the 50,000 deemed worthy of permisision to settle here and their dependents. The
argument that Britain could use 50,000 highly educated, talented, energetic
people - the government, professional, and business elite of Hong Kong who will
have to satisfy demanding criteria to qualify - does not get very far.

Under the proposal for admitting the Hong Kong families, a point system based on
a variety of criteria would be used to select the 50,000 households - about
250,000 people - who would get full British passports. The criteria would
include the value of a person's services, the extent to which people in the
person's category are emigrating, length of service with British institutions in
Hong Kong, and knowledge of English. Provisions were also to be made for those
who feel politically threatened.

Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd told the House of Commons last month that
confidence among the 5.7 million people of Hong Kong was ''at a low ebb,'' and
argued that that Hong Kong's elite - less than 1 percent of the population -
would be encouraged to stay there if they got the assurance that they could come
here.

Next Saturday, he plans to fly to Hong Kong to deliver that message himself, and
confront the additional problem of the 57,000 Vietnamese boat people being held
in detention camps there. Britain flew 51 of them back to Vietnam last month
against their will but has not yet made another ''involuntary repatriation.''
The policy has been deplored by the United States but backed by many Chinese in
Hong Kong whose sympathies do not extend to Vietnamese.

''It's a dangerous thing to issue an insurance policy that would bankrupt you if
the event occurred,'' Mr. Tebbit commented today about the Government's
rationale for holding out the prospect of British residence to 50,000 Hong Kong
Chinese and their families. ''That's not proper underwriting,'' he said.

He declined to forecast how many Conservatives in Parliament would oppose the
measure when it came to a vote. ''I think it's legislation which is potentially
at risk,'' he said. ''The constituency parties will back those who vote against
the Government on this.''

After Beijing Demonstrations

The Government began coming under pressure to do something after the suppression
of pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing last June led to mass protests and
fear in Hong Kong, where the British authorities are still negotiating the terms
of the colony's return to Chinese sovereignty in 1997, under the terms of the
99-year lease on most of the territory that was negotiated in 1898.

There are about 3.25 million British passport holders in Hong Kong, and Mrs.
Thatcher never held out much hope that more than a fraction of them would be
allowed to settle in Britain if worse came to worst. There are an estimated
350,000 people of Chinese origin living in Britain today, according to Lydia
Yee, an official of the Chinese Information and Advice Center in London.

''All the people of Hong Kong should have the right to come here,'' said Wai Ha,
a counselor at the center. ''Britain has been governing it for 140 years. The
only people they're allowing in are wealthy people. Most Chinese here are
workers trying hard to make a living for their families.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Upheaval in the East: Trade Bloc;
Moscow Proposes That Trade Bloc Begin Using Real Market Prices

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1186 words

DATELINE: SOFIA, Bulgaria, Jan. 9


The Soviet Union today formally presented to its Eastern European partners a
proposal to begin trading next year on a hard-currency basis at real market
prices.

If accepted, the plan would represent a dramatic shift for the Soviet-led trade
bloc, Comecon, which has long been tightly controlled and has relied on
transferable rubles and barter in its transactions.

But the Soviet recommendation, put forth by Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov,
drew no enthusiasm from Comecon's nine other members, meeting for the first time
since some among them were swept by monumental political changes late last year.
A Czechoslovak Deputy Prime Minister, Vladimir Dlouhy, said the Soviet plan
would be a ''disaster'' if put into effect right away.

The Soviet ruble, the Polish zloty and all the other Eastern European currencies
are soft or nonconvertible - that is, the exchange of those currencies is
governed by strict rules and controlled by the Government.

Market Forces Set Rates

Western currencies like the American dollar, the Japanese yen and the West
German mark are all hard, or convertible - their value is determined by market
forces and they can be freely exchanged for other currencies at prevailing
market rates.

The Soviet plan did not envision making the ruble or any other Eastern European
currency convertible, but rather denominating the value of goods traded in hard
currency. Thus, the oil and gas sold by the Soviet Union to its allies - or by
the allies to the Soviet Union - would command the same price in Eastern Europe
as in Western Europe.

The concern in Eastern Europe is that in the short run, only Moscow would
benefit because it has natural resources - oil and natural gas - that are
readily marketable for hard currency like dollars and marks. Other countries in
the trade association would not have such an easy time selling their low-quality
manufactured goods for hard currency.

Calls for Comecon Overhaul

It is therefore not to their immediate advantage to scrap that feature of the
present system, which enables them to send those goods to the Soviet Union in
exchange for raw materials.

Mr. Ryzhkov's proposal, which he made to Soviet lawmakers a few weeks ago,
raised questions of to what degree it was an attempt the steal the march on
Comecon members seeking even more radical changes in the 41-year-old system.

Despite their caution on the hard-currency proposal, Eastern European leaders
called today for a thorough overhaul of the organization to allow them to trade
freely without rigid controls on what they may sell and to whom. But they
stopped short of demanding abolition of the old Communist organization, even as
one speaker after another denounced it as outmoded, inefficient and not worth
keeping alive unless it was transformed.

Serious divisions emerged over the pace of revisions, with Czechoslovakia,
Poland and Hungary urging speed, while on that score the Soviet Union counseled
a more cautious approach. For the moment, Moscow prevailed. Umbrella Group
Sought The association, formally known as the Council for Mutual Economic
Assistance, endorsed the creation of a special commission that is supposed to
consider changes and report back to the entire group in two or three months.
Details of the panel are expected to be completed Wednesday, when the meeting in
Sofia will end. It is to resume in Prague next week.

''We all agree that we need a new type of Comecon organization,'' a Soviet
delegate, Deputy Prime Minister Stepan A. Sitaryan, told a news conference
tonight. ''How this is to be done is the serious issue.''

Czechoslavakia's Finance Minister, Vaclav Klaus, replied that Comecon's needs
were so evident that figuring out what to do should take almost no time at all.
''We can prepare a draft in several hours,'' he said. ''It can be done over a
weekend.''

What Prague wants, Mr. Klaus said - speaking in English, unlike the
representatives of other countries - is an organization that no longer rigidly
controls production and distribution but instead serves as an umbrella group
that promotes trade among its member countries.

'We Have Grown in Number'

''There is nothing to invent here,'' he said. ''It is just a return to the
market and normal international trade, and Eastern European economies should be
geared toward the world market.''

His opinion was echoed by Deputy Prime Minister Peter Medgyessy of Hungary, who
said that, if anything, his country had been in the vanguard of the changes now
being sought.

''For a long time, we have been criticizing Comecon,'' he said. ''We were lonely
long-distance runners, but lately we have grown in number.''

In a newspaper article published Monday in Budapest, Mr. Medgyessy proposed that
Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia - the three East Bloc countries that have
most thoroughly broken with Communist leadership - form a market-oriented inner
circle within Comecon to push for changes.

Mr. Klaus, moderating a somewhat tougher stance assumed last week, told
reporters that Czechoslovakia was considering withdrawal from some Comecon
agreements, like those regulating currency-exchange rates. But like other
delegates, he said that no thought had been given to abolishing the trading
group, which was formed in 1949 to promote multilateral cooperation in the hope
of making the Soviet bloc the industrial equal of the West.

Rumania Plays Passive Role

''Comecon will exist, definitely,'' he said. ''But I think it will change, and
bilateral relations will become more important.''

Nearly all the delegations here were led by prime ministers, many of them
meeting for the first time. Some, like Prime Minister Petre Roman of Rumania,
have been in office for only a few weeks.

Still reeling from the upheaval surrounding the overthrow of President Nicolae
Ceausescu three weeks ago, Rumania was said to have been a relatively passive
participant at the session today.

''Our economy is in grave crisis,'' Stefan Stancu, the Rumanian Deputy Minister
of Foreign Trade, told reporters. ''We are lagging behind in technology. We have
great problems with domestic food supplies. So it could be expected that in the
near future, we will not be able to liberalize trade with any neighbor.''

Few Kind Words for Comecon

Even so, Mr. Stancu said: ''One thing is clear. We know what kind of Comecon we
don't want to have.''

There were few kind words to be heard today about the trade bloc, whose cracks
have burst fully open as Eastern Europe's political alignment has shifted. It
comprises the Soviet Union and its six Warsaw Pact allies -Bulgaria,
Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland and Rumania - and Cuba, Mongolia
and Vietnam.

Critics in and out of the organization accuse it of inflexibility, saying that
it has paralyzed competition while retarding technological development and
produced shortages of food and other essentials. Almost as though to underline
the troubles plaguing Eastern European economies, Bulgaria found itself forced
as the conference got under way to impose partial blackouts because of
power-supply problems.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Eastern Europe leaders called for a thorough overhaul of the
Soviet-led trade bloc Comecon, but delegates to the organization's conference in
Sofia, Bulgaria, stopped short of seeking to dismantle it (Reuters) (pg. A11)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 11, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST;
Soviet Bloc Trade Group Says It Needs to Make Big Changes

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: SOFIA, Bulgaria, Jan. 10


Leaders of the Soviet bloc's trade group, Comecon, agreed today that their
crisis-ridden organization needed a drastic overhaul to guide it toward a
market-oriented system after four decades of stifling central planning.

But delegates to a two-day meeting that ended here today continued to disagree
sharply over what specific changes were required and how quickly they should be
put into effect.

Some, notably the Czechoslovaks, insisted that the trade bloc had to move
immediately to dismantle outmoded and unproductive rules that prevent its 10
members from deciding on their own what they ought to produce and where they may
sell it. Others, reportedly including the Soviet Union, urged a more cautious
approach.

In the end, the delegates agreed to disagree and to leave the details of how to
proceed next to a special commission that is supposed to work out proposals for
a reconstituted Comecon ''in the shortest time.'' It was believed that this
panel would take two or three months to complete its work.

Brief Closing Statement

The seriousness of the underlying disputes was reflected a brief, joint closing
statement.

''The session,'' it said, ''stressed the need of a decisive renewal of the
entire system of mutual cooperation and of the mechanism of multilateral
cooperation'' within the organization, formally known as the Council for Mutual
Economic Assistance.

The statement said the session emphasized the necessity ''of a radical renewal
of the council's operation, of a review of its functions and purposes, of
drafting a new charter to meet the modern and long-term requirements of
interaction'' among the group's members.

In other words, delegates said outside their meeting hall, Comecon would never
be the same again.

'Started a New Era'

''We definitely started a new era,'' said Andrej Barcak, the Czechoslovak
Foreign Trade Minister, who added: ''I think everybody realizes that changes
have to come, and even delegates who thought there should be no change realized
that there must be some.''

Prime Minister Miklos Nemeth of Hungary, whose nation will be host to the next
high-level session, said, ''We think the monolithic nature of the council will
disappear now,'' along with five-year plans and rigid mechanisms involving many
nations to control currency exchanges and monetary flows.

''We think the priority will be given to bilateral contacts,'' he said.

Created in 1949 to make the Soviet bloc competitive with Western Europe, Comecon
has become virtually an empty shell, many economists say, as Communism has
fallen apart in one Eastern European country after another and they now struggle
with creaking economies.

The members are the Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact allies - Bulgaria,
Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland and Rumania - plus Cuba, Mongolia
and Vietnam.

Dramatic Change Sought

Even delegates who were the most unhappy about the pace of change said they were
not prepared to break up the trade bloc entirely. ''You don't walk out of the
home if you do not have another home to move into,'' Mr. Barcak said.

But talking with Western reporters, several delegates warned that the political
upheavals in their countries over the last year had to be matched by equally
dramatic economic changes if they hoped even to dream of keeping pace with the
West.

In that sense, said Vladimir Dlouhy, a Czechoslovak Deputy Prime Minister, the
agreement today to study the issues still further amount to ''a half-step.''

''We've started to do something, but Czechoslovakia wanted to do it more
quickly,'' he said.

Convertible Currencies

Despite its eagerness for a market-oriented economy, Czechoslovakia, along with
other members, has reacted cooly to a new, even radical, Soviet proposal to
begin putting trade with its partners on a hard-currency basis at real market
prices, starting next year.

This means that instead of using so-called transferable rubles, which are
worthless outside Comecon, member nations would start paying one another in
convertible currencies like the dollar or the West German mark. And instead of
pegging prices for goods at more or less arbitrary levels, existing worldwide
standards would be used.

Several delegates repeated objections to the Soviet proposal that they had
expressed the day before. Mr. Barcak said that Czechoslovakia agreed in
principle to the hard-currency proposal but did not like certain aspects on
technical grounds.

Soviet Natural Resources

But for other Eastern Europeans, and perhaps the Czechoslovaks as well, the
objections were more fundamental: They would be short-term losers, for the
Soviets have natural resources to sell that are instantly marketable for hard
currency, while the Eastern Europeans produce manufactured goods of often shoddy
quality that would have few buyers in the West -or in Moscow, for that matter.

Therefore, they are reluctant to scrap right away this aspect of the present
controlled system that enables them to purchase badly needed Soviet oil and
natural gas in exchange for their products.

Reuters quoted a Soviet delegate, Deputy Prime Minister Stepan A. Sitaryan, a
saying today that Moscow ''would agree on pricing and payment conditions with
each country on a bilateral basis.'' But, he said, ''prices must come closer to
world market values.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: The Soviet bloc's trade group, Comecon, agreed to allow a
special commission to work out proposals for a remodeled Comecon ''in the
shortest time.'' Signing for Rumania was Prime Minister Petre Roman. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 11, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Israeli Camping Store Offers Tips From Afar

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 662 words

DATELINE: TEL AVIV, Jan. 7


At first glance, it looks like an ordinary camping store stocked with waterproof
flashlights, down-filled sleeping bags and 12 brands of bug spray. But a
schedule on the front window gives a hint of the shop's larger purpose.

''Weekly advice to travelers to the Far East, Tuesdays, 4 P.M. - Free,'' it
says. South American travelers, it says, should come ''Sundays at 4.''

Inside, a lecture is under way. Avi Lugassi, who has just returned from a trip
in which he backpacked in India and Nepal, is offering advice to about two dozen
young men and women sitting on the floor under the hiking-boot display. All of
them are about 21 or 22 years old, meaning they have just been released from the
army.

As Mr. Lugassi talks about the importance of taking water purifiers and diarrhea
pills - ''If you ever have to go into a Nepalese pharmacy, you'll understand
why,'' he said - many of the young people look through loose-leaf notebooks
holding thousands of handwritten letters from other young Israeli adventurers
who have written back to the store with bits of travel advice.

Looking over it all, the owner, Yuval Limon, 33, said ''A system like this could
only work in Israel.''

Each year, more than 60,000 young Israelis pass through Mr. Limon's store. They
listen to lectures and look through the notebooks, preparing for the trip to far
reaches of the third world that has come to be a unique national ritual for
Israeli youths just out of the army.

Virtually all young people enter the army as soon as they enter high school and
often come out several years later changed men and women.

''All of us have to be in the army, and when we come out it has been very
rough,'' Mr. Limon said. Many 19-year-olds are thrown into the occupied
territories, fighting the Palestinian uprising, or into Southern Lebanon, where
they find themselves in gun battles with Palestinian guerrillas.

''You see blood, sometimes death,'' Mr. Limon said. ''When you get out, you have
to get away.''

Mr. Limon suggests that many Israelis are not immediately driven by ambition
into jobs since the socialist structure of this state makes incomes and living
standards comparatively uniform.

Instead of immediately jumping onto the professional ladder, tens of thousands
of Israelis strap on backpacks and set off for India, Asia, South America or
other places where travel is cheap.

As a result, it is not at all uncommon to hike through a tiny Burmese village,
for example, and find a restaurant menu written in Hebrew. And travelers to such
places often report that the residents tell them they believe Israel must be the
world's second largest nation, given the unusually high number of visitors. Only
Germans seem to visit the third world more.

Letters With Travel Advice

Those remote places are seldom mentioned in formal travel guides. That is why
Mr. Limon started what he calls the institute in his store. Israel's young
travelers, thousands of them a year, are compiling an ever-evolving, Hebrew
record for other young Israelis of the world's least-frequented travel spots.

Before leaving, they spend hours in the store reading the letters and getting
valuable advice. In the Burmese capital, one letter says, ''The driver in
carriage No. 40 speaks good English.'' In the United States, says another, ''Be
sure to join the American Automobile Association so you can get their travel
'Triptiks.' ''

''The knowledge in these notebooks you could never find anyplace else,'' Mr.
Limon said. Clearly, the store's services are not a purely altruistic
enterprise. Although the lectures are free, and there is no charge for
consulting the letters, many of the young people end up buying their camping
gear from Mr. Limon's store, too.

''We like to give people the keys,'' Mr. Limon said. ''In Israel, we are living
something like the Vietnam War all the time. If you live in Israel, you've just
got to get away sometime. You've got to get out and take a big breath.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 11, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Seeks Expanded Cambodia Role

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 872 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 10


As diplomatic efforts increase to revive negotiations for a peace settlement in
Cambodia, a senior United Nations official said today that the organization was
ready to play a sharply expanded role in the country.

''This time, the United Nations is ready,'' the official said. ''A lot of the
homework has already been done.''

With General Assembly approval, the Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar,
''practically just has to pull the envelopes out of his drawer,'' said the
official, who has spent the better part of the last decade working on Cambodian
issues.

The catalyst for the new flurry of diplomacy is an Australian proposal that the
warring Cambodian factions allow the United Nations to administer the country
for at least a year with the presence of a strong international peacekeeping
force and control mechanism to monitor a cease-fire in place.

Indonesian Role in Talks

At the end of that period, free elections would be held, also under United
Nations auspices, to determine the country's new government.

The Cambodian seat at the United Nations, now held by an opposition coalition
dominated by the Khmer Rouge, would by agreement become vacant during that
period, while the current Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen, installed by the
Vietnamese after they ousted the Khmer Rouge 11 years ago, would resign.

A senior Australian diplomat, Michael Costello, is now in Bangkok on his second
tour of the region, having just had meetings with the Vietnamese and Mr. Hun
Sen. He met here today with the Indonesian Foreign Minister, Ali Alatas, who
continues to play a crucial role in Cambodian diplomacy.

It was under Indonesian sponsorship that the first negotiations among the
Cambodian factions took place, and Mr. Alatas served as an active co-chairman of
last summer's international conference on Cambodia in Paris.

Meetings With Non-Communists

Mr. Alatas is meeting with Thai officials and representatives of the Cambodian
opposition coalition, which includes the non-Communist followers of Prince
Norodom Sihanouk and a former Prime Minister, Son Sann, to see if a new round of
negotiations in Jakarta makes any sense.

Mr. Alatas is also to meet with senior Vietnamese officials at an academic
conference starting Thursday in Chiang Mai, and is making arrangements to meet
Mr. Hun Sen.

The Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister in charge of Asia, Igor A. Rogachev, is in
Beijing discussing Cambodia with Chinese officials. And on Jan. 15 and 16, the
five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council -China, the Soviet
Union, the United States, Britain and France - are to meet in Paris to discuss
Cambodia at the invitation of the French Foreign Ministry.

According to a ministry spokesman, the meeting ''comes at a time when it appears
possible to envisage an increased role for the United Nations in the settlement
process.''

Crucial Chinese Backing

But the senior United Nations official said the position of China, which has
been the prime ally of the Khmer Rouge, was crucial to any settlement. ''Nothing
will happen without the Chinese,'' he said.

Mr. Perez de Cuellar is a conservative man, the official said, and unless
China's support for the envisaged United Nations role is specific and open, ''no
one will want to get involved.''

''Even an abstention by China in the Security Council won't be enough,'' he
said. ''We need a positive vote from China. The United Nations won't commit
without absolute assurances of full cooperation.''

What that meant, he said, was China's willingness to instruct the Khmer Rouge to
''play along and behave themselves.'' The Khmer Rouge would have to obey
Beijing, he said. ''They have nowhere else to go for support.''

Planning for Peacekeeping Force

Publicly, at least, the Chinese say they still favor an interim coalition
government in Cambodia embodying all four warring factions, including the Khmer
Rouge. But the Cambodians have been unable to agree on such a coalition, with
Mr. Hun Sen refusing to give the Khmer Rouge any governmental role.

The Australian proposal, based on an idea of Representative Stephen J. Solarz,
Democrat of Brooklyn, is intended to avoid the issue by allowing the United
Nations to administer Cambodia instead.

While the role envisioned for the United Nations in Cambodia would be more
expensive than in Namibia, the official said, it would not require more
personnel, because of Cambodia's smaller size and less complicated logistics. In
Namibia, the United Nations supervised new elections and monitored a South
African administration, spending $700 million and using 7,000 to 8,000 military
and civilian personnel.

Under the Khmer Rouge, more than a million Cambodians died of executions,
starvation, malnutrition and disease before Hanoi invaded in late 1978. Vietnam
says it withdrew the last of its occupying troops in late September, causing an
increase in fighting that has renewed fears that the Khmer Rouge might return to
power.

Over the weekend, the Khmer Rouge succeeded in exploding a series of small
plastic mines in Phnom Penh. The explosions were timed to dampen the
Government's celebration Sunday of the day the Khmer Rouge abandoned the capital
in 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 12, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Drew Middleton of The Times Dies at 76

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2114 words


Drew Middleton, who covered World War II and postwar Europe for The New York
Times and later served as the newspaper's military correspondent, died quietly
in his sleep Wednesday night at his apartment on the Upper East Side of
Manhattan. He was 76 years old.

The cause of his death was not immediately known, but he had suffered a severe
heart attack three years ago and had been in somewhat frail health since then,
although he continued to write newspaper columns until his death.

Moving from sports writing to combat reporting at the outset of World War II,
Mr. Middleton spent nearly half a century chronicling what he called ''the huge,
changing, kaleidoscopic world of international affairs.''

He covered Allied forces in North Africa and on several European fronts,
reported on peace conferences and war-crimes tribunals at the end of the
conflict, and followed postwar diplomacy from both sides of a divided Europe and
at the United Nations.

He then returned to coverage of military affairs and was noted most recently for
his analyses of fighting in the Middle East and the Falkland Islands.

Met 'Heroes and Rogues'

After stepping down as military correspondent, he wrote a twice-weekly column
and occasional additional articles for the Special Features division of The
Times Company.

Down the decades, he also wrote or or was co-author of more than a dozen books
and lectured extensively.

Mr. Middleton once wrote that his career had led him to encounter, ''in all
stages of sobriety and sanity, presidents and prime ministers, monarchs and
mountebanks, heroes and rogues.''

Some encounters were inspiring. In his memoirs he described hearing Winston
Churchill being ''brutally frank about the situation in the Far East and the
Middle East'' at a bleak moment in World War II. But then, Mr. Middleton
recalled, ''As I rose to go, he said: 'Do not be downcast. My experience is that
the spirit of free men can overcome all.' ''

Mr. Middleton's reportage was nourished by his fascination, decade after decade,
at world events. ''I watched at first hand the greatest military drama of this
century, the defeat at grievous cost of Hitler and Nazi Germany,'' he observed
in his 1973 memoirs, ''Where Has Last July Gone?''

His reporting was nourished, too, by special affection for some people, notably
the British.

''Like most Americans, I had been brought up on the myth that all Englishmen are
aloof, monosyllabic, cold to strangers,'' he wrote. But he reported that ''the
myth was banished'' on his first night in London in 1939, at a pub off Oxford
Street, where he found people arguing about sports.

Early Career

Drew Middleton was born Oct. 14, 1913, in New York, the son of Elmer Thomas
Middleton and the former Jean Drew. He spoke often and proudly of his Drew
connection, which linked him to one of America's greatest theatrical clans,
including John Drew Barrymore.

The young man attended public schools in New York and Orange, N.J., and was
graduated from Syracuse University.

He worked as a sports writer and general reporter for The Poughkeepsie Eagle
News and The Poughkeepsie Evening Star in 1936 and 1937 and then joined The
Associated Press in New York, which transferred him to its London bureau to
cover sports in 1939. But after Germany invaded Poland that year, he began
writing about the war.

It was in London that Mr. Middleton joined The New York Times, in September
1942, after covering the unsuccessful Allied raid on the French port of Dieppe.
But he was soon back at the front.

On Oct. 24, 1942, he and other war correspondents went aboard a United States
Navy transport vessel that steamed out of a British port. On the first night at
sea, a colonel announced, ''Gentlemen, the Allies are going to open a second
front.'' It was in North Africa. Several days later, afer harassment from the
Luftwaffe, came American and British landings on the Algerian coast.

''We clambered down the net into the landing craft - men from Indiana, Wyoming,
Arizona, New York and Georgia,'' he wrote in the Times Magazine. ''They spoke as
softly and confidently as their ancestors might have done years ago at Saratoga
or Gettysburg.''

A Silent Battlefield

Later, Mr. Middleton wrote about a visit to a battlefield in Tunisia where
Allied soldiers had fallen, saying:

''You can follow the path of those soldiers through the wheat as you could
follow the path of Pickett's charge through the summer wheat at Gettysburg.
History was made here only yesterday, but today only the wind blows over the
rich grass and ruffles the wheat. And there is silence in the graveyards so far
from home.''

In Algiers in 1943, he called on Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower, who voiced
confidence about beating the Germans, saying, ''We have got them now.''

Mr. Middleton wrote about the Allied invasion of Normandy in June 1944. And
after returning there 40 years later, he reported in The Times that ''in the
little stone villages and farmhouses, gratitude and affection'' for Americans
still ''ran strong and deep.''

In April, 1945, it fell to him to report, from Paris, that American and Soviet
troops had met in Central Europe. ''Two armies of plain men who had marched and
fought from the blood-splashed beaches of Normandy and the shattered streets of
Stalingrad have met on the Elbe River in the heart of Germany,'' his dispatch
began, ''splitting the Third Reich and sealing the doom of the German Army,
whose tread shook the world only three short years ago.''

On the Front Line

By the end of the war, Mr. Middleton had accompanied American and British forces
not only to France, North Africa and Sicily but to Belgium and Germany as well.
In October 1944, when troops of the United States Army's First Division advanced
into the German city of Aachen, 77 miles east of Brussels, he went with them and
was on hand for bitter fighting.

Describing the battle, Mr. Middleton wrote: ''Machine-gun fire swept the street.
Bullets hit the walls of our house and whispered as they ricocheted. This was
hard, blind fighting in narrow backyards, or in steep staircases where men met
unexpectedly, threw a grenade, or lunged with a bayonet.''

On Oct. 27, the Germans surrendered Aachen. It was the first important German
city to be captured by the Americans. On that afternoon, Mr. Middleton watched
German civilian refugees, the first he had seen, trudging away -''haggard men
and women, pushing wheelbarrows, pulling small carts.''

''One should be compassionate,'' he wrote, but added, ''Compassion is difficult
when you think of the roads of France and Belgium black with frightened, tired
people, the gray faces of Londoners leaving their shelters to start another
day's work, the Arab woman holding her dead baby after the German fighters had
been over.''

Mr. Middleton also managed much mellow bonhomie in that hectic era and later,
but he was sometimes gruff. When he was assigned to be The Times's correspondent
in Moscow in 1946, his colleague, James Reston, observed: ''Moscow will be good
for his temper. It will teach him patience or kill him.''

In 1947, he moved on to Germany, where he remained until 1953 and was struck by
the dislocations of postwar life. Early in his tenure there, he covered the
Soviet blockade of Berlin.

At the end of his time in Germany, Mr. Middleton contended, in an article in The
Times Sunday Magazine, that ''the task of the United States'' was to bring about
the reunification of East and West Germany ''without endangering democracy in
Germany.''

Yet during that assignment in Germany, Mr. Middleton was also in some ways a
perennial skeptic. As he wrote later, in his memoirs, he found Konrad Adenauer,
the first West German Chancellor, ''an impressive figure, easy to respect, hard
to like.''

A Love for London

Late in 1953, Mr. Middleton took up his duties as chief correspondent in London,
a post he held until 1963. Those years in London, he said, were the happiest of
his life abroad. He fitted in so smoothly that he was invited to Buckingham
Palace for tea, and his colleagues sometimes referred to him with a smile as Sir
Drew.

His way of speaking still recalled his New York boyhood, but he had suits made
in London, he kept a handkerchief tucked into his sleeve in the manner of some
Britons, and he loved British-style club life.

In those years, Mr. Middleton and his lieutenants in The Times's London bureau
chronicled what he sometimes called, as he titled a chapter in his memoirs,
''Britain in the Soft Twilight of Empire'' - that is, Britain adjusting to the
dismemberment of its overseas possessions.

He relished the pageantry and hullaballoo of British elections, fretted at what
he saw as excessive self-criticism among his beloved Britons, and savored life
in their capital, which he found majestic, even in that era ''of decaying
power.''

From London, he went to serve as Times bureau chief in Paris, at the United
Nations and in Brussels. Returning to the United States, he became The Times's
Manhattan-based military correspondent from 1970 until his retirement in 1984.

A World of Contacts

In that assignment, Mr. Middleton crisscrossed the United States and the world -
sizing up armies, bases, weapons, conflicts and policies in the field -and also
maintaining an extraordinary range of personal contacts in the fields of
intelligence and military affairs.

He was often in Washington. He went repeatedly to West Point to lecture. He was
sought out by military and intelligence personnel of many ranks and nations when
they passed through Manhattan. He heeded and noted what enlisted personnel and
non-coms had to say - as he had, long before, in the din of battle at Dieppe and
Aachen.

Over the years, he wrote about myriad aspects of the martial world. His
dispatches ranged from periodic assessments of NATO and of the readiness of
American forces to analyses of military developments overseas, such as the
insurgency in Afghanistan, that were difficult or impossible for American
journalists to cover on the spot.

Often, to provide the underpinning for his columns, he went to the scene of the
action, and he dug hard for fresh information.

Arriving in Saigon one afternoon during the Vietnam war, for example, he walked
into a short-handed Times bureau and offered to take on the humblest of chores,
writing the routine story based on the daily American communique.

During major conflicts, he wrote day-to-day analyses, making tireless use of the
telephone to sound out military experts and informants.

Covering Falkland War

When Argentina invaded the British-owned Falkland Islands in the South Atlantic
on April 2, 1982, he was on his way to London within 48 hours. The British
captains and ensigns he had known in World War II were now generals and
admirals. Every evening he would meet them at his beloved Savoy Hotel or at one
of London's clubs, and every morning he would stride into the office with
valuable insights into the distant combat.

In one dispatch, he emphasized an underlying weakness in the Argentine armed
forces.

''Argentina's most urgent military problem,'' he wrote, ''is the acquisition of
more advanced weapons from the Western European powers that have sold arms to
the country's military establishment for 15 years but that have now imposed an
embargo on such sales to Argentina.'' Within weeks, events showed that the
Argentines were unable to correct the problem.

Among the books Mr. Middleton wrote were ''The Struggle for Germany'' (1949),
''These Are the British'' (1957), ''The Atlantic Community'' (1965) and
''Submarine'' (1976).

Appraising Mr. Middleton's 1983 book ''Crossroads of Modern Warfare,'' in The
Times Book Review, Russell F. Weigley, a Temple University military historian,
lauded his thoughtfulness and noted that Mr. Middleton admired ''flexible
military tacticians.''

Decorations and Clubs

Mr. Middleton was an honorary Commander of the Order of the British Empire, and
his other decorations included the United States Medal of Freedom. His clubs
included the Brook and the Century in Manhattan, the Beefsteak and the Garrick
in London, and the Travellers in Paris.

In 1981 he was elected an honorary life member of the Garrick Club, which was
founded in 1831. Its secretary, Martin Harvey, said yesterday that Mr. Middleton
was almost certainly the only United States citizen to be so honored in the
club's history.

Mr. Middleton is survived by his wife, the former Estelle Mansel-Edwards, and a
daughter, Judith.

His remains are to be cremated. There will be no funeral service, but a memorial
service is to be held in Manhattan, at a time and place to be announced.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Drew Middleton (The New York Times, 1981); Mr. Middleton with
General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower in Berlin shortly after the defeat of
Nazi Germany in 1945. (AP)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WESTCHESTER OPINION;
Why Do Students Yawn at History?

BYLINE: By Dr. William E. Sheerin; Dr. William E. Sheerin lives in Yonkers and
teaches at Yorktown High School.

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 32, Column 5; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 788 words


THE past few months have certainly had more than their share of historic events.
As 1989 wound down and a new decade began, it seemed that each day brought some
stunning change in the world, some major new development to interpret and
discuss with my ninth-grade students in social studies.

But the high drama that thrilled me - the scenes of freedom trains rolling
toward the West, of young men and women smashing the Berlin wall with
sledgehammers, of a million people rallying for democracy in Prague's Wenceslaus
Square, of unarmed Rumanians sacrificing their lives to end Nicolae Ceausescu's
tryanny, of the top leader of the Communist world coming to call on the Pope -
left most of my students unmoved.

''You're watching history in the making,'' I would tell them, only to be met
with a collective yawn and a bemused look from my captive audience of
teen-agers. From years spent in the classroom, on both sides of the teacher's
desk, I knew that look. It said: ''Uh-oh, here he goes again. this probably
means another current- events assignment.''

I wondered how so many of them could sit there with eyes glazed over,
indifferent to the dramatic events unfolding before them. The United States
invasion of Panama sparked some interest - like a ''Rambo'' movie heavy on fire
power, with clear good guys and bad guys - but in response to the sweeping
changes in Europe, they remained curiously disengaged. Another teacher said they
were desensitized - the result of too many violent movies, too much rock music,
too much money easily acquired and easily spent.

His argument seemed a bit extreme, but he had a point. Could it be that these
young people are so overstimulated by the entertainment they constantly seek and
by their own breathless life styles, that they can't appreciate the triumph of
an idea? Are they so complacent about the freedoms and comforts they enjoy, that
they can't identify with people struggling for what we already have?

Of course, every new generation tends to take a lot for granted, and I must
admit that - as a high school student - I was pretty blase myself. I remember
yawning through accounts by my teachers and elders of the Great Depression and
World War II, and of the lessons we should draw from them. ''Oh, come on,'' I'd
think, ''do we have to hear all this stuff again?'' Yet I still took a healthy
interest in current events and I generally knew what was going on in the world
around me.

The swelling demands for democracy in eastern Europe, the movement to end the
cold war, the radical changes of the last few months that may herald the
beginning of the end of Communism itself - all these things can't be fully
appreciated without some historical context. These developments speak not only
to the weaknesses of a moribund system but to the enduring wisdom that shaped
our own values and institutions. They are, in any case, transforming the
contemporary scene and they should be of interest to every thinking person.

Whoever may be to blame - teen-agers, their parents, their teachers, the youth
culture, the culture at large - something is awry when so many young people know
little and care even less about the changing world in which they live.

Unquestionably, those of us who came of age in the 1950's and 60's had something
of an advantage in this regard. In an era when the Soviet leader was saying that
he would ''bury'' us, it was a good deal easier for young people to see why they
should be concerned with national and international affairs.

The Cuban missile crisis, which took place when I was a junior in high school,
shocked a lot of the young people of my generation out of their cozy torpor -
there is something about the possibility of imminent death that really helps to
focus one's attention.

Later, the assassinations of the Kennedys and Dr. King and the festering tragedy
of the Vietnam War would force us to confront the real world and disabuse us of
any lingering notions of youthful immortality.

It is a different world that confronts the young people of today, one that is a
lot less threatening in terms of international conflict but in many ways is more
exciting in its possibilities. It may not be easy to get teen-agers to take an
interest in that world and see those possibilities, but it will be to our
detriment if we stop trying.

In the last few months, it seems like the floodgates of history have opened up,
carrying us at a dizzying speed not just into a new decade, but into a whole new
era.

We had better make sure that all of us - most important, our young people -
attend to what is going on, give some serious thought to where we have been and
prepare for a future that is coming upon us faster than we ever imagined.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Recalling the Pursuit of a Still-Elusive Prize

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 920 words


In the mid-1960's, the civil rights movement, which had seemed on a victorious
course, was dramatically split. Black Muslims, drawing support from inner-city
ghettos, where hard conditions had not been alleviated by the triumphs in the
courts, brought to the field a new antiwhite militancy that stirred many young
blacks. That militancy disturbed older followers of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr. and it shook white liberals.

The drama of that time makes a powerful beginning to ''Eyes on the Prize II,''
Henry Hampton's sequel to his memorable 1987 series. The eight-part history
starts tonight, on Dr. King's birthday, at 9 P.M. on Channels 13 and 31 and at
10 P.M. on Channels 21 and 49.

Combining newsreels of the period with recent interviews, ''The Time Has Come''
reminds us of the message of Malcolm X after his break with Elijah Mohammed, the
leader of the Nation of Islam. While Dr. King held to the principle of
nonviolence and the dream of racial justice, Malcolm X called for black
nationalism. His speeches, shown here, fired up his followers with assaults on
whites: ''The white man makes you a drug addict. The white man puts you in jail
when he catches you using drugs.''

Malcolm's rhetoric owed less to the Southern pulpit than to the city streets,
and he refused to reject violence. ''We're nonviolent with people who are
nonviolent with us,'' he declared, and he pounded home the charge that whites
were committing daily violence against blacks. We see him being applauded at an
Oxford Union debate in England for reporting that the American system is based
on the castration of the black man. The power of his message was evidenced by
the thousands who turned out to mourn him after his assassination in 1965.

Although Malcolm's vision was very different from that of Dr. King, the
narrator, Julian Bond, points out that the Muslim threat of ''another way'' made
the King approach more inviting to whites, particularly after the Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee moved from ''Freedom Now!'' to ''Black
Power!''

This opening hour also recalls the origin of the Black Panther symbol as a
device for registering voters in Lowndes County, Ga. We see the young Stokely
Carmichael in action and then see him today, in a quieter mood, reflecting on
the days when he emerged as the champion of black power.

The division among black leaders sharpened on a vividly recorded March Against
Fear into Mississippi after the shooting of James Meredith. Shortly before state
troopers moved in, kicking and beating marchers, King told his followers, ''I'm
not going to let my oppressor dictate to me what methods I will use.'' But the
younger Carmichael was saying, ''You tell the white folks in Mississippi that
all the scared niggers are dead.''

That was the last great civil rights march in the South. Next week's episode,
''Two Societies,'' moves north, bringing back the scenes of rampage and
retaliation in the Watts section of Los Angeles and then in Detroit as the inner
cities erupted. It also offers a sharp account of the protest led by King
against housing discrimination in Chicago, on what the Rev. Jesse Jackson called
''the Daley plantation,'' a reference to Mayor Richard J. Daley.

The goals in the north were different from those in Georgia and Mississippi, but
the newsreel clips make plain that the emotions, as registered by the faces,
yells, signs and rock-throwing of some whites, had a lot in common with the mob
reaction against voting rights and school integration in the South. The hour
ends with the issuance of the famous 1968 report on civil disorders by the
Kerner Commission appointed by President Lyndon B. Johnson. It warned that
America was becoming ''two societies, one black, one white -separate and
unequal.'' But by then the nation's attention had turned to the war in Vietnam.

Future episodes of this valuable eight-part series cover the appearance and
repression of the Black Panther Party, the assassination of Dr. King and the
subsequent outbreaks of violence, the election of black mayors and governors and
battles about school busing and affirmative action programs. It offers differing
perspectives on controversies like the one over control of the Ocean
Hill-Brownsville school district in Brooklyn.

''Eyes on the Prize II'' brings up to 1980 an illuminating and moving history
that leaves one with a jumble of feelings: admiration for those who put their
bodies on the line mixed with distaste for some of their messages and tactics,
pride in what has been accomplished mixed with shame for the hatred, fear and
selfishness exposed in the years of white resistance, and considerable
perplexity over how, finally, to achieve the prize.

Tomorrow evening at 10 on Channel 13 and at 9 on Channel 49, ''The American
Experience'' offers as the last program of its admirable season, ''Roots of
Resistance: A Story of the Underground Railroad.'' Produced by Orlando Bagwell,
who produced two of the episodes in the first ''Eyes on the Prize,'' this new
documentary uses letters, diaries and songs to recreate such events as Nat
Turner's slave rebellion in Virginia in 1831 and Harriet Tubman's work in
bringing slaves to freedom, setting forth on a path that both Malcolm X and
Martin Luther King would in their separate ways follow.

Leaders Divided
EYES ON THE PRIZE II, Steve Fayer, series writer; produced for PBS by Blackside
Inc.; Henry Hampton, executive producer. At 9 P.M. on Channels 13 and 31; at 10
P.M. on Channels 21 and 49.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In a scene from ''Eyes on the Prize II,'' Malcolm X addresses a
crowd in Harlem. (AP/Wide World Photos)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Pentagon Pool, Bottled Up

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 506 words


The invasion of Panama offered the first true test of the Pentagon's system for
giving journalists access to live combat. The system failed. More precisely, the
Pentagon failed the system. It is the President's job to make it work.

The system was devised after the Reagan Administration excluded reporters from
the Grenada invasion in 1983, temporarily blinding press and public to one of
the more debatable expeditions in American military history.

A commission headed by Winant Sidle, a retired general, then recommended that a
select ''pool'' of reporters be allowed to cover the early stages of any
surprise operation and share its information with other news organizations. That
seemed a fair compromise between the military's need for surprise and the
public's need for information.

In Panama, the arrangement swiftly became a joke. The Pentagon did not get the
16-person pool to Panama City until four hours after the fighting began, and
reporters were unable to file dispatches until six hours after that. Overall
coverage improved as hordes of other reporters arrived, but the original pool
remained under tight military control and contributed little. ''We started
behind the eight ball,'' one photographer said, ''and it just got worse from
there.''

Part of the problem may have been an absence of institutional memory: George
Bush's Pentagon seemed to feel no urgent need to abide by an accommodation
struck by Ronald Reagan's Pentagon. No civilian official accompanied the press
pool to Panama City. The Pentagon simply handed the reporters over to the
officers of the Southern Command, who treated the journalists as an unwelcome
nuisance. In a rare burst of bureaucratic candor, Pete Williams, the Pentagon
spokesman, summed up the military's entire press performance in one word:
''incompetence.''

The larger problem, as it always has been, is one of mutual comprehension and
trust. Since the goals of defending the nation and informing the nation often
conflict, forbearance is required on both sides. For its part, the press is
obliged to accept limitations, including rules on what may be published before
an operation begins. In World War II and Korea, the press agreed, if not always
cheerfully, to rigorous censorship.

In exchange, the military is obliged to allow reporters to do their job, which
means getting them to the scene of the action and providing means of
communication. As General Sidle noted the day after the Panama invasion began:
''If you're going to let the media in, you've got to let them do something.''

But insuring adequate coverage is a civilian responsibility. It belongs to
President Bush, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and the appointed officials who
carry out their orders - not the military. As a post-Grenada report by the
Twentieth Century Fund noted in 1985, the two cultures, military and media, have
been divided since Vietnam. Commanders charged with leading troops into battle
are likely to give the press low priority - unless told otherwise by their
civilian chiefs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 16, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Festival of Foreign TV At Museum of Broadcasting

BYLINE: By ELEANOR BLAU

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 936 words


Award-winning programs from abroad, most of them never broadcast in this
country, are the focus of the New York World Television Festival opening today
at the Museum of Broadcasting at 1 East 53d Street.

They are a disparate lot, with some well-known artists - Ben Kingsley, Leslie
Caron and Alec Guinness, for example - and many unknown in the United States,
from countries including Britain, Italy, Hungary, Austria, Finland, Sweden and
Ireland.

''Unlike foreign movies, foreign television hasn't found a place here,''
observed Ronald C. Simon, the museum's curator for television. The reasons for
this are not entirely clear, he said, but they include a resistance to subtitled
works for the small screen. At any rate, much important work is never seen in
the United States, said Dr. Robert M. Batscha, the president of the museum.
''What we are trying to do is stimulate broadcasting interest in international
programming,'' he said.

Two Showcase Series

As usual, the award-winners will not start or end this fourth annual event. The
museum likes to frame them with a pair of series, each featuring a body of work
- in this case works by the West German producer and director Reiner Moritz and
by Lord Olivier.

Opening the monthlong festival will be American premieres of seven arts programs
by the prolific Mr. Moritz, whom Mr. Batscha hailed as ''the true impresario of
cultural programming all over the world.''

The Moritz programs begin with a profile of Peter Brook and a documentary on the
making of his nine-hour dramatization of ''The Mahabharata.''

Following these will be profiles of the German Expressionist painter Otto Dix
and of Picasso; a musical portrait of Georg Frideric Handel, starring Trevor
Howard as the composer; a performance of Handel's comic opera ''Xerxes'' by the
English National Opera, and a profile of the ballerina Dame Margot Fonteyn. Why
the Well Known? Although he likes especially to discover unknown artists and to
follow their careers, Mr. Moritz said he had particular reasons for choosing the
well-known artists in the progams to be shown at this festival. Speaking from
London, he said, for instance, that of all the previous films about Picasso,
none ever ''really got to his roots.''

''There has been very little about Picasso and women,'' about his ''macho
aspect,'' he said, or about his fascination with bull fighting, all of which he
said would help understanding of the artist's work.

Documentary makers, in his view, too often avoid controversy, showing geniuses
as ''wrapped in cellophane with a pink ribbon'' instead of showing their
complexities.

Ending the festival, Feb. 13 though 17, will be five performances featuring
Olivier in works produced for television, starting with ''Uncle Vanya'' with
Rosemary Harris, Joan Plowright and Michael Redgrave, and followed by ''The
Merchant of Venice,'' in which Olivier's Shylock appears as a merchant banker
rather than a greedy moneylender.

He plays an aging homosexual in Harold Pinter's ''Collection,'' an eccentric
father in John Mortimer's ''Voyage Round My Father'' and a vaudevillian past his
prime in the first episode of ''Lost Empires.''

Only the Beginning

The two series are tastes of more to come. All of Olivier's television work will
be shown Feb. 20 through Sept. 29, and more of Mr. Moritz's work Jan. 30 through
Sept. 29.

The core of the festival will be shown Jan. 23 through Feb. 10 -dramatizations
and documentaries that won high awards last year at international festivals
around the world - with subtitles for those not in English.

They open with a fantasy from Austria called ''Leonardo,'' in which the painter,
while finishing a portrait of Mona Lisa, decides to putter instead and invents
television.

It is paired with ''The Bike,'' a British drama without dialogue about a boy
from a poor family who is desparate for an expensive bicycle of his own.

Other British programs scheduled include ''First Tuesday: Afghantsi,'' a
documentary in which Soviet soldiers discuss their disllusionment with their
invasion of Afghanistan and discuss being shunned at home, much like America's
Vietnam veterans; ''Tumbledown,'' a drama based on the experiences of a British
soldier in the Falklands War, and ''Mountain Language'' by Harold Pinter, a play
set in a prison camp where a group of women visit their incarcerated husbands,
fathers and sons.

On the Rails With Lenin

A collaboration between Italy, Austria, France, Spain and West Germany produced
''Lenin's Train,'' in which Ben Kingsley plays the Bolshevik leader journeying
from exile to lead the revolution, and Leslie Caron plays his wife.

In the documentary ''The Last Seven Months of Anne Frank'' (Belgium and the
Netherlands), seven women who were with Anne Frank and her family in Nazi
concentration camps discuss their experiences.

An American program is also on the bill: ''Sarafina! Words of Freedom . . .
Songs of Hope'' features the young black South African cast of the Broadway
production of ''Sarafina!''

''Stiller, Garbo and I'' (Finland) explores the life of the Swedish silent film
director through the eyes of his great-nephew and a dog, and in ''The Magician's
Dream'' (Hungary), an opium-addicted storyteller experiences a long night of
hallucinations.

Other programs include ''Darkness Visible: The Art of Manic Depression,'' an
Irish documentary about four artists who suffer from the disease, and
''Monsignor Quixote'' (Britain), about an unlikely friendship between a Roman
Catholic priest (Alec Guinness) and a Communist mayor (Leo McKern), based on a
novel by Graham Greene.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alec Guinness, left, and Leo McKern in ''Monsignor Quixote,''
one of the award-winning foreign programs in the New York World Television
Festival at the Museum of Broadcasting.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 19, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WEEKENDER GUIDE

BYLINE: By ANDREW L. YARROW

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1389 words



Friday

ON ICE FOR 50 YEARS

The Ice Capades 50th-anniversary show will come to three arenas in the New York
City area this winter, beginning with Madison Square Garden, where the
ice-skating extravaganza will be presented today through Jan. 28. This ''Golden
Anniversary Ball'' features skating champions and performers like Richard Dwyer,
Vicki Heasley, Catarina Lindgren, Tom Dickson and Bobby Beauchamp. Lions, tigers
and leopards will perform with a Czechoslovak team called the Fabulous Fercos.
Special production numbers will include ''Beyond the Magic Mirror,'' featuring
precision skating; ''From the World of Nintendo: The Adventures of the Super
Mario Brothers,'' in which Nintendo video characters are brought to life, and
''Barbie at the Big Top.'' Performance times vary; this weekend's shows will be
tonight at 7:30, tomorrow at 11 A.M., 3 and 7:30 P.M., and Sunday at 1:30 and
5:30 P.M. The show also will be presented Jan. 30 through Feb. 4 at the Brendan
Byrne Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., and from Feb. 6 though 11 at the Nassau
Coliseum in Uniondale, L.I. Tickets at all locations are $8 to $26. Information:
307-7171.

ONE MAN'S CONEY ISLAND

It may be a cliche to say that Coney Island is a state of mind, but this
memory-laden part of Brooklyn has always been more than just a beach, amusement
parks and Nathan's hot dogs. This wild and woolly world of showmanship,
tawdriness and hedonism is the subject of a one-man theater piece called ''Alive
on the Inside: The Report From Coney Island,'' being presented this weekend at
Theater Club Funambules, 167 Ludlow Street, on the Lower East Side. The show, a
sort of personal odyssey, was written and is performed by Richard Eagan, the
director of the Coney Island Hysterical Society, a muralist for Coney Island
rides and, for many years, a sideshow barker. Performances are today through
Sunday at 8 P.M. Tickets are $10. Reservations: 420-1466.

A WALL NO MORE

The end of the Berlin wall's 28 years as a dividing line between East and West
Berlin and as the most visible symbol of the cold war is chronicled in a
photographic exhibition at New York University. The show, called ''Charlie's
Retired: A Walk Along the Wall, Nov. 15, 1989,'' includes 24 black-and-white
photographs taken by E. E. Smith, a Brooklyn photographer, a few days after the
boundary was officially opened. It is on view through Feb. 16 at the Tamiment
Library on the 10th floor of Bobst Library, 70 Washington Square South. Hours
are 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Fridays; 10 A.M. to 9 P.M. on
Mondays and Thursdays, and, beginning Jan. 27, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. on Saturdays.
Admission is free. Information: 998-2635.

VETERANS IN WAR PLAY

The Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company is presenting the stage premiere
of ''The Strike,'' Rod Serling's play about the Korean War, at the South Street
Theater, 424 West 42d Street. The show, which was written for television in
1954, is set on the border between China and North Korea and focuses on an Army
major who orders an action that will risk soldiers' lives. Performances are
Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 P.M., and Saturdays and Sundays at 2 P.M.,
through Feb. 11. Tickets are $20. Information: 564-8038.

Saturday

ONE-ACT COMEDIES

Nine new one-act plays, selected from more than 1,000 scripts submitted, will be
presented during the Manhattan Punch Line Company's Sixth Annual Festival of
One-Act Comedies, which begins on Saturday. The plays will be presented at the
Judith Anderson Theater, 422 West 42d Street, in two alternating series,
prosaically titled Evening A and Evening B. Evening A includes David Ives's
''Philip Glass Buys a Loaf of Bread,'' about the composer; Tom Donaghy's
''Portfolio,'' about a French model and her photographer and production
assistant; ''The Show Must Go On,'' Laurence Klavan's farce about a family who
must improvise in a world where everything is scripted, and Rick Louis's ''How
Are Things in Costa del Fuego?,'' a musical comedy about Latin American
dictators and revolutionaries. Evening B includes Peter Tolan's ''Fertilization
Opera,'' a love story told from the perspective of three sperm; Barbara
Lindsay's ''Grunions,'' about a couple waiting for fish to spawn; ''Brunch at
Trudy and Paul's,'' Michael Aschner's look at relationships today; Jeffrey
Hatcher's ''Fellow Travelers,'' about three writers facing a Communist Eastern
European official, and ''Artistic Direction,'' Roger Hedden's story of a theater
director's meeting with a theater critic. The Evening A plays will be presented
this Saturday through Monday at 8 P.M., plus Sunday at 3 P.M.; and the Evening B
plays will be presented next Friday through Jan. 28. After that, different
series will be presented on different days through March 4. Tickets are $10.
Beginning Feb. 9, on Friday and Saturday nights, two comedy shows will be
presented after the plays. Reservations: 279-4200.

5 BY FREARS

Stephen Frears, the British director best known for ''Dangerous Liaisons''
(1988), is the subject of a film series on five Saturdays beginning this weekend
at the Queens Museum. ''Dangerous Liaisons,'' a tale of sexual intrigue in
18th-century France, starring John Malkovich, Glenn Close and Michelle Pfeiffer,
will be shown this Saturday. Subsequent films are ''My Beautiful Laundrette''
(Jan. 27), ''Sammy and Rosie Get Laid'' (Feb. 3), ''The Hit'' (Feb. 10) and
''Gumshoe'' (Feb. 17). All screenings begin at 2 P.M. The series is presented in
conjunction with a two-month exhibition called ''The New British Painting,'' a
survey of 1980's painting that includes 53 works by 26 young artists. A slide
lecture on contemporary British painting, featuring three artists, is scheduled
on Sunday at 2 P.M. The museum is in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Flushing,
Queens. Hours are noon to 5:30 P.M. on Saturdays and Sundays, and 10 A.M. to 5
P.M. Tuesdays through Fridays. Suggested donation is $2; $1 for students and the
elderly, free for children under 5 and members. Information: (718) 592-5555.

HOME, TOXIC HOME

Paul Zaloom, a political satirist, puppeteer and performance artist, will
perform ''The House of Horror,'' his one-man show about the dangers of
contemporary life, on Saturday at 8:30 P.M. at the Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. of Suffolk, 74
Hauppauge Road, Commack, L.I. The three-part show includes sketches about a
family terrorized by a toxic house, an overview of products designed to clean up
after environmental disasters, and animated household objects symbolizing values
like peace and justice. Tickets are $17. The program is presented by the United
Jewish Y's of Long Island. The Suffolk Y is near the Commack Road exits of the
Long Island Expressway and the Northern State Parkway. Information: (516)
938-4600.

Sunday

CERAMICS AND VOICE

As part of the Guggenheim Museum's Works and Process series, in which new or
unfinished pieces of music, dance and theater are performed, a work by the
Chinese composer Tan Dun will be presented on Sunday and Monday at 8 P.M. The
piece, ''Soundshape: For Ceramics, Voice and Movement,'' is inspired by
traditional Chinese ritual music and is written for more than 70 ceramic
instruments that are played by striking, plucking, bowing or blowing. The
instruments were developed by Ragnar Naess, a ceramicist, and Mr. Tan, who also
will conduct the performance. The museum is at 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th
Street. Tickets are $10; $9 for students and museum members. Information:
360-3558.

TONING DOWN

A two-year-old international campaign to lower the standard pitch for tuning
musical instruments will come to Alice Tully Hall on Sunday at 3 P.M., during a
concert performance of Beethoven's opera, ''Fidelio,'' by the Lubo Opera
Company. The campaign was started by the Milan-based Schiller Institute, which
argued that because the human voice is composed of certain harmonic
relationships, it can be damaged by the present standard concert pitch. Anthony
Morss, Lubo's artistic director, will conduct a 45-piece orchestra called the
Eighteenth Century Ensemble, playing period instruments at C-256 (A-430.5),
about a quarter-tone lower than the present standard of C-261 (A-440). Tickets
are $20; $12 for students and the elderly. Information: 362-1911 or (201)
854-4524.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 19, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

An Israeli Rights Group Fights for Palestinians

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1097 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Jan. 18


Dedi Zucker did not expect that founding the only Israeli organization that
monitors human rights abuses in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip would help
bring threats to his life by angry Jewish mobs.

A convivial legislator who belongs to the liberal Citizens Rights Party, Mr.
Zucker quickly learned how deeply many Israelis feel about his fight to protect
Palestinian human rights.

Last July, more than 150 angry Israelis stormed outside his home, throwing
stones and chanting ''Arab lover!'' and ''Death to the Arabs!'' A short while
earlier, a Palestinian had grabbed the steering wheel of a bus traveling along
the Jerusalem-Tel Aviv highway, plunging it into a ravine and killing 16 people.
And with the publicity the founding of his group had generated a short time
earlier, Mr. Zucker instantly became a target of rightist Israeli fury.

Nevertheless, Mr. Zucker has not been deterred. In fact, he says he was
convinced more than ever that his group, called B'Tzelem, must continue to
catalogue and publicize Israeli human rights violations - improper jailings,
destruction of property, beatings and death - in the occupied territories.

'The Business of Democracy'

''I'm convinced there must be an alternative checking of every Palestinian
casualty,'' Mr. Zucker said. ''No one should allow the state to be the only
source of information. It should be checked and challenged. That's what the
business of democracy is.''

Until B'Tzelem began monitoring army reports on clashes in the occupied
territories, the Israeli public had to depend solely on the army spokesman,
international human rights groups, or Palestinian accounts.

After more than two years of reporting on the uprising, it is now an accepted
fact that the army routinely minimizes reports of abuses by its soldiers. Even a
well-informed army official, who declined to be identified, acknowledged that
reports of field officers are not always completely accurate and that the
inaccuracies have reduced the credibility of the spokesman's office.

Last month, ABC News broadcast a report that showed videotape of Israeli troops
in Bethlehem firing without warning directly at fleeing Palestinian
demonstrators, hitting one of them in the back of the head. The young man died
later. As the ABC piece showed this tape, it simultaneously aired a translation
of an army spokesman's account of the incident, saying the soldiers had merely
yelled warnings and fired into the air, or at the legs of the demonstrators. #2
Policemen Face Trial As the result of another investigation, the army announced
on Sunday evening that two border policemen involved in the incident were
suspended from duty and will be tried for violating firing orders and falsifying
a report.

''The army spokesman can't be an eyewitness every time a Palestinian is
killed,'' Nachman Shai, the head of the army spokesman's office, said on Sunday.
''We are entirely dependent on the reports of soldiers and officers in the
field.''

Whenever a Palestinian is shot and killed in a clash with soldiers, the army
says it fully investigates to insure that army firing regulations were followed.
But the investigations often take months if not a year to complete. Soldiers who
are tried usually get light sentences or are quietly disciplined in military
hearings. In fact, the Israeli Supreme Court recently ordered the army's chief
prosecuting attorney to reverse his decision not to charge an army colonel who
ordered his soldiers to break the hands and legs of Palestinian men and women.

Mr. Zucker decided he could not count on the Government to provide an accurate
record. He set up B'Tzelem which now operates with a handful of volunteers and a
small staff. Daily, it compiles statistics on Palestinians killed by Israeli
soliders and settlers while also tracking deportations, arrests, and house
demolitions. In addition, the organization reports on abuses in the Israeli
military judicial system and a host of other problems.

Source of Funds

''B'tzelem filled a vacuum,'' said Elliot Appel, 24, a paid intern who recently
graduated from the University of Michigan.

The organization operates on $125,000 a year donated by private foundations and
donations. Less than a year old, it is already attracting international
attention. Late last year, a $100,000 Carter Award for Human Rights was divided
between B'Tzelem and Al Haq - Law in the Service of Man, a Ramallah-based
Palestinian human rights organization.

B'Tzelem is a Hebrew word that appears in Genesis 1:27 meaning ''in the image
of.'' The full verse reads, ''So God created man in His own image, in the image
of God He created him.''

''Israelis don't want to know what's going on in the occupied territories,''
said Zehava Golan, the woman who runs B'Tzelem. ''We don't want to be only a
center collecting data, but to make the Israeli public aware of the abuses.''

''People say, 'Why do you bother with Palestinian problems? We have enough
problems in Israel,' '' she says. ''But, there is a basic standard of human
rights that we have to protect. It can be in Sri Lanka, Chile, or anywhere.''

Criticism From Right

But some people from the Israeli right say B'Tzelem is not a neutral
organization, and that it has its own agenda of promoting the views of Mr.
Zucker. He advocates withdrawal from most if not all of the territories,
negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organziation and the eventual
establishment of a Palestinian state.

''B'Tzelem is playing into the hands of the enemy,'' said Elyakim Haetzni, a
member of Parliament from the far right-wing Tehiya party.

''In a normal state, any such type of activity wouldn't be allowed,'' he added.
''I don't think the British established an organization like B'Tzelem to protect
the citizens of Hamburg when they bombed it.''

Rabbi Dov Berkovitz, a member of the West Bank settlers council said he believes
B'Tzelem is doing important work but needs to be more balanced.

''It's very important that there should be a systemic supervision on exactly
what the damage, the casualties are in the uprising,'' said Mr. Berkovitz, who
lives in the West Bank settlement of Shilo. ''Unfortunately, there are too many
people in the country who have put the intifada in a little drawer someplace
like the American mentality in the Vietnam War.''

But, Mr. Berkovitz says, B'Tzelem should not report on Israeli human rights
violations without document Palestinian abuses, too. That, he says, is the only
way the new human rights organization will ever have an impact on Israeli public
opinion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 19, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1280 words



INTERNATIONAL    A3-15

Soviet troops in Azerbaijan were apparently bogged down by widespread
resistance, including airfield and railroad blockades, sabotage, and civil
disobedience, as they tried to control the violence there.    Page A1



Soviet press disrupted by republic's violence    A10


Iran is apprehensive about Azerbaijan revolt    A10



The goal of German unity must be declared by West Germany and a freely elected
East German government, said Bonn, alarmed by its flood of East German
immigrants.    A1



In a West German camp, those who lost hope for change    A11


World economic aide sees trouble in Warsaw policy    A11


Hungary seeks withdrawal of Soviet forces in two years    A10


Investor denies Gdansk deal is dead    A11


Bulgarian Communist leader is under house arrest    A12


Bucharest seizes Communist assets    A12


U.N. Secretary General agrees to accept invitation to Albania    A12


Prague leader quits the Communist Party    A12



The prosecution in the Noriega case has tried to intimidate three defense
witnesses by sending immigration agents to their homes, asserted lawyers for a
co-defendant of General Noriega.    A15



Panama-Latin ties linked to a U.S. pullout    A14


U.S. is releasing invasion captives    A14



The case of the priest killings in El Salvador has a new, much discussed twist:
why was the officer who blew the whistle on the suspects detained, publicly
identified and presumably exposed to reprisals?    A3



Argentines take to the streets against inept police    A3


Ecuador court orders arrest of ex-President over funds    A3



The mayor of Nagasaki was shot, and a 40-year-old ultra-nationalist was arrested
as the prime suspect. The mayor has received many death threats since he
asserted a year ago that Emperor Hirohito bore some responsibility for World War
II.    A6



Soviets said to withdraw fighter planes from Vietnam base    A6


News analysis: Cambodia peace effort embraces more realism    A6


China reports release of 573 held in revolt    A5


India names new Kashmir Governor    A7


Israeli rights group fights for Palestinians    A9


Israelis accuse a P.L.O. aide    A8


A second newspaper is shut by Lebanese General    A8


French agree to buy Rorer for $3.14 billion    D1



NATIONAL    A16-20, B9

Mayor Marion Barry was arrested by the FBI on a drug charge at a downtown
Washington hotel, law enforcement officials said.    A1



A child abuse trial in California, the longest and costliest criminal trial in
American history, ended with the acquittal of a former preschool director and
her son on 52 counts of molesting young children.    A1



For jurors, fact and fantasy but no firm truth    A18



R.J. Reynolds was assailed by the nation's top health official, Dr. Louis
Sullivan, for ''deliberately and cynically'' test-marketing a cigarette aimed
primarily at blacks and ''promoting a culture of cancer.''    A1



A plan to cut Social Security taxes, criticized by President Bush and Vice
President Quayle, was angrily defended by its sponsor, Senator Moynihan, who
said it was not a political trap.    A1



George Bush's approval rating at the end of his first year is higher than that
of any President at an equivalent point in his Administration since John F.
Kennedy, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.    A20



Student says experiment error jammed computer network    A19


Wariness over computer indictment    A19


Ending of H.U.D. program seen as blow to developers    A16


Airlines urged to hide bomb threats    A15


Washington Talk: Rethinking priorities on foreign aid    A17


Savings failure, White House tie    D1



Astronomers are using gravity to reveal the presence of the mysterious invisible
matter believed to constitute the bulk of the universe. This may lead them to an
understanding of forces that shape galaxies and even larger cosmic
agglomerations.    A16



Space shuttle under control after erratic spinning    A16


Consumer prices up by 0.4 %    D1


Plane collision in Atlanta kills one person, officials say    A16


Risk is seen in needless removal of asbestos    A20


High cholesterol poses heart risk in older men, study says    A19



REGIONAL    B1-4

Candidates to head school districts must have the Chancellor's approval or their
appointment will be challenged by him, the Chancellor, Joseph Fernandez, said,
mounting a frontal assault on New York City's decentralized system.    A1



New York's truth-in-testing law, which requires testing services to disclose
questions and answers from their exams, is unenforceable because it conflicts
with Federal copyright law, a judge ruled.    B1



The search for a health chief for New York City took another twist as two major
gay-rights groups and the expert who nominated the leading candidate withdrew
their support for him.    B1



''Impressive'' or ''slick''?: candidate seen two ways    B4


Suspect shot by police at Grand Central Terminal    B1


On land and in air, Kennedy delays persist    B1


Court forbids forced medical care to save life    B3


Tale of extortion unfolds at ex-Danbury Mayor's trial    B3


Rebirth of plant may help Shoreham    B2


Agents kill two linked to series of bank thefts    B3



NEEDIEST CASES    B4

BUSINESS DIGEST    D1



WEEKEND

Weekender Guide    C1


The Winter Antiques Show    C1


Mickey Katz's music    C1


The Bronx celebrates itself    C31


Met offers Rumania help in restoring damaged art    C18


Film maker alienates his allies    C12


Theater: On Stage    C2


Film: At the Movies    C6


Music: Rock Hall of Fame opens gates to pop    C3


Dance: Alfred Gallman troupe    C3


Art: New African works    C32


An evolving Rothko    C30


Soviet artists in two shows    C26


Word and Image: ''My Traitor's Heart'' on apartheid    C33


TV Weekend: ''Jekyll and Hyde''    C34



SPORTS

Baseball: Stalemate in Strawberry negotiations    B11


Two sides discuss revenue-sharing plan    B12


Basketball: Mavs bracing for Knicks    B14


Michigan halts Ohio State    B14


300 fans join on-court brawl    B14


Column: Vecsey on the baseball talks    B11


Football: Clemson's Ford resigns under pressure    B13


Golf: Three lead in Bob Hope Classic    B12


Hockey: Penguins tie Rangers    B11
Rangers reportedly after Nicholls    B14


Horse Racing: Notebook    B13


  LAW  B6

At the Bar
The long road back for a disgraced patricia

OBITUARIES

Charles Hernu, a French Socialist politician

B8


Edward H. Kass, epidemiologist

B8


Inzer B. Wyatt, Federal judge

B8


Candy Jones, ex-model and host Of a radio talk show

B9



EDITORIALS/LETTERS/OP-ED

Editorials    A34



Nationalism at its nastiest
The right-to-die dilemma
Smart about sex
The case for Dr. Myers

Letters    A34



William Safire: Bankrupt bankers    A35


Nayan Chanda: A false start on Cambodian peace    A35


Julius Gordon: School reform again? (sigh)    A35


Doug Bandow: First a unified Berlin    A35


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: January 21, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1304 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2  10   DADDY, by Danielle Steel (Delacorte, $19.95.) Unexpected
                crises wreck the safe, predictable world a man has built for
                himself and his family.

 2      3  21   CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy (Putnam, $21.95.) The
                C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights Colombian drug lords.

 3      4  10   CARIBBEAN, by James A. Michener (Random House, $22.95.) The
                history of the sea islands told in fictional form.

 4      1  12   THE DARK HALF, by Stephen King (Viking, $21.95.) After a
                writer of horror tales kills off his pseudonym, the deceased
                goes on a murderous rampage.

 5          1   VINELAND, by Thomas Pynchon (Little, Brown ($19.95.) The
                passions of the 1960's continue to rule the lives of members
                of a community in Northern California.

 6      5  14   FOUCAULT'S PENDULUM, by Umberto Eco (Wolff/Harcourt Brace
                Jovanovich $22.95.) Ancient documents and arcane codes
                produce astonishing results when thrown into a computer.

 7     15   2   HARMFUL INTENT, by Robin Cook (Putnam, $18.95.) A physician
                struggles to clear his name in a "medical malpractice" death
                and to prevent others from occurring.

 8          1   A RULING PASSION, by Judith Michael (Poseidon, $19.95.) A
                young widow's entry into the world of television brings her
                adventures fraught with love, intrigue, revenge and murder.

 9      8  14   TALES FROM MARGARITAVILLE, by Jimmy Buffett (Harcourt Brace
                Jovanovich, $16.95.) Short stories set on a mythical
                Caribbean island.

10          1   MYSTERY, by Peter Straub (Dutton, $19.95.) A bright young man
                and an elderly eccentric join hands to solve a murder that
                haunts them both.

11      7   9   STRAIGHT, by Dick Francis (Putnam, $18.95.) A steeplechase
                jockey inherits property and a mysterious enemy.

12     12   3   SPY LINE, by Len Deighton (Knopf, $18.95.) To salvage his
                reputation, the British agent Bernard Samson undertakes a
                hazardous mission in Vienna.

13      9   8   THE ELEVENTH HOUR, by Graeme Base (Abrams, $14.95.) An
                illustrated mystery story about a birthday party attended by
                11 animals.

14*    14  16   THE OLDEST LIVING CONFEDERATE WIDOW TELLS ALL, by Allan
                Gurganus (Knopf, $21.95.) A 99-year-old woman reflects on her
                past.

15          1   COLD HARBOUR, by Jack Higgins (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The
                O.S.S. agent Craig Osbourne on a perilous mission during
                World War II.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  18   IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum
                (Villard, $17.95.) A new collection of inspirational essays.

 2      3  11   LIAR'S POKER, by Michael Lewis (Norton, $18.95.) Wall Street's
                 tumultuous 1980's, as witnessed by a young bond trader.

 3      2  64   ALL I REALLY NEEDED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN,
                (Villard, $17.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday matters.

 4     12   6   THE TEMPTING OF AMERICA, by Robert M. Bork (Free Press,
                $22.50.) A critique of the relationship between politics and
                the law by Ronald Reagan's Supreme Court nominee.

 5      6  92   A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME, by Stephen W. Hawking (Bantam,
                $18.95.) A scientist views efforts to create a unified theory
                of the universe.

 6      4  12   MY TURN, by Nancy Reagan with William Novak (Random House,
                21.95.) The former First Lady's memoir of her White House
                years.

 7      5  16   ROSEANNE, by Roseanne Barr (Harper & Row, $18.95.) The
                autobiography of the television comedian.

 8      7   9   ALL MY BEST FRIENDS, by George Burns with David Fisher
                (Putnam, $17.95.) Reminiscences about show business
                acquaintances.

 9*    11  21   AMONG SCHOOLCHILDREN, by Tracy Kidder (Todd/Houghton/Mifflin,
                $19.95.) A year in the life of a fifth-grade schoolteacher in
                Holyoke, Mass.

10      8  11   DRIVE, by Larry Bird with Bob Ryan (Doubleday, $17.95.) The
                autobiography of the Boston Celitcs baseball star.

11      9  12   EDUCATION OF A WANDERING MAN, by Louis L'Amour (Bantam,
                $16.95.) The author recalls the places he visited and the
                books he read in his youth.

12          1   THE EMPEROR'S NEW MIND, by Roger Penrose (Oxford University,
                $24.95.) A physicist maintains that computers will never
                replace human thinking.

13*    13   7   WONDERFUL LIFE, by Stephen Jay Gould (Norton, $19.95.) What
                the contents of a small quarry in the Canadian Rockies have
                revealed about the past and about scientific methods.

14     15  17   FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM, by Thomas L. Friedman (Farrar,
                Strauss & Giroux, $22.95.) The Arab Israeli conflict as
                observed by a New York Times correspondent over the past
                decade.

15          1   WHO NEEDS GOD, by Harold Kushner (Summit, $18.95.) A rabbi
                tells how religious commitment can make great differences in
                our lives.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      5  59   WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens (Simon & Schuster,
                $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's advice about how to make a
                personal fortune.

 2      3   6   THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford (Little, Brown
                $10.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find
                an ubiquitous chap named Waldo.

 3*     1  28   THE WAY THINGS WORK, by David Macaulay (Houghton Mifflin,
                $29.95.) Explanations in pictures and text.

 4      2   9   THE WAY TO COOK, by Julia Child (Knopf, $50.) More than 800
                recipies from "the French Chef."

 5      4  13   THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS THREE ANCIENT CUISINES, by Jeff
                Smith (Morrow, $18.95.) Recipies from China, Greece and Rome.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.



And Bear in Mind

(Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interest.)

PICTURING WILL, by Ann Beattie (Random House, $18.95.) Complex points of view
unfold to yield the shock of enlightenment in Ms. Beattie's fourth novel, a
lyrical, deeply affecting story about a little boy and the people who love him,
or should.

BECOMING A POET: Elizabeth Bishop with Marianne Moore and Robert Lowell, by
David Kalstone (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.50.) The fullest account so far of
Bishop's life. David Kalstone's presentation approaches her creative activity
through her close friendship with two other major poets.

ORDINARY MONEY, by Louis B. Jones (Viking, $18.95.) A wacky, satirical first
novel of life among the relatively disadvantaged of Marin County, California,
who are saddled with responsibility for a truckload of counterfeit money (except
it may be real.)

THESE GOOD MEN: Friendships Forged from War. by Michael Norman (Crown, $19.95.)
A survivor of a Marine company dreadfully cut up in a 1968 Vietnam War battle
has worked his own memories and those of his fellows into an eloquent statement.

FORGED IN BATTLE: The Civil War Alliance of Black Soldiers and White Officers,
by Joseph T. Glatthaar (The Free Press, $24.95.) An absorbing account, more
social than military, of the revolution through which 180,000 blacks fought for
the Union in the Civil War.

OUR NEW YORK, Text by Alfred Kazin, Photographs by David Finn (Harper & Row,
$35.) A delightful collaboration on the New York landscape and its meaning by
two wise old Brooklyn hands.

RICHARD NIXON AND HIS AMERICA, by Herbert S. Parmet (Little, Brown ($24.95.) Mr.
Nixon as the product of historical forces, cheifly the dread of Communism and
the disdain of the middle classses for the privileged and the opinion-making
elites.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE REGION;
Fewer Turf Battles, More Drug Arrests

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 894 words


QUIETLY, virtually unnoticed by most New Yorkers, a three-year effort by Federal
and local law-enforcement officials has made some notable gains against some of
the city's most notorious narcotics traffickers. Government officials say that
150 dealers, including some major traffickers who controlled drug distribution
in parts of Manhattan and Queens, have been locked up since 1986 in an operation
that has become a model for Federal and municipal cooperation.

But even the success of the effort, called Operation Horse Collar, points up the
intractability of the drug problem. Federal and local authorities acknowledge
that drug sales, especially cocaine, showed no significant decline in those
areas where the arrested kingpins had operated.

''As far as a decrease in the amount of heroin and coke coming into these areas,
you're not going to see that,'' said Jules Bonavolonta, who heads the organized
crime and narcotics division of the New York office of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. ''That involves the problems of interdiction and reducing
demand,'' he said.

The operation was conceived at a meeting at the F.B.I.'s office in Lower
Manhattan in early 1986. The meeting was called to make peace among the various
law-enforcment agencies, which often seemed more intent on protecting turf and
gaining exclusive arrests than pooling resources to concentrate on heroin
dealers. At that time, crack, the smokable cocaine derivative, had not reached
epidemic proportions.

'Like Cats and Dogs'

''We all tended to act like independent contractors,'' said Sterling Johnson
Jr., New York City's special narcotics prosecutor. ''And when we got together,
we would end up fighting like cats and dogs.'' Mr. Johnson attended the strategy
session, along with representatives of the F.B.I., the Federal Drug Enforcement
Administration, the United States Attorney offices in Manhattan and Brooklyn and
the city's Police Department.

They agreed on an assault on the different links in the drug chain, from street
dealers to distributors to international traffickers. A squad was established
consisting of 15 agents from the F.B.I., 10 city narcotics detectives and four
Federal drug agents. In addition, a specialist from the D.E.A.'s analysis unit
and from the F.B.I.'s asset forfeiture team were assigned part time to the
operation. The squad focused on areas like Harlem and the South Bronx where
heroin use was the greatest.

In contrast to past practice when different agencies often conducted separate
and sometimes overlapping investigations, Federal and local law-enforcement
officials began sharing informants and witnesses, money for undercover drug
purchases and wiretaps. One Federal and one local officer were assigned to each
case.

''If anybody got anything, we would put it in the pot,'' Mr. Johnson said.
''Then we would decide who would prosecute.'' An F.B.I. agent, Arthur C.
Grubert, said, ''The key really emphasized at that meeting was not to be
statistically oriented, not to worry about making big seizures. We wanted to
take down distribution networks.''

Going for the Top

The aim was to get the top leader of various drug distribution gangs and as many
lieutenants as possible, and to seize their assets. ''Once they're in jail, the
people out on the street couldn't care less about them if they don't have any
money,'' said Mr. Bonavolonta.

In the last three years the operation has been credited with the arrest and
conviction on drug and other charges of key figures like Leslie Atkinson, who,
while serving a prison term for smuggling heroin into the United States in body
bags containing dead American soldiers from Vietnam, had set up an operation to
import heroin from Thailand. Others arrested include James Smith, considered one
of the top heroin dealers in Queens; Kenneth McGriff, whose gang controlled the
cocaine trade in much of southeast Queens, and Thomas Mickens, who was described
by Government officials as the cocaine king of the neighborhoods near Kennedy
International Airport.

The operation also also helped snare Lorenzo (Fat Cat) Nichols, another Queens
trafficker, and Howard (Pappy) Mason, who was convicted in December of ordering
the killing of a police officer, Edward Byrne, who was shot to death while
guarding the home of a witness in a drug case.

But if the effort has won some battles, victory in the war on the crack trade
remains elusive. A reason, law-enforcement officers say, is the decentralized
nature of the city's cocaine distribution system, a tangled web of independent
gangs each controlling a slice of the city. To get to the top of each disparate
organization involves the long and often dangerous process of infiltration.

In the case of heroin, law-enforcement agencies say that they confront larger,
well-integrated supply and distribution networks. Mr. Smith, for example, headed
11 of the 13 big distribution networks in Queens, according to Federal
officials.

The authorities say they do not even know the total number of distribution
networks in the city. And, as a recent spate of shootings in Queens has
indicated, new groups are already vying to see who will replace those that have
been broken up. So while those involved in the operation like to boast of its
success, they acknowledge that they are much closer to the beginning of their
job than the end.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 22, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

4 Golden Globe Awards To 'Born on 4th of July'

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 220 words

DATELINE: BEVERLY HILLS, Calif., Jan. 21


''Born on the Fourth of July,'' the Vietnam drama, won four Golden Globe Awards
Saturday night, including best dramatic picture, best dramatic actor for Tom
Cruise and best director.

''Driving Miss Daisy,'' the account of a Southern widow's relationship with her
black chauffeur, collected three awards, including best musical or comic motion
picture.

Ron Kovic, the disabled veteran whose story was the basis for ''Born on the
Fourth of July,'' received a standing ovation in accepting the film's fourth
award, for best screenplay for a dramatic picture. He shared that award with
Oliver Stone, the co-writer and director, at the 47th Annual Golden Globe
Awards.

Michelle Pfeiffer was named best actress in a dramatic motion picture for ''The
Fabulous Baker Boys.''

The Golden Globes are awarded by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association. The
ceremony was held at the Beverly Hilton Hotel.

In the television competition, the CBS series ''Murphy Brown'' won as best
musical or comic television series, ABC's ''China Beach'' was named best
dramatic television series and ''Lonesome Dove'' won for best mini-series or
television movie.

In the movie competition, ''Driving Miss Daisy'' also captured trophies for best
actor and actress in a musical or comic motion picture, for Morgan Freeman and
Jessica Tandy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 23, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Luang Prabang Journal;
If the Buddha Is Laughing, There's a Good Reason

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 901 words

DATELINE: LUANG PRABANG, Laos


This large village on the Mekong River, deep in the interior of a landlocked and
underdeveloped country, was once a royal capital and, with its dozens of
pagodas, also a capital of the celebration of Buddha.

The coming to power of the Vietnamese-supported Communist guerrilla movement
banished King Savang Vatthana, driving him, the Queen and the Crown Prince to
early deaths from exposure to the rigors of the malaria-ridden, jungled
mountains of the northeast.

But despite 15 years of Communist rule, Luang Prabang is today as in the past a
place that breathes a deeply held faith, a town whose people, many poor by any
standard, prove by daily offerings to the servants of Buddha their adherence to
timeless ways. The Communist Party long ago gave up a struggle it realized it
could not win.

In interviews in Vientiane, the capital, both Prime Minister Kaysone Phomvihan
and Acting President Phoumi Vongvichit professed to be Buddhists as well as
Communists.

'This Is Lao Socialism'

''I go to the pagoda on all festival days,'' said the 80-year-old Mr. Phoumi
Phongvichit. And Somlith Souksomvang, a monk who is headmaster of the school for
novice monks, said, 'This is Lao socialism.''

About 6:30 every morning, when the sun rises in this dry season, men step from
their simple houses in the rectangle formed by four main streets and ring gongs
attached to trees or walls at many corners. It is a signal for others, women and
men, to file into the street carrying wicker baskets filled with the glutinous
rice favored by Laotians.

At the same signal, the monks form outside their temples and begin their daily
march along the rectangle to collect the alms of food that are their due in
return for the life of devotion, teaching and healing that is their Buddhist
mission. In single file, barefoot, in a procession headed by the abbot and
brought up in the rear by the boy novices, each monastery's entire complement
forms a platoon in the silent parade.

In a single rank also, Luang Prabang's people line the middle of the four
streets. As the first group of monks, visible from afar as lines of
golden-yellow robes, draws near, they step out of their sandals, and the women
kneel. The monks hold out their metal or wicker bowls, observing the
prescription not to look at the donors, especially not women, and each of the
alms-givers drops a small amount of rice into each monk's bowl.

About a half-hour later, the last contingent, always that of Xieng Thong, the
former royal pogoda, has passed. The men and women replace the lids on their
baskets, join their palms in front of their faces in the Buddhist gesture of
respect and return to their houses.

Back to Their Temples

The monks return to their temples, put their filled bowls in the large common
room of the abbot's house where they will eat, seated on mats, and begin the
daily ritual of sweeping the temple yards. When the last fallen leaves and
bougainvillea petals have been gathered into neat piles, they return to the
house and receive a procession of townspeople who deliver the pots of vegetable,
fish and meat dishes that complement the rice.

Are not Communist parties against religion? Sipanh Sirinounghkhoun, who heads
the Office for Church Affairs for the province, was asked. ''Yes, with the
exception of Laos,'' he replied with a smile. He said he was a party member and
added, as if to reassure the questioner, ''I follow the principles of the party
and Buddhism.''

After taking a more ideological stand against Buddhism in the early period of
their rule, the Communists have taken the line that Communism and Buddhism
pursue common goals, above all peace and social justice, and have adopted the
laissez-faire policy that is most evident here.

Mr. Sipanh Sirinounghkhoun said the Government needed Buddhist cooperation to
persuade the population of its policies. ''If we party officials teach these
things, the people don't believe us,'' he said. ''They believe the monks much
more. The monks teach Buddhist principles together with socialist principles.''

The more tolerant attitude also includes the principal enemies of the past, the
United States and France. T-shirt messages and mock badges feature many
''official'' American insignia.

The Lying Goes On

The young woman who served tea in Mr. Sipanh Sirinounghkhoun's office, whose
decor featured a large portrait of Ho Chi Minh, Vietnam's revolutionary leader,
wore an image of the official seal of the United States. A member of the Hmong
ethnic group, known to Americans, who recruited a mercenary army of them, as
Meos, wore a military-style jacket with a ''U.S. Army'' inscription.

The official attitude is far from relaxed, however, on the subject of the former
royal family. Although Mr. Kaysone Phomvihan conceded to the press in Paris for
the first time in December what had been public knowledge for more than a decade
-that the King and his family are dead - this has not been announced to his
people.

In the royal palace, now a museum, the official guide looked embarrassed when
asked where the royal family was and replied softly. ''In Vieng Say,'' the
region of their exile, Are they still alive? she was asked. Uncertain how to
respond, she looked to a Foreign Ministry official for help, but he looked away.

''Yes,'' she whispered, ashamed of her lie but still unaware that the truth had
finally been made official.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Despite 15 years of Communist rule, Luang Prabang, Laos, is
today, as in the past, a place that breathes a deeply held faith, a town whose
people, many poor by any standard, make daily offerings from what little is
theirs to the servants of Buddha, who go on alms-gathering rounds each morning.
(NYT/Henry Kamm); map of Thailand showing location of Luang Prabang (NYT)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 24, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Most Employers Coveting Frequent-Flier Bonus Miles

BYLINE: By PHILIP S. GUTIS

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1034 words


Corporations are increasingly wrestling with their employees to claim
frequent-flier bonuses from airlines as travel costs soar and the economy slows.

Frequent-flier programs, which were introduced 11 years ago, typically offer
free upgradings to first class and free flights to passengers who log a certain
number of miles. At first, many companies took the position that having paid for
the tickets, they deserved to get any bonuses earned by their employees on
business trips. But the structure of the programs and an overwhelming resistance
by employees to give up what they saw as a new benefit quickly led most
companies to abandon their efforts.

Now, under pressure from a sluggish economy and business travel costs that rose
94 percent in the 1980's, according to the Runzheimer International Business
Travel Price Index, corporate travel managers are trying a variety of ways to
reclaim frequent-flier bonuses.

Some, like the Boeing Corporation, use get-tough policies ranging from
monitoring the return of bonus points accumulated by employees to restating
longstanding corporate policy against using the bonuses for personal use.

But others, the Unisys Corporation notable among them, have decided a
share-the-fortune approach is better. They offer their employees cash or other
incentives to turn the bonuses in for company use.

''As air fares go up, companies tighten budgets and corporate travel managers
come under pressure to cut costs, frequent-flier programs are something that is
being looked at,'' said Margie L. Crace, the president of the National Business
Travel Association, an organization of corporate travel managers.

Still, it is unlikely that most companies will make stringent efforts to take
the bonuses from employees, according to travel managers and people who monitor
the frequent-flier programs. Because awards are registered in personal accounts
- designed by the airlines to increase ''brand loyalty'' among travelers and
their families - it is difficult for companies to keep track.

Ms. Crace is travel manager at Chemed/DuBois, a specialty chemical company in
Cincinnati. She said her company has been taking back frequent-flier bonuses
since 1984.

Employees Fight Back

Even though the airlines expect only 30 percent of all frequent-flier awards to
be redeemed, employees still strongly resist giving them up. ''At first, it's
like Vietnam, Korea, World War III,'' Ms. Crace said. ''You are against Mom,
Apple Pie and America when you try to take the awards.''

One international management consultant said frequent-flier miles should not be
taken from employees. The benefits represent ''the scars of business travel,''
he said, because such travel was more of ''a hassle than pleasure.''

That may explain why more than 100 companies have got in touch with Unisys, in
Blue Bell, Pa., for information about a strategy it devised for prying loose
frequent-flier bonuses from its workers.

Under a program started in April 1989, Unisys, the computer manufacturer, gives
employees who agree to use their bonus points for business travel half the cash
value of the air fare saved.

Robert W. Anderson, the company's director of corporate travel, said many
employees had accumulated so many bonus points that they would never be able to
use them all for personal travel. The program, he said, benefits both company
and employee.

'Money in the Hand'

''There is more to a trip than just the air fares,'' Mr. Anderson said, ''and if
you don't have the money to take a big trip - or the vacation time - then our
program offers money in the hand and it certainly helps the company.''

In the first nine months of the voluntary program, Mr. Anderson said, Unisys
saved about $100,000 -which he concedes is minuscule when compared with the
company's air fare costs last year of about $75 million. But he said he expected
more of the 25,000 eligible employees to participate this year and projected
saving 10 percent of Unisys's air fare costs.

Other companies are more strict about wanting it all. In Dallas, the Halliburton
Company, the diversified energy and construction concern, told its more than
60,000 employees last year that they would no longer be able to keep
frequent-flier awards accumulated on business trips. ''I'm not aware of any
problems that we've had with the new policy,'' said Guy Marcus, Halliburton's
vice president for investor relations. ''The employees recognize that it is the
company that buys the tickets.''

Boeing's Savings

Boeing, the Seattle-based aircraft manufacturer, has never allowed employees to
use awards for personal travel. It closely scrutizes ticket reimbursements to
insure that bonuses are returned to the company. A spokesman, Bob Jorgensen,
said that last year the company used the bonuses to save about $1 million on an
annual travel budget of $100 million.

When new employees join Boeing, Mr. Jorgensen said, many grumble about losing
frequent-flier benefits. To assauge them, the company said that any money saved
on air fares is credited to an employees' department. ''That way the money comes
back to your organization,'' he said, ''if not to you.''

Following the airlines' lead, many hotel chains and rental car agencies have
started their own frequent-traveler bonus programs. But because air travel is
usually the most costly part of corporate travel over all, companies are
focusing on ways to cut that expense.

Ken Heldt, managing director of Frequent Flyer Services of Colorado Springs,
said that on average a company could cut total air fare costs by 7 to 10
percent. His company analyzes corporate travel budgets to help managers
determine how much they can save through reclaiming bonus awards and how to
track the awards.

His clients, he said, have included large international operations like the
Amoco Oil Corporation and the Union Carbide Corporation as well as the small but
travel-dependent scouting team for the Chicago Cubs.

While these companies are interested in seeing how much they can save by
reclaiming awards, Mr. Heldt said he often advised sharing.

''It still gives employees some incentive to make sure that the numbers are put
in the computers,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graph of free miles earned but not used in U.S. from '81 to '89
(Source: Runzheimer Frequent Flyer Services)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 25, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Sihanouk Quits Opposition Post And Severs Ties to Peace Process

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 477 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Jan. 24


Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the leader of the Cambodian opposition and probably a
key figure in any resolution of his country's conflict, said today that he would
resign as head of the exile government and withdraw from future discussions on a
peaceful settlement in Cambodia.

Prince Sihanouk has announced his withdrawal from the peace process at least
twice before, only to return later, and diplomats who closely follow the
Cambodian issue said his resignation might not make much difference for the time
being. They also said that he might return to the bargaining table if a
settlement appeared to be taking shape and elections were being planned.

The Prince, who governed Cambodia until he was overthrown in a coup in 1970, is
one of Cambodia's best-known and most-respected figures. His endorsement would
be important for the peace settlement that the Cambodian factions and the major
powers are hoping to reach before long.

The United States, France, the Soviet Union, China and Britain are expected to
meet in New York next week to continue discussions on a resolution of the
conflict based on a United Nations administration and subsequent free elections.


Criticism From the West

Prince Sihanouk said he would be a candidate for president if free elections
were held. He also said that he would remain Cambodia's head of state, a post he
claims to have held continuously on the ground that the 1970 coup was illegal.

In a statement issued from his residence in Beijing - an announcement
handwritten in his characteristic scrawl in elegant French - the Prince said he
was resigning because of growing criticisms from the West that he is an
accomplice of the Khmer Rouge guerrillas.

The Khmer Rouge, under whose rule more than a million Cambodians died when they
held power from 1975 through 1978, cooperate with the Prince's faction in
opposing the present Vietnam-backed Government in Cambodia. After a string of
recent attacks by the guerrillas, alarm has grown around the world that the
Khmer Rouge might return to power.

''This hostility toward Sihanouk has greatly accentuated in recent months,'' the
Prince said, adding that it was fruitless to combat it.

Effort to Improve Image

Western and Asian diplomats who follow Cambodia said the Prince appeared to be
trying to distance himself from the Khmer Rouge, and thereby to improve his
image.

''He does not want responsibility for military successes,'' an Asian diplomat
said. ''Maybe he thinks it's best to lie low for a while.''

Prince Sihanouk's statement said he would resign, effective today, as head of
the Cambodian opposition's military wing and as head of the rebel coalition
government. He said he would no longer give interviews or meet most visitors,
and that he would not take part in any international conferences or discussions
among the Cambodian factions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 26, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Awards Are Given for Broadcast News

BYLINE: By BILL CARTER

SECTION: Section C; Page 30, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 553 words


''Frontline,'' the public-television documentary series, won the Gold Baton, the
highest of the Alfred I. du Pont-Columbia University Awards for broadcast
journalism, last night in the annual presentation at Low Library at Columbia
University. Three network news divisions, CBS, ABC and CNN, won Silver Batons,
for their coverage of the Chinese student rebellion last May.

''Frontline'' was honored for five documentaries, broadcast between July 1,
1988, and June 30, 1989. The documentaries were: ''Remember My Lai,'' an
examination of the continuing impact of the 1968 My Lai massacre; ''The Spy Who
Broke the Code,'' a study of the Walker family spy-ring case, which rocked the
United States Navy; ''Who Profits from Drugs?,'' a report on a Federal
investigation into the many layers of American society that benefit from the
drug trade; ''Children of the Night,'' a chronicle of the life and death of a
young boy who worked as a prostitute in San Francisco, and ''The Choice,'' a
special two-hour ''Frontline'' that profiled the two 1988 Presidential
candidates, George Bush and Gov. Michael S. Dukakis.

CBS News was cited for its television and radio coverage of the events in China.
The jury specifically mentioned CBS's assignment of senior journalists to cover
the story as it was breaking in Beijing.

CNN, too, was praised for its live Chinese coverage, with the reporter Mike
Chinoy and the anchor Bernard Shaw both mentioned in the citation. The jury said
CNN became ''the network of record'' on the China story.

ABC News shared its Silver Baton with Koppel Communications, the independent
production company owned by the ABC News anchor Ted Koppel, for a ''Koppel
Report'' special called ''Tragedy at Tiananmen: The Untold Story.'' The jury
said the program had recapped the turmoil in China with ''extraordinary detail
and insight.''

A Silver Baton went to WETA, the PBS station in Washington, for the documentary
''Arab and Jew: Wounded Spirits in a Promised Land.'' The jury called the
program a ''stunning'' translation of David K. Shipler's book about the
stalemate between Palestinians and Jews in Israel. Mr. Shipler received praise
for exceptional writing on the documentary.

A Silver Baton for radio coverage was given to National Public Radio for 16
reports on ''AIDS and Black America: Breaking the Silence.'' The award for
independent television production was won by Appalshop, a small company in
Kentucky, for tracing efforts by landowners to overturn a law allowing the sale
of mining rights on personal property in Kentucky.

Silver Batons went to television stations in three categories based on the size
of their television markets. Two stations were winners in major markets: WFAA-TV
In Dallas, and its investigative reporter Byron Harris, for coverage of failures
of savings and loan institutions in Texas, and KCET in Los Angeles, for reports
on medical issues.

A Silver Baton in the medium-size-market category was awarded to Maryland Public
Television for a documentary on the disproportionate incidence of AIDS in black
and Hispanic communities.

Two small-size stations won Silver Batons: WJXT in Jacksonville, Fla., for
reports on the roots of the city drug crisis, and WBRZ in Baton Rouge, La., for
an investigative report on corruption in the state insurance industry.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 26, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Britten's 'War Requiem,' To Images by Derek Jarman

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 710 words


Taking Benjamin Britten's ''War Requiem,'' composed for the opening of the new
Coventry Cathedral in 1962, Derek Jarman has made a movie of epic irrelevance
that, when it rises to the occasion, is merely redundant. It opens today at the
Quad.

The text for the Britten oratorio is based on the soaring Missa pro Defunctis
(Mass for the Dead), sung in Latin, and the profoundly sorrowful, unsentimental
poems of Wilfred Owen, the English poet who was 25 years old when he was killed
in World War I, just a week before the Armistice.

The Britten work, thought by some to be his masterpiece, is an astonishing
conjunction of the sacred and the profane. Unlike Rupert Brooke, Owen did not
glorify war. Instead, he saw it to be a failure of Christianity. ''My subject,''
he wrote, ''is War and the pity of War. The Poetry is in the pity.''

No one connected to the filmed ''War Requiem'' seems to have considered the
possibility that oratorios are far more effective when heard than seen.

The film's soundtrack is provided by the 1963 ''War Requiem'' recording that
Britten conducted at Kingsway Hall in London, with Galina Vishnevskaya, Peter
Pears and Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau as the soloists. There's nothing wrong with
it, but most of the time, one doesn't hear any music at all. It's not because
the level is off but because, in movies, images take precedence in the mind over
sound.

From beginning to end, the oratorio is upstaged by the mostly awful pictures on
the screen. The style and tone are set by the introductory sequence, in which
Laurence Olivier plays an ancient, wheelchair-bound Old Soldier. As the audience
watches Olivier on the screen, his voice can be heard on the soundtrack, reading
the Owen poem (''I dreamed that out of battle I escaped'') that is key to the
oratorio.

As Olivier's Old Soldier fusses with his battle ribbons and indulges in other
bits of actorly business, he slowly but successfully begins to obscure his own
voice on the soundtrack. The soundtrack never recoups.

This is all the more maddening because Mr. Jarman's choice of images is
alternately so sentimental and so tacky. The film proceeds as a kind of
free-association journey through the mind of the Poet (Nathaniel Parker), who
stands in for Owen.

The Poet has encounters with the Unknown Soldier (Owen Teale) and a nurse (Tilda
Swinton) who also seems to be the soldier's sister. Sometimes he is seen in his
trench quarters, late at night, composing poems. He wanders the battlefield. He
sees himself as he meets, after his own death, the German soldier he has killed
and who has killed him. ''I am the enemy you killed, my friend'' is the way it's
put in the Owen poem.

Mr. Jarman, whose films include ''Sebastiane'' and ''Caravaggio,'' has a
weakness for the sort of baroque image that is utterly beside the point of the
work of both Britten and Owen, or too much. The Poet is presented with a crown
of thorns made of the barbed wire of no-man's land.

Later, the Poet, who is also everyman, is stripped to the waist by a mad
doctor-priest, his hands tied behind him, the better to be whipped before an
audience of leering, lubricious white-faced capitalists whose cheeks are
wickedly rouged.

Mr. Jarman decorates a movie as much as he directs it. He makes indiscriminate
use here of newsreel footage from World War I through Vietnam, with some stock
shots of an A-bomb explosion thrown in. The latter lends the film a piquant but
transitory, apocalyptic effect.

POETRY IN BATTLE - WAR REQUIEM, directed by Derek Jarman; screenplay by Mr.
Jarman, inspired by the oratorio by Benjamin Britten, based on poems by Wilfred
Owen; director of photography, Richard Greatrex; edited by Rick Elgood; music by
Britten; produced by Don Boyd; production company, Anglo International Films. At
the Quad, 13th Street, west of Fifth Avenue. Running time: 92 minutes. This film
has no rating.

THE CAST: Laurence Olivier, Nathaniel Parker, Tilda Swinton, Owen Teale,
Patricia Hayes, Claire Davenport
THE RECORDING: Galina Vishnevskaya, Peter Pears, Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau; the
Bach Choir and London Symphony Orchestra Chorus; Highgate School Choir; Simon
Preston, organist; Melos Ensemble; London Symphony Orchestra; conducted by
Benjamin Britten

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Laurence Olivier

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 26, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Death of a 'Lost Soul': A Gentle Man Is Killed in His Sanctuary

BYLINE: By DONATELLA LORCH

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1469 words


All along the quiet, rundown streets of Charleston, S.I., Michael Taylor and
Phillip Sarlo have a reputation for being troublemakers, heavy beer drinkers who
start fistfights. One of their favorite targets of ridicule, neighbors say, was
James Zappalorti, a 44-year-old emotionally disturbed man. They harassed him,
the residents say, because they believed he was gay.

On Monday night, at about 8 P.M., the two men started insulting Mr. Zappalorti
as he left the Deli Delight two blocks from his house on Androvette Street. They
called him a ''queer'' and a ''faggot,'' the store clerk, Kelly Ann Tawil, said.

They followed him down the dead-end street, she said, taunting him as he walked
along a rush-lined pebbly path, to a small hut Mr. Zappalorti had built of
scraps of wood by the Arthur Kill.

Within the next hour, the police say, Mr. Taylor and Mr. Sarlo slashed Mr.
Zappalorti's throat and stabbed him repeatedly in the chest with a five-inch
folding knife in what the police have characterized as a bias killing.

Made Off With Rosary

The police say the two men took the victim's keys, broke into the house where he
lived with his parents, ransacked his room and made off with a rosary before
they were discovered by his invalid mother.

The killing of Mr. Zappalorti - an eccentric, simple man who was loved by his
neighbors - has stunned the quiet, working-class neighborhood in one of the most
rural parts of Staten Island. Residents say Mr. Taylor and Mr. Sarlo - two
small-time criminals and high school dropouts, who drifted from job to job,
living most often with relatives - - had made a hobby of harassing the gentle,
disabled man.

Arrested on Wednesday

''They always picked on Jimmy,'' Miss Tawil said. ''They followed Jimmy all over
the place. They wrecked his beach house a couple of times.''

Mr. Zappalorti's brother Michael found the body at 2:15 P.M. on Tuesday, lying
face down on the beach at the end of Androvette Street.

Mr. Taylor was arrested early Wednesday morning in a Staten Island nightclub and
was arraigned on a second-degree murder charge that afternoon in Criminal Court
on Staten Island. He pled not guilty.

Yesterday, his lawyer, John Murphy, submitted a motion in State Supreme Court on
Staten Island before Justice Norman J. Felig, asking to have Mr. Taylor examined
by psychiatrists at Kings County Hospital to determine if he is fit to stand
trial. The judge remanded Mr. Taylor for 30 days for the examination.

Mr. Murphy called the accusation of bias ''much ado about nothing'' and denied
that the incident had anything to do with whether Mr. Zappalorti was homosexual.

Detectives were still searching last night for Mr. Sarlo. He disappeared on
Tuesday night, they said, after stealing $300 from a service station where he
worked.

The flag in front of the Zappalorti home hung limply at half-staff under the
pouring rain yesterday. And the street where James Zappolarti spent much of the
last 25 years was quiet and in mourning.

''He was a lost soul but a good lost soul,'' his father, Mr. Zappalorti, said as
he fingered the splintered door of his son's room. ''He never harmed anybody. He
was very trustful.''

'He Was Clean'

In the workshop near his home, where he makes stained-glass windows and lamps,
the elder Mr. Zappalorti held a picture of his son playing the piano and angrily
denied that his son was gay.

''He wasn't a pervert, he was clean,'' his father said. ''He liked to be free.
He liked to be in the woods with the flowers.''

The Zappalortis moved into the white, two-story wood-frame house in 1950. James,
the youngest of four children, grew up on the banks of the Arthur Kill, playing
on its beaches and doing odd jobs for the neighbors. He also loved his piano. He
played show tunes by ear.

James Zappalorti joined the Navy on Nov. 27, 1962, and served aboard a supply
ship off Vietnam until he was discharged in April 1965 with a disability, his
parents said. They said that he suffered from a nervous breakdown and that,
although he had never seen active combat, he rarely spoke about his experiences
in Southeast Asia.

After his discharge in 1965, he lived on his military disability pay and spent
much of his days by himself, his father said. His mother, bedridden for years
with heart disease, was closest to him. He cooked and washed for her and
vacuumed the house. He swept the street, clipping the neighbors hedges, did odd
jobs at the local bar and occasionally went to Manhattan to visit friends on the
Upper West Side, his father said.

Wherever his son went, the elder Zappalorti said, he always called twice a day
to speak with his mother and to leave a phone number where he could be reached.
On Monday night, when he neither came home nor called, his father said, he felt
that something serious had happened.

His son Michael began a search the next morning, and found the body a few hours
later.

''I had a feeling he was dead,'' the father said. ''I knew.''

His son James had two loves - the water and his religion. He never missed a
Sunday Mass at the local church, the pastor, the Rev. Maurice Burke, said.

'Jimmy Was a Friend'

James Zappalorti may have been a simple person, said Father Burke, who had known
him for about 20 years, but people in the neighborhood understood him.

In his small, neat room, the walls are decorated with a gold-colored crucifix, a
statue of the Virgin Mary and paintings of sailboats tossed on stormy seas. He
also decorated his room with driftwood he collected from the shore or on his
expeditions with a neighbor's row boat across the Arthur Kill.

''Jimmy was a friend - not somebody you had to be afraid of,'' said Owen Reiter,
a neighbor who lives on the street. ''Jimmy's world was this street. He really
loved the water.''

''Jimmy's the type of guy, you slap him in the face, and he'd hand you his
wallet,'' said Miss Tawil, whose father owns the Deli Delight.

Friends said he spent most of his time in the shingled hut he had built among
the cattails on the Arthur Kill. Narrow pathways of brick near early daffodils
surrounded the hut. Blue and green curtains hung on a wall, two armchairs on a
brown shag rug faced the cargo ships across the Arthur Kill. A Christmas wreath
still decorated the white posts at the entrance.

Friends who frequently came down to share a beer with him, said he regularly
raked and cleaned his beach and that he loved to sit there at sunset.

Started Fights at Bar

Two years ago, teen-agers burned down the hut, neighbors said, and Mr.
Zappalorti rebuilt it.

Neighbors said Mr. Sarlo and Mr. Taylor were inseparable friends who spent most
of their time drinking beer at the corner of Androvette Street and Arthur Kill
Road. Neither had a steady job, and they often started fights with young people
in the neighborhood or with the patrons of the Black Garter Saloon, a
strip-tease bar on the street, neighbors said.

''They were troublemakers,'' Miss Tawil said. ''Mike would start the trouble,
and Phil would finish it.''

Mr. Sarlo's father, Wallace, said the friendship went back at least to April
1986, when the two of them were arrested and convicted along with two other men
of kidnapping a homosexual man from a parking lot in South Beach, locking him in
the trunk of his car and threatening to blow it up.

In a plea bargain, Mr. Sarlo pleaded guilty to robbery in that case, went to
state prison and was paroled in March 1989. Mr. Taylor, charged as a juvenile
offender, served 18 months in state prison, part of it in Greene Correctional
Facility in Coxsackie with Mr. Sarlo.

Lost Job With Plumber

Since his release from prison, Mr. Sarlo has bounced from job to job as a
gas-station attendent, living with his brother Stephen on Joseph Avenue in
Staten Island or staying for short periods with friends in Tottenville, his
father said.

''We hoped he would come out of prison better,'' Wallace Sarlo said. ''But I
guess he came out worse.'' Mr. Taylor, who is 20, moved 18 months ago with his
parents into a small one-story house at 83 Androvette Street and held down odd
jobs. He worked for a few months at Duo Plumbing, where his father has a job,
across the street from the Zappalorti stained-glass workshop. Then he was fired.

Neighbors said Mr. Taylor drank with friends at the house and had rowdy parties.
He did not socialize with the older residents of the street.

In his son's wood-paneled room, Mr. Zappalorti had trouble holding back his
tears as he held a pile of his son's clothes that he planned to give to the
Salvation Army.

''They are wicked men,'' he said of Mr. Taylor and Mr. Sarlo. ''They're
bastards.''

He said his son was too trusting and too gentle.

''He was my baby,'' he said ''When he was a little drunk, he'd hug me and say,
'I love you father.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Michael Taylor, left, being arraigned in Staten Island for the
killing of James Zappalorti, top right. The police were searching for a second
suspect, Phillip Sarlo, bottom right. (Pool photo) (pg. B1); Mary and James
Zappalorti, parents of the slain man, at their home in Charleston, S.I. On the
television was a picture of a suspect in the killing. (NYT/Angel Franco) (pg.
B5)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FACING FASCISM

BYLINE: By ROBERT DALLEK; Robert Dallek is the author of ''Franklin D. Roosevelt
and American Foreign Policy, 1932-1945.'' He is completing the first of two
volumes on the life of Lyndon B. Johnson.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 17, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 694 words



ROOSEVELT & HITLER
Prelude to War.
By Robert Edwin Herzstein.
Illustrated. 500 pp. New York:
Paragon House. $24.95.

Americans see Franklin D. Roosevelt as one of the country's greatest Presidents.
Asked to rate the last nine Presidents, from Roosevelt to Ronald Reagan,
respondents in a 1988 Harris poll placed F.D.R. second only to John F. Kennedy
as likely to be ''viewed as the best President by history'' and as ''best in
domestic affairs.'' Only 8 percent of the sample, however, considered F.D.R.
''best in foreign affairs,'' well behind Richard M. Nixon, Ronald Reagan and
John Kennedy. The results of the survey may tell us more about the power of myth
than about the public's knowledge of history, but historians have played their
own part in shaping F.D.R.'s low standing as a world leader.

Robert Edwin Herzstein, a professor of history at the University of South
Carolina who uncovered Kurt Waldheim's hidden war record, locates F.D.R.'s poor
reputation for foreign policy leadership in the writings of conservative
neo-isolationists and left-wing opponents of American ''imperialism.'' These
historians have described Roosevelt as practicing ''interventionist deception,''
which led to Pearl Harbor and ultimately Vietnam; approving the unconstitutional
relocation of Japanese-Americans; abandoning the Jews to Hitler's Holocaust; and
selling out Eastern Europe to Stalin.

Mr. Herzstein sees this negative assessment as greatly overdrawn. Although he
calls his book ''Roosevelt & Hitler,'' his focus is F.D.R.'s response to the
Nazi challenge before Pearl Harbor. Mr. Herzstein concedes that F.D.R. was less
than candid with the public about his intentions and was timid, even cowardly,
about fighting for the acceptance of Jewish refugees fleeing Hitler's
persecution.

But Mr. Herzstein argues that these actions masked Roosevelt's larger purposes
and achievements. F.D.R. was, he maintains, the principal architect of anti-Nazi
coalitions that in 1939-41 confronted Hitler abroad and destroyed the political
influence of anti-Semitic groups in the United States. ''There might have been
no war in Europe in September 1939 had it not been for Roosevelt's pressure on
London, Paris, and Warsaw,'' Mr. Herzstein writes. ''Because of his insights
into the nature of National Socialism, and his manipulation of a confused and
often hostile public opinion, Roosevelt emerges as the giant figure of his
age.''

At the same time, F.D.R. ''effectively prevented the political mobilization of
American anti-Semitism by isolating groups professing anti-Jewish sentiments.''
He convinced Americans that ''anti-Semites, fascists, and even
anti-interventionists were part of the 'fifth column,' a Trojan horse placed in
the Americas by the Germans.''

Mr. Herzstein's picture of Roosevelt as a consistent anti-Nazi who aimed to
defeat fascism at home and abroad is indisputable. But his assertion that F.D.R.
largely created the English-French-Polish coalition that went to war against
Hitler in 1939 rests on very thin evidence: German assertions that the President
was encouraging Hitler's opponents to fight, and the efforts of William C.
Bullitt, American Ambassador to France, to stiffen the resolve of the Allies.

Even if one sees Bullitt as representing F.D.R.'s wishes, it is difficult to
believe that American pressure had much to do with the decision for war. (''It
is always best and safest to count on nothing from the Americans but words,''
Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain of Britain said in 1938.) Roosevelt's
inability in the summer of 1939 to win Congressional approval for changes in the
neutrality laws that would have helped Britain and France certainly diminished
his influence on European events. In addition, his effective opposition to
America's anti-Semitic groups hardly suggests that he had anything more in mind
than combating fascism within the United States.

Exaggerated claims about Roosevelt's opposition to Nazism and anti-Semitism in
1939-41 will not improve his historical reputation. His role in defeating the
Axis should be enough to insure his standing as one of America's great foreign
policy leaders.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 28, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 824 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1    14   THE DRAWING OF THE THREE, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL,
           $5.95.) Continuing the horror story begun in "The
           Gunslinger."

 2    11   THE SANDS OF TIME, by Sydney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.95.) A
           struggle between the Spanish Army and Basque separatists.

 3     6   A THIEF OF TIME, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks,
           $4.95) Tracking down a missing archeologist, missing
           artifacts and a murderer.

 4     4   SPY HOOK, by Len Deighton. (Ballantine, $5.95.) The agent
           Bernard Samson on the trail of a financial scam within
           the British Secret Service.

 5    50   THE SHELL SEEKERS, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dell, $4.95.)
           Three generations of a family.

 6     3   THE LONG DARK TEA-TIME OF THE SOUL, by Douglas Adams.
           (Pocket, $4.95.) The detective of "The Hitchhiker's Guide
           to the Galaxy" pursues the meaning of an explosion at an
           airport.

 7     3   TOO DEEP FOR TEARS, by Kathryn Lynn Davis. (Pocket,
           $5.50.) Three half-sisters from far-flung parts of the
           British Empire become acquainted as their father dies in
           Scotland.

 8     9   CAT'S EYE, by Margaret Atwood. (Bantam, $5.95.) A woman's
           visit to her native Toronto leads her to reflect on the
           changes time has wrought.

 9     9   STOLEN BLESSINGS, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $4.95.)
           The scandalous life of the Hollywood superstar Marilyn
           Taylor.

10     3   SCORPIUS, by John Gardner. (Charter, $4.50.) James Bond
           contends with the villainous leader of acult dealing in
           vice and terrorism.

11    18   BREATHING LESSONS, by Anne Tyler. (Berkley, $5.50.) The
           many facets of a 28-year marriage are revealed during a
           drive to a funeral.

12*    1   MUTATION, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $4.95.) A physician's
           attempt to create a superior child results in a prodigy
           that turns into a terror.

13*   29   THE GUNSLINGER, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL, $4.95.)
           Volume One of "The Dark Tower," about a young man's
           pursuit of an evil force.

14     3   UNICORN POINT, by Piers Anthony. (Ace, $4.50.) The sixth
           volume in a fantasy series.

15*    2   SMOKE AND MIRRORS, by Barbara Michaels. (Berkley, $4.95.)
           A newcomer to a Congresswoman's staff finds herself
           beseiged by strange incidents.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    10   ALL I REALLY NEEDED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by
           Robert Fulghum (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.

 2     7   NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK, by Grace Catalano (Bantam, $3.50.)
           The lives and predilections of the five members of a
           teen-age singing group.

 3     1   DESPERADOS, by Elaine Shannon. (Penguin, $4.95.) The
           murder of the Federal agent Kiki Camarena and how the
           United States is losing the drug wars.

 4*   327  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck
           (Touchstone/S & S, $10.95.) Spiritual inspiration.

 5    10   THE BLOODING, by Joseph Varnbaugh. (Bantam, $5.95.) The
           murder of two girls in an English village is solved
           through genetic clues.

 6     1   BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, by Ron Kovic. (Pocket, $4.50.)
           The autobiography of a former Marine, gravely wounded
           physically in Vietnam, spiritually on his return home.

 7    18   BLIND FAITH, by Joe McGinness. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.) The
           family tragedy that came to light after the 1984 murder
           of a Toms River, N.J. woman.

 8    87   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel.
           (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The importance of a
           patient's mind and emotions.

 9    68   THE POWER OF MYTH, by Joseph Campbell with Bill Moyers.
           (Doubleday, $19.95.) The ways in which mythology
           illuminates the stages of life.

10    40   CHAOS, by James Gleick. (Penguin, $8.95.) A science that
           sees order in what appears erratic.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     8   THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1990. (World Almanac,
           $6.95.) The latest edition of a reference work.

 2    74   CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie. (Hazelden/Harper
           & Row, $8.95.) Solving your own problems while caring for
           other people's afflictions.

 3     7   RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $6.95.) The 1990
           edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.

 4    17   THE PREHISTORY OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson. (Andrews
           & McMeel, $12.95.) The cartoonist's sketches and notes
           from the past 10 years.

 5    17   THE CALVIN AND HOBBES LAZY SUNDAY BOOK, by Bill Watterson
           (Andrews & McMeel, $9.95.) A new collection of cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.
 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

From Abe to Zeus, Beards Are Business

BYLINE: By Roberta Hershenson

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 25, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 613 words

DATELINE: WHITE PLAINS


SAL ALFANO can size up a beard in no time. ''That's a farmer's beard,'' he'll
say to a new customer. Or, ''You look like Zeus.''

The 42-year-old haircutter, who owns Hair Station on West Post Road here, also
has names for his tools. The electric razor is his ''chain saw.'' The electric
clipper is his ''heavy duty land clearer.''

Customers don't seem to mind Mr. Alfano's sense of humor. They trust their faces
to the man who calls himself a ''beard specialist.''

The haircutter has developed a close relationship with beards: he has one
himself. This gives him a certain prospective, an intuition he applies to other
men.

''Because I have a beard, I know what to do,'' Mr. Alfano said. ''I know the
questions to ask. I have a soft spot for a guy with a beard.''

He has his opinions, but he's democratic. ''I always ask everybody what they
like,'' he noted. ''I want to know right in the beginning.''

Arrival in Disarray

Beards arrive in disarray and Mr. Alfano analyzes them. ''He's out of
alignment.'' he said of one man. ''This guy's mustache is roofing off, and his
beard is too big for his face,'' he says of another.

If there's one thing the beard specialist hates it is ''when the hair from the
nose grows into the mustache.'' But he's sympathetic to the home beard trimmer's
plight. ''Under the nose is the hardest for them to do,'' he observes.

Mr. Alfano also understands that when a right-handed man trims the left side of
his beard, the results may be uneven. There are ''blind corners'' at the sides
of the jaw, he observed, and ''weak spots'' - areas where hair doesn't grow -
contribute to an asymmetrical look.

Watching television news commentators is distracting to this specialist. ''I
can't believe the uneven sideburns on some of these guys!'' he exclaimed.

The hairline under the chin can especially be a problem. ''When I look under
there, I never know what I'm going to see,'' Mr. Alfano confided.

In his hands, however, a beard usually finds its proper shape. The beard
specialist recently persuaded Matthew Palazola, manager of the respiratory
therapy department at the White Plains Hospital Medical Center, to reduce the
size of his beard almost by half. ''When a guy has a nice head of hair like he
has, he doesn't need such a big beard,'' Mr. Alfano said.

Mr. Palazola said he was pleased with the trim. ''This is the first time I've
had a good experience with someone cutting my beard,'' he declared. Mr. Palazola
usually trims his beard himself.

The haircutter offers some advice to bearded men. Have the beard professionally
trimmed every three to four weeks. At home ''take the little wild ones off with
a scissors every day.'' Three minutes will do the trick, he added.

Of course, many don't watch the calendar. ''Some guys know it's time to get a
trim when they're chewing it,'' Mr. Alfano observed. Mr. Alfano charges $15 for
a shampoo and haircut and $5 for a beard trim. He charges $7 for a beard trim
alone. For every beard wearer, there is a beard story. Mr. Palazola started
growing his 17 years ago, after returning from a military tour of duty in
Vietnam and Germany. In the Army, he said, ''if they didn't like the way you
shaved, you had to go back in and dry shave. They'd send you to the barber.''
Mr. Palazola's wife, Jeannie, has never seen him without his beard.  Mr. Alfano
says that when he lost his hair, he noticed people gazing at his forehead.
Growing a beard, he noted, ''brought their eyes down to my eyes.''

There are those who think it is easier to wear a beard than to shave, but that
is wrong, Mr. Alfano said. ''Having a nice beard is harder and takes a lot of
time and care,'' he insisted.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos; Sal Alfano trimming beard of Ted Astor at the Hair Station in
White Plains, Matthew Palazola, who has worn a beard for 17 years, getting a
trim and shave (NYT/Roberta Hershenson)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

RECORDINGS;
The Image of Movie Music Is Changing Once Again

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 28, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1110 words


In ''Wonder Waltz,'' one of 15 surreal musical fragments composed by Elliot
Goldenthal for the soundtrack of the movie ''Drugstore Cowboy'' (RCA Novus
3077-2; all three formats), a synthesizer, bells and delicately layered
percussion combine to suggest a broken-down merry-go-round playing woozily in an
underwater carnival.

Although the fragment lasts only a minute and 19 seconds, it is a finely wrought
self-contained piece that captures the neurotic, downbeat mood of a film that
follows the aimlessly peripatetic lives of a bunch of drug addicts in the
Pacific Northwest in the early 1970's. Mr. Goldenthal's eerie, subliminal music
seems to seep from the skins of its deadbeat characters like cold perspiration.

Thehfaca thatatr. ldlnehal, the expepememealacomooper r t vividly hued Latin
American carnival mass for Julie Taymor's stunning puppet-theater work ''Juan
Darien'' (at St. Clements' Church in Manhattan through Feb. 3) was given the
opportunity to score the film is one sign of the artistic well-being of movie
music in general.

Another is John Williams's score for ''Born on the Fourth of July'' (MCA 6340;
all three formats), which is almost diametrically opposite in style to Mr.
Goldenthal's. If Mr. Williams's soaring symphonic themes epitomize high-minded
Hollywood grandiosity, they are also transcendent examples of the old-time
Hollywood movie music tradition brought up to date.

The score fuses musical sounds and postures borrowed from Aaron Copland, Ralph
Vaughan Williams, Alban Berg and Gustav Mahler with the same sort of electronic
sound effects that Mr. Williams used in his scores for ''Star Wars'' and ''Close
Encounters of the Third Kind.'' Mr. Williams's themes are melodically strong
enough so that one could imagine them being developed into a full-blown
symphonic poem.

Interestingly, at a moment when the quality of film music is on the upswing,
albums of movie scores have stopped being the commercial bonanzas that they were
during much of the past decade, when soundtracks crammed with ready-made pop
hits and oldies regularly climbed to the top of the charts.

But recently the trend has sputtered. Last year the only movie with a soundtrack
whose success as a record was comparable to the movie's box-office performance
was ''Beaches'' with Bette Midler.

At least for the moment, the mating of movies with would-be pop hits has lost
its novelty. Meanwhile, fully composed scores that once seemed like an
endangered species continue to hold their own comparatively modest position in
the marketplace.

The best-selling soundtrack album of the moment, for Walt Disney's ''Little
Mermaid'' (Walt Disney 64038; CD and cassette), while successful, is no
blockbuster. Howard Ashman and Alan Menken's charming score for the film updates
the sound and style of classic 40's animated films with a dash of calypso while
remaining true to the romantic spirit of the scores for films like ''Snow
White'' and ''Cinderella.''

Of course it's highly unlikely that a score as original and esoteric as Mr.
Goldenthal's music for ''Drugstore Cowboy'' could be a commercial hit. Yet that
very music plays a crucial part in the movie's esthetic. With artfully arranged
bangs, squeaks, groans and jingles, Mr. Goldenthal's iconoclastic music
superficially resembles the ragtag, homemade sound that Tom Waits developed on
albums like ''Rain Dogs.''

One of the most fascinating aspects of the score is the way the composer
suggests spatial relationships among the sounds. Some seem to emerge out of the
background and then recede, while others rotate around one another. Much of the
music also implies drug-skewed states of consciousness, with prominent feelings
of exposed nerves and heart palpitations. On several cuts, Tom Peterson's
free-jazz tenor saxophone riffs conjure up squawking graffiti of jumbled
emotions and thoughts.

Certain sounds suggest very specific references. The ominous percussive ticking
in ''Strategy Song'' conveys both suspenseful anxiety and a sense of time being
squandered in a spiritual void. The gasping mechanized breath sounds in ''Heist
and Hat'' take one under the skin of someone running for his life.

''Drugstore Cowboy'' wouldn't be half so impressive were it merely a collection
of colorful musical sound effects. For what Mr. Goldenthal has succeeded in
creating is a series of little miniatures that have a sense of form and
intricate, abrasively beautiful textures worthy of study.

The music for Oliver Stone's ''Born on the Fourth of July'' is as inflated as
''Drugstore Cowboy's'' is sparse. In creating the score, Mr. Williams has taken
a cue from the director's earlier Vietnam epic, ''Platoon,'' in which dizzying
shots of battlefield slaughter were underscored by Samuel Barber's tender
''Adagio for Strings'' distended by amplification to rock proportions.

The ''Born on the Fourth of July'' soundtrack, which mixes symphonic music with
vintage pop songs, is even more aggressive than ''Platoon'' in its choice and
use of music with strong emotional voltage. Most of its nonoriginal songs,
including Don McLean's ''American Pie,'' the Shirelles' ''Soldier Boy,'' Henry
Mancini's ''Moon River'' and Bob Dylan's ''A Hard Rain's A-Gonna Fall'' (given a
lackluster performance by Edie Brickell and New Bohemians), are milked for their
mythical status in the era of their popularity.

The director plasters them on to the action like huge captions. Together with
Mr. Williams's score they constitute a cartoonishly bombastic elegy to American
innocence.

While watching both ''Platoon'' and ''Born on the Fourth of the July'' in the
theater, I felt bullied by music that was intended to force a visceral response.
Still, the technique works. In combination with the films' careening camerawork,
the music drags one by the throat to the front lines.

Edward Zwick's Civil War film ''Glory'' is set in a different era from ''Born on
the Fourth of July,'' but its score, composed by James Horner (Virgin 2-91329;
all three formats), has a similar epic sweep and eclecticism. Where Mr. Williams
uses a solo trumpet to evoke a military setting, Mr. Horner's music is anchored
in drum rolls.

The two scores, however, are similar enough to suggest an official Hollywood
attitude, musically speaking, toward the epic portrayal of American history.
Less lachrymose than the classic film scores of Max Steiner (''Gone With the
Wind''), they sound folksy, military and grandly symphonic all at once. By not
wallowing in Wagnerian chromaticism and by using melodic echoes of Americana
against a firm rhythmic background, they imply romantic nobility while keeping a
stiff upper lip.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: John Williams-symphonic themes (Michael Lutch); Elliot
Goldenthal's self-contained piece captures the neurotic mood of the film.
(NYT/Fred R. Conrad)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Buffalo's Parks Commissioner Under Investigation

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 32, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 884 words

DATELINE: BUFFALO, Jan. 27


On the city's talk shows, morning radio programs, front pages and nightly
newscasts, the topic of conversation these days is the widening controversy
surrounding the city's Parks Commissioner, Robert E. Delano.

Mr. Delano, 49 years old, a good friend and handball opponent of Mayor James D.
Griffin, is the focus of a corruption investigation announced two months ago by
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which said then that it had followed and
photographed him for five months before going public. Each new day seems to
bring a new accusation in a department charged with maintaining an extensive
park system largely planned by Frederick Law Olmsted, the designer of Central
Park in New York.

The accusations, by unidentified parks workers who say they fear retribution,
range from the minor - the Parks Department is said to buy three times as much
food for each of its dogs as the Police Department does - to the outrageous. The
Buffalo News reported Jan. 13 that parks workers said Mr. Delano had ordered
them to dump barrels of an anti-icing compound, calcium chloride, on the ice of
Delaware Park Lake during the winter of 1987-88 to ruin it for skating after the
Buffalo Common Council closed an unauthorized concession stand operated by parks
workers.

Mr. Delano, meanwhile, has refused to respond to the allegations. The
department's main receptionist hung up the phone Thursday as soon as a reporter
identified himself. And Mayor Griffin has stood behind his friend, describing
workers who have talked to the F.B.I. and to reporters as ''stool pigeons'' and
''malcontents.''

Concerns About Lake

The lake disclosure brought new demands for Mr. Delano's resignation from public
officials, environmentalists and park lovers concerned about the once-polluted
lake, which in 1984 underwent a $7.2 million cleanup.

The state Department of Environmental Conservation announced it would join the
F.B.I.'s investigation of the claim that the lake had been deliberately
polluted.

Other accusations made by parks workers in the case include complaints:

* That parks employees had been forced to work on the home of Mr. Delano and
others with political connections.

* That a quarter-mile-long trench had been dug through the city's Front Park so
the Parks Commissioner could enjoy cable television at a city-owned apartment.

* That the Parks Department had bought 11 tons of powdered chlorine, which is
used primarily for home swimming pools. Several pool maintenance specialists
said the chemical in that form is impractical for municipal pools.

Some who have questioned the policies of the Parks Department, including parks
workers, reporters and elected officials, have found windows in their homes and
automobiles smashed. Joseph Thompson, a 74-year-old parks laborer who had
clashed with Mr. Delano over a softball league, said he had been told to report
to a locked building in freezing weather, waiting for assignments that included
cleaning toilets, chipping ice and picking up litter along an expressway in the
rain.

'Other Than Honorable'

''He was trying to get me to quit; he was trying to get what they call a package
on me,'' said Mr. Thompson, whose diary of that time was printed in The Buffalo
News. His front window was shattered after he criticized Mr. Delano in a
television interview, as was the window of the television reporter who
interviewed him.

There have also been news reports that records showed Mr. Delano is not a high
school graduate and a Vietnam veteran, as he claimed. His discharge from the
Marine Corps in 1958 was under ''other than honorable'' conditions, a discharge
record says.

Mr. Delano has met each of the disclosures with silence. His only public comment
came last week when he declined to appear before a committee of the Common
Council.

''Unfortunately, the news media has made so many false accusations and blown
this investigation so far from reality that I was forced to seek the advice of
an attorney,'' Mr. Delano said in a letter to the Council. ''He has advised me
not to make any statements pertaining to this investigation of my department.''

As the investigation widens with each day's disclosures, Mr. Delano has become
the butt of editorial cartoons and disk jockeys on the morning radio programs.

''You might see the villagers marching on City Hall,'' said John Otto, the host
of a popular talk show on radio station WGR, who said his listeners were angered
by the scandal. ''There is dismay, frustration, outrage.''

Mayor Griffin, who named Mr. Delano Deputy Parks Commissioner in 1981 and
Commissioner in 1985 to succeed Thomas J. Griffin, the Mayor's brother, has
continued to stand by Mr. Delano. Mr. Griffin said in a speech last week that
the park system under Mr. Delano was in ''terrific shape.''

Mayor's Lawn Mower an Issue

The four-term Mayor has also been brought into this story. A newspaper report
Thursday, based on accounts by unidentified parks workers, said that a boat
engine and lawn mower owned by Mayor Griffin and lawn mowers owned by his
brother, Thomas, were among about 100 privately owned machines that parks
workers had repaired at taxpayer expense.

According to Buffalo's City Charter, only the Mayor has the authority to fire
Mr. Delano or put him on a leave of absence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 30, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

For Casting, Countless Auditions And One Couch, Never Used

BYLINE: By GLENN COLLINS

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1758 words


Outside the rehearsal room, in a stark Manhattan hallway under bare bulbs, four
nervous young actors sat on metal folding chairs, clutching scripts and
muttering their lines. Inside the room behind the big gray doors, an actress
named Jessica was pacing the oak floor before a video camera as Billy Hopkins
smiled at her encouragingly, going about the business of casting a role for the
director Oliver Stone's next movie.

''Let's just try it once,'' Mr. Hopkins said. ''And it's O.K. to make her a
little spacey.'' He focused the camera as the actress tossed her long hair,
assumed a dreamy expression and said:

''It's really boring here tonight. You want to go downtown to a new club with
us?''

Jessica tried a few more lines until Mr. Hopkins said, ''And cut.'' He jumped up
enthusiastically. ''That's good. That's great! Just: have a little more fun with
it this time, will you?''

And so Jessica said her lines again - and again - and then one actor after
another left the hallway and came into the room to audition for a speaking part
in Mr. Stone's new movie about the rock icon Jim Morrison of the Doors, who died
in 1971. And on the West Coast . . .  The videotapes of the actors, with Mr.
Hopkins's comments, would be sent by air express to the director in Los Angeles,
where - on the very same afternoon - Risa Bramon, Mr. Hopkins's partner, was
auditioning West Coast actors for parts in the film, whose working title is
''The Doors.'' It begins shooting this spring.

These days, the 31-year-old Mr. Hopkins and the 33-year-old Ms. Bramon are much
in demand. While working on ''The Doors,'' they have also been casting ''Jacob's
Ladder,'' a film by Adrian Lyne, and they are working on another movie, ''Mr.
Destiny,'' a Walt Disney production. Mr. Hopkins is also casting ''A Kiss Before
Dying,'' a thriller starring Matt Dillon.

The two casting directors - they call their firm simply Risa Bramon and Billy
Hopkins, and everyone else calls it Bramon-Hopkins - have cast 22 films in the
last six years. It is an eclectic list that includes Mr. Stone's last three
movies (''Born on the Fourth of July,'' ''Talk Radio'' and ''Wall Street''); Mr.
Lyne's megahit ''Fatal Attraction'' with Glenn Close; ''Uncle Buck'' with John
Candy, ''National Lampoon's Christmas Vacation'' with Chevy Chase, ''Angel
Heart'' with Robert De Niro and Mickey Rourke, and ''Desperately Seeking Susan''
with Madonna. They also find actors for stage productions and commercials, and
did the casting for the ABC show ''Roseanne,'' which made one of their regulars,
John Goodman, a star.

Despite their track record, and a job that can keep them busy round the clock
seven days a week, not everyone is clear about what it is that they do.

''I say casting director to some people, and they think I work in an iron
foundry,'' said Mr. Hopkins, laughing and adding that this benighted state once
also afflicted the entertainment industry. ''Until 20 years ago, casting
directors never even got billing.''

'A Step Up'

These days, increasing numbers of casting directors are being prominently
featured in movie credits. Some casting directors are also getting credits in
paid advertising for movies. ''That's a step up, since paid-advertising credit
is an important deal point for actors,'' said Ms. Bramon, interviewed by
telephone from Los Angeles.

The names of casting directors, current and former, are already familiar in a
mysterious, subliminal sort of way to any movie buff who has ever pondered film
credits as they roll by on the screen. The roster includes Ellen Chenoweth, Mary
Colquhoun, Cis Corman, Marion Dougherty, Howard Feuer, Mary Goldberg, Alixe
Gordin, Wallis Nicita, Gretchen Rennell, Fred Roos, David Rubin, Margery Simkin,
Juliet Taylor, Vickie Thomas and Bonnie Timmermann.

But why are they necessary? ''It's the casting director's role to turn an idea
into flesh,'' said John Amiel, the director whose credits include ''Queen of
Hearts'' and the acclaimed six-part television series ''The Singing Detective.''
He worked with Mr. Hopkins in casting ''Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter,'' a
feature-film adaptation of the Mario Vargas Llosa novel that is to be released
this year.

''But no director working in film has a chance to pound the pavement, to go to
all the fringe theaters and study the cast lists, or go to the acting schools'
end-of-year shows,'' Mr. Amiel added.

Casting directors are hired by film, theatrical or television producers to fill
anywhere from several to 20 or 100 or more roles in a play, feature film or
television show. ''Born on the Fourth of July'' had ''more than 200 speaking
roles,'' Mr. Hopkins said.

''And we filled lots of the nonspeaking parts as well,'' he added. ''I guess you
could say that was our epic film.''

The Business of Deadlines

Bramon-Hopkins has had as few as nine days to cast a movie (''Talk Radio''). The
partners had eight weeks to cast a much larger film (''Desperately Seeking
Susan''), and they have worked for a year or more on other projects, including
''Jacob's Ladder,'' a thriller about the effects of the Vietnam War, starring
Tim Robbins, which had preproduction delays.

Casting directors are paid $15,000 to $75,000 a film, ''very little for what
they do,'' Ms. Bramon said. On some low-budget films they get a percentage of
the gross instead of a large salary. ''Not only do they do the casting, but they
suggest how roles can be changed to fit promising actors, they coach actors for
roles, and they do up budgets, too,'' she said.

In stage work, actors' union rules often require open casting - the so-called
cattle calls that are the stuff of theatrical legend, where the director keeps
saying, ''Next!'' Film casting, though, is more selective; generally, actors are
called in and auditioned individually.

''However, if we can't find the right person, we will go to an open call,'' Mr.
Hopkins said. For ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' Bramon-Hopkins advertised an
open call for 2,000 children in Massapequa, L.I., one of the film's settings.
The team also saw 8,000 people in Dallas just to cast extras.

'A Whole Scouting System'

Ms. Bramon and Mr. Hopkins met at the Ensemble Studio Theater in Manhattan,
where they have done the casting since 1978, and have, separately, directed
dozens of plays. They began casting their first picture, ''Desperately Seeking
Susan,'' in July 1984. Since 1985, they have done the casting for Lincoln Center
Theater productions, including ''The House of Blue Leaves,'' ''Anything Goes''
and ''Our Town.''

''We have a whole scouting system due to our theater work,'' Mr. Hopkins said.
''For films, we get the new talent first.''

Of movie casting, Ms. Bramon said: ''You try for it to be an art form. Part of
the art is getting away from the obvious choice - even, sometimes, suggesting
changes in the role if you've found a good actor to do it.''

Ms. Bramon railed against ''boring, on-the-nose casting,'' saying that some
films are '' 'The Hollywood Squares' of casting.''

''They find any bankable name to fill in the square,'' she said. ''They cast a
film by marquee value, rather than a rightness for the role.''

Ms. Bramon said she loves to work ''with a director who trusts you and has faith
in you, and allows you to come up with an actor who isn't the director's exact
vision - but who may work better.''

''I've visualized midgets and cast giants, and vice versa,'' said Mr. Amiel, the
director. ''Whole new roles have condensed around an actor sitting in front of
me. The process of casting is always a venture into the unknown.''

Frequently, ''The one part you think will be easy turns out to be the one you
can't cast,'' said Mr. Hopkins. ''In 'Fatal Attraction' we saw every single
available actress in the known world,'' he said, for the parts of the wife and
the lover.

An Idea and a Career Lift

Ultimately, the partners suggested that Glenn Close be cast in the role of the
lover, though ''she'd never seemed sexy before,'' he said. It was Ms. Bramon who
suggested Anne Archer for the role of the wife - revitalizing Ms. Archer's
career.

The Bramon-Hopkins office is hardly a penthouse with a billion-dollar view, like
that of some agents they deal with: it is a cinderblock-walled space in the
bowels of Lincoln Center Theater. On tables and the floor are boxes of actors'
pictures and resumes; agents send along an average of 60 a week. In addition,
each week a hundred or more agentless actors submit glossies and resumes on
their own.

Some actors are so desperate that they accost Mr. Hopkins on the sidewalk, and
even hail him while he is riding his bike around Manhattan. Actors have pursued
Ms. Bramon in the supermarket and have camped out on the stoop of her Manhattan
apartment with their glossies and resumes.

But the actors' persistence can be matched by the doggedness of Bramon-Hopkins
in pursuing stars. ''Risa and I don't take no for an answer,'' Mr. Hopkins said.
''We call them at home or drive the script over to their house. The agents get
really mad at us.''

Reputation and Power

The profession hasn't always been portrayed favorably: David Rabe made a casting
director an unsavory protagonist in ''Hurlyburly,'' his acidic play about
Hollywood. Indeed, a visitor to the Bramon-Hopkins office looked in vain for the
casting couch. ''Oh, Risa took the only couch we ever had, and brought it to Los
Angeles!'' said Mr. Hopkins of his partner, who has been on the West Coast for
10 months working on television and movie projects.

Casting agents do have a certain amount of power, Mr. Hopkins acknowledged,
''But it's all really the director's choice,'' he said. ''In the end, we're
invisible.''

Ms. Bramon commented: ''Influence, yes - but power? Well, often you're smack in
the middle. Actors get angry at you, agents get angry at you, and directors get
angry at you.''

Part of the term ''casting director'' is ''director,'' and Mr. Hopkins and Ms.
Bramon say they find their decade of theater-directing experience helpful when
casting films. Both say they very much want to be film directors when their
casting days are over; Ms. Bramon is actively pursuing the possibility in Los
Angeles.

But to Ms. Bramon, it is regrettable that Hollywood does not yet award an Oscar
to casting directors. ''The industry sees us as technicians rather than
artists,'' she said. ''Casting isn't seen as an autonomous creative process.''

She laughed. ''But if I could go to the Academy Awards in a glitter dress,'' she
said. ''Would that be great?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Billy Hopkins, standing, a casting director for Oliver Stone's
next movie, ''The Doors,'' as Alan Manson reads lines. Seated at left is Charles
Chessler, an auditions reader, who reads with the actors. (NYT/Ruby Washington)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 30, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Asia's Latest Economic Miracle Is Vietnam;
Dawn for Cambodia?

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 398 words


To the Editor:

''If all goes well'' are the key words in ''At Last, Dawn for Cambodia?''
(editorial, Jan. 18). The statement from the five permanent members of the
United Nations Security Council in response to the Australian proposal on the
Cambodia impasse leaves many ambiguities, three in particular: (1) The proposal
hinges on the questionable neutrality of the United Nations to mediate the
deadlock among the four Cambodian factions. Now, as for the last 11 years, the
General Assembly has voted to recognize a Khmer Rouge cadre as the
representative of Cambodia. The flag of Democratic Kampuchea still flies at the
United Nations. Yet, the Australian proposal expects a United Nations interim
administration to create a neutral climate to set the stage for free and fair
elections. The United Nations, if it is to gain credibility with the Hun Sen
regime as an impartial broker, must take steps to derecognize the Khmer Rouge
presence at the United Nations. (2) A cease-fiire must have the cooperation of
Thailand. It would be a fatal mistake to assume that China, much less the United
States, can control Pol Pot and his murderous clique. Even without new arms
shipments from China and elsewhere, the Khmer Rouge have a two-year stockpile of
weapons in the Cardamon Mountains to continue their guerrilla war. However, the
Khmer Rouge depends on Thai sanctuaries and logistical lines, both of which can
be sealed by the Thai military. The Thai Foreign Minister's Dec. 26 call for a
meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations to discuss the Australian
proposal hints at Thai support.

Closely related to Thailand's role is the need for a sizable and armed
peacekeeping force to contain the Khmer Rouge at the border. (3) The makeup of
the proposed national supreme council will be a major stumbling block. The Hun
Sen regime is certain to reject any Khmer Rouge role, while Pol Pot will not
acquiesce to anything less than equal representation. The Paris talks last July
broke down over this point.

The Bush Administration can play a leadership role in forging a peaceful,
workable solution through its influence with China (so far unexercised), with
other members of the Security Council, and with Asean - if it has the political
will for peace.

SARAH LAI
Boston, Jan. 19, 1990
  The writer is coordinator of Oxfam America's Southeast Asia program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 30, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Britain Seeks U.S. Visa Aid in Hong Kong

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 170 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 29


Seeking help from Washington in easing Hong Kong's transition from British to
Chinese rule, the British Foreign Secretary urged the Bush Administration today
to grant American passports to residents of Hong Kong who are working for
American companies.

The goal is to encourage residents of the colony to remain in Hong Kong by
reassuring them that they will have an American passport to fall back on should
they wish to leave, Mr. Hurd said after a luncheon meeting with Secretary of
State James A. Baker 3d. Hong Kong is scheduled to revert to Chinese rule in
1997.

Mr. Hurd said he also mentioned the idea to President Bush in a meeting later at
the White House. ''The president did not react,'' he said.

The British minister suggested that the United States was applying a double
standard in opposing the forced repatriation of boat people to Vietnam from Hong
Kong.

Despite China's crackdown on dissent in June, Mr. Bush vetoed legislation
protecting Chinese students in the United States from deportation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 1, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Civil Rights Slayings of '64 The Subject of a TV Movie

BYLINE: By STEPHEN FARBER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1005 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Jan. 31


David Wolper, the executive producer of ''Murder in Mississippi,'' a new
television movie that NBC will broadcast on Monday at 9 P.M., insists that his
film is ''completely different'' from ''Mississippi Burning,'' the 1988 film
about the murder of three civil rights workers 26 years ago. '' 'Mississippi
Burning' begins where our story ends,'' Mr. Wolper says.

It is true that ''Mississippi Burning'' is about a Federal investigation of the
murders of James Chaney, Michael Schwerner and Andrew Goodman, and that ''Murder
in Mississippi'' concludes with the murders. All the same, ''Mississippi
Burning,'' which has been criticized as playing down the importance of blacks in
the civil rights movement, has haunted the makers of ''Murder in Mississippi,''
indeed has affected the final shape of their television movie.

In 1985, Tova Laiter, the co-executive producer of ''Murder in Mississippi,''
submitted a proposal for a feature film about the murders to several studios.
Most of them rejected the idea as uncommercial, but Mark Canton, the president
of production at Warner Brothers, responded enthusiastically. The studio hired
Stanley Weiser, whose previous credits include ''Project X'' and ''Wall
Street,'' to write a script.

Participants Interviewed

Mr. Weiser and Ms. Laiter interviewed many Mississippians who witnessed civil
rights demonstrations in 1964 as well as civil rights leaders and relatives of
Chaney and Goodman. (Rita Schwerner, the widow of Michael Schwerner, would not
agree to be interviewed by the film makers.) After the script was completed,
Oliver Stone expressed interest in directing the film, but ultimately decided to
make ''Born on the Fourth of July'' instead. Then Warner's hired Chris Menges,
who had been praised for his direction of ''A World Apart,'' to direct the film.

But when ''Mississippi Burning'' was released by Orion at the end of 1988, the
executives at Warner Brothers grew nervous. ''Warner's felt the wind had been
taken out of our sails,'' Ms. Laiter said. ''I don't really understand why the
studios feel they can make 100 movies about the Holocaust or about Vietnam but
only one movie about the civil rights movement. They wanted us to wait a year,
and then they said they would reconsider the project.''

Instead, Ms. Laiter and Mr. Weiser urged the studio to make the movie for
television. Mr. Wolper, who had produced ''Roots,'' had a long-term contract
with Warner Brothers, so he was a logical person to approach. He immediately
sold the project to NBC.

First, Mr. Weiser's script was compressed. ''A television movie has a smaller
scope,'' Mr. Wolper explained. ''You can't have a scene of 25,000 Ku Klux
Klansmen marching through town.'' So the focus was narrowed to the relationship
between Chaney (a black youth from Meridian, Miss., played by Blair Underwood)
and Schwerner (a white social worker from New York portrayed by Tom Hulce).

Accommodating Criticisms

Mr. Weiser said that he was aware of the criticisms that ''Mississippi Burning''
had slighted the role of blacks and that he had made some changes in his script
as a result. And Ms. Laiter acknowledged that although she had first thought of
telling the story from the point of view of the white volunteers, she had
changed her mind. ''Once we went to Mississippi and met the people,'' Ms. Laiter
said, ''we realized that it was really a black movement and that it would be a
betrayal to tell the story from the white point of view.''

Mr. Weiser said that he had written the script to highlight the role of Chaney
and other black civil rights workers. Also, he said, he changed the end of the
film after seeing ''Mississippi Burning.'' ''Originally, I had ended with Rita
Schwerner's eulogy at the funeral,'' Mr. Weiser said. ''But after 'Mississippi
Burning' came out, I wrote a new ending in which a very angry eulogy is given by
Dave Dennis, the head of CORE in Jackson, Miss. Both of them actually gave
eulogies, but I decided I wanted to end with a strong statement by a black
leader.''

Another criticism of ''Mississippi Burning'' centered on its portrayal of almost
all white Southerners as bigoted rednecks. In ''Murder in Mississippi,'' the
Southern whites are presented in an equally villainous light. ''I tried to find
sympathetic whites,'' Mr. Weiser said, ''but I couldn't. I know that's something
'Mississippi Burning' was criticized for. But I think in that period things were
very polarized.''

Still, to soften what might seem a stereotyping of Southerners, Mr. Weiser added
a scene in which Schwerner comments that the tensions between whites and blacks
in Mississippi were not that different from those in the North.

In the Driver's Seat

Ben Chaney, the brother of James Chaney, was unequivocal about which version of
the story he preferred. '' 'Murder in Mississippi' will counter the negative and
inaccurate portrait of 'Mississippi Burning,' '' Mr. Chaney said. ''That movie
shows black people in the south as indifferent and easily intimidated. Even in
the very first scene, 'Mississippi Burning' puts my brother in the back seat of
the car as they are being pursued by the Klansmen. 'Murder in Mississippi' shows
him driving the car, which is, as far as I know, what really happened.''

Nevertheless, Mr. Weiser conceded, not everything in his film is accurate. A
scene in which Rita Schwerner (played by Jennifer Grey) is terrorized by
rednecks in a laundromat never occurred, though Mr. Weiser said the Schwerners
were harassed repeatedly. Mr. Wolper said the film was ''very, very accurate in
spirit.''

Mr. Wolper said he believed the film was particularly timely in 1990.
''Incidents like the Howard Beach case and the Boston case involving Charles
Stuart are bringing racial conflict back to the forefront,'' he said. ''I wanted
to do this film because I thought it was a good yarn. But it may also be a
worthwhile reminder that two young people, one white and one black, can get
together and accomplish something.''Time Warnerd(Time Warner)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tom Hulce, left, Blair Underwood, center, and Josh Charles star
in ''Murder in Mississippi,'' to be shown Monday on NBC.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 2, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Stage

BYLINE: By Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1042 words



3 for Lawrence and Lee

Jerome Lawrence and Robert E. Lee have been writing plays together for 48 years,
but, they say in unison, ''We're just beginning.'' The co-authors of ''Mame,''
''Inherit the Wind'' and ''First Monday in October'' have not one or two, but
three new ideas in the works. And their concepts are as diverse as any three
could be.

Take the comedy with music they have been talking about, are now ready to put on
paper, and hope may be ready early next year. It's called ''Life Is Not a Dress
Rehearsal,'' and there is a very good likelihood that it will star Carol
Channing, who is talking to them about playing the lead role of Mme. Kulturova,
a Russian theater teacher whom they describe as ''a fictional Stella Adler.''

''Wedding the idea of Stella Adler and Carol is interesting because they're very
different and very similar,'' Mr. Lawrence said.

The playwrights are also working with Norman Cousins on ''Whisper in the Mind,''
which had a reading in California last year and may go to a regional theater in
England later this year.

''It's about holistic medicine and Norman's theories about everyone's ability to
cure himself, the body cured by the mind,'' Mr. Lee said.

Finally, there is ''Turn of the Century'' about parallel situations between the
16th and 17th centuries and the 20th and 21st centuries.

'Gospel' Is Returning

Alec McCowen and ''St. Mark's Gospel'' are to return to New York next month for
a fourth round here. Mr. McCowen won a Tony nomination in 1979 for his
performance in the show.

The one-man dramatic rendering of material from the Gospel According to St. Mark
in the New Testament was first brought to New York in 1978 and played successful
limited runs both off and on Broadway. It returned three years later for a
second limited Broadway run. Arthur Cantor, who co-produced the previous
productions, is doing this one alone.

Mr. McCowen this week began a four-week run of the show in London. It will begin
on March 20 at the Lamb's Theater and end, appropriately, on April 15, Easter
Sunday.

5-Show Package

Theatergoers will have a chance to see five Broadway shows this season at a 20
percent discount. Jujamcyn Theaters is offering a subscription package of three
shows already that have opened and been well received - ''City of Angels,''
''Grand Hotel'' and ''Gypsy'' - and two shows scheduled to reach New York in the
near future: ''Cat on a Hot Tin Roof,'' starring Kathleen Turner, and August
Wilson's ''Piano Lesson.'' The series, which will cost $204, will begin in late
March and continue through September. Subscribers will be limited to two pairs
of tickets.

Minding His Own Business

Some days, Everett Quinton said, the world weighs heavy upon him. ''I have to
remind myself that I'm a comedian,'' said the man who plays the principal roles
in the Ridiculous Theatrical Company's ''Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.'' A somewhat
shy person offstage, Mr. Quinton caught himself up with a small laugh. ''But
doesn't suffering make good comedians?'' he asked rhetorically. ''I don't know -
but it could be.''

The fact that the company's productions are not traditional theatrical fare has
taught him, he said, not to make snap judgments about audience reaction.

''You learn not to live in the head of the public,'' he said. ''I used to
wonder, 'What are they thinking?' And then I decided that it's not my business.
For example, one night we had a totally silent audience, and at the curtain call
they went wild.''

In late March, Mr. Quinton will transform himself into a mean-spirited dwarf in
a new production of ''Der Ring Gott Farblonjet,'' which he will also direct. The
sendup of Wagner's ''Ring'' cycle was written by Charles Ludlam.

When he assumes directorial duties, Mr. Quinton said, he has learned ''not to
push.''

''I keep it loving, with as little ego as possible,'' he said, ''and people
respond.''

Veterans in Revue

A musical revue produced by the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company? Yes,
indeed, but it will not be open to the general public. The show, ''Inside Out,''
which features 20 Broadway musical numbers, will begin a five-week tour of
shelters for homeless men on Monday.

Strikes and Spares With the Stars

The benefit hiatus has ended. ''Bowling With the Stars'' on Sunday will cost $60
($20 for spectators) and benefit the Manhattan Class Company (239-9033). Then on
Monday the Drama League of New York is honoring Jule Styne with ''A Musical
Celebration of Broadway'' at the Pierre Hotel. Tickets are $300 and $500 for the
evening, which includes dinner, or $50 for only the show, which will feature,
among others, Liza Minnelli and Tyne Daly. Telephone: 302-2100.

In the Wings

''Lettice and Lovage'' has found a home. It will be at the Barrymore Theater
beginning March 13. . . . ''The Merchant of Venice'' will be extended two weeks
to March 10 with the 523 mezzanine seats for each performance priced at $15 for
students with identification. . . . Arrangements have almost been concluded for
a production of ''Grand Hotel'' in London this fall. . . . Coming up March 15:
the deadline for the New York Theater Workshop's New Directors Series, a program
that gives new directors an opportunity to mount a professional production in
the New York area. Information: 302-7737. . . . Dana Ivey has been signed to
play Gertrude in the Public Theater's production of ''Hamlet.'' Other news at
the Public: Elizabeth Swados's ''Jonah,'' the fifth in her series of biblical
cantatas, begins Feb, 13. And Jackie Mason's pre-Broadway ''tryout'' has been
extended to Feb. 10. . . . Keir Dullea will play Dr. Astrov in Michael Frayn's
translation of Anton Chekhov's ''Uncle Vanya,'' beginning Feb. 20 at the RAPP
Arts Center, 220 East Fourth Street (529-6160). . . . Peter Gennaro is directing
the musical ''Goose! Beyond the Nursery''; his daughter, Liza Gennaro Evans, is
assisting with choreography, and her husband, Scott Evans, is lyricist (composer
is Mark Frawley) and co-author with Austin Tichenor. The Musical Theater Works
production is at St. Peter's Church (Lexington Avenue and 54th Street).
Information: 688-6022. Bring a nursery-rhyme book for charity, and you'll get a
half-price ticket.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 2, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: U. S. POLICY;
Economic Effect of Cutting Troops in Europe Assessed

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1221 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 1


Troop reductions of the type proposed by President Bush would temporarily
disrupt the local economy in parts of West Germany, but would have negligible
effects on the civilian economy of the United States, experts said today.

The effects in the Soviet Union would depend on how military manpower and
resources are redeployed, the experts said.

John P. Hardt, associate director of the Congressional Research Service, said
the demobilization of Soviet troops could benefit the Soviet economy ''if
military resources - manpower and factory capacity - are effectively redeployed
to produce food, consumer goods and housing, and to improve the delivery of food
from farm to market.''

But the ex-servicemen could also cause short-term economic problems for the
Kremlin if jobs and housing are not available for them, experts said.

Impact on Parts of Germany

In parts of Germany, including the Frankfurt area and the state of
Rhineland-Palatinate, tens of thousands of people depend for their livelihoods
on the presence of United States military units, which buy some of their
supplies in Germany. In addition, service personnel buy large amounts of local
beer, clothing and appliances.

If American troops begin to leave Europe, some regions of West Germany would
feel the loss, but the national economy is so strong that it would not be
damaged to any significant degree, experts said. Clarence Hill, an economist for
Deutsche Bank in New York, said the withdrawal of 60,000 to 80,000 American
servicemen would probably occur gradually and would have ''a negligible
depressing effect'' on West Germany's trillion-dollar economy.

In economic terms, he said, the exodus of American troops would be more than
offset by the influx of East Germans and of ethnic Germans from Poland and the
Soviet Union. The newcomers arrive in West Germany with few possessions and need
to buy many consumer goods, alhtough they have significantly less money with
which to make those purchases. In the last year, according to the West German
Embassy here, 343,850 East Germans and 377,000 ethnic Germans from Eastern
Europe settled in West Germany, and Bonn expects similar numbers this year.
#80,000 Troops Could Go In his State of the Union address on Wednesday, Mr. Bush
proposed sharp new reductions in the numbers of Soviet and American troops in
Europe. American troops, which now total 305,000, would be cut by 80,000, to
225,000. Most of the American troop reductions would come in West Germany.
Soviet troops, which now total about 565,000, would be reduced to the same
level.

American officials say they hope that Soviet and American troops withdrawn from
Europe would be demobilized and released from the armed services.

Stephen M. Meyer, a professor of political science at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, said today that the demobilization of more than 300,000
Soviet troops would, in the short term, have a ''negative impact on the economy
of the Soviet Union.''

There would be ''tens of thousands of troops with no place to live, no place to
work, no accommodations of any kind,'' Professor Meyer said. ''To release them
from the army right away would create social and economic problems.''

In the long run, he said, such troop reductions could save money for Moscow,
because the Soviet armed forces would presumably buy fewer weapons and supplies
and would have lower operating costs. Soviet officials could minimize the
economic problems by keeping soldiers in garrisons for a while after they return
to the Soviet Union, said Profssor Meyer, a consultant to American military and
intelligence agencies.

'Destabilizing Factor' Possible

Mr. Hardt, an expert on the Soviet economy, said that if substantial numbers of
Soviet military officers are demobilized, they would lose housing privileges and
access to special military stores and might become dissastified. They could then
be a ''destabilizing factor'' in Soviet politics, he said.

In any event, he said, money saved in the Soviet military budget would have to
be used to build housing and to train army veterans for civilian jobs. ''The
peace dividend would be small,'' he said.

In the United States, the Congressional Budget Office estimates that the
Pentagon would eventually save $7 billion to $8 billion a year if it demobilized
80,000 troops, as Mr. Bush proposed.

For more than a decade, the United States has had a volunteer army, and in
recent years, the vast majority of army recruits have been high school
graduates. Economists said that most of those recruits could probably get
civilian jobs.

With a labor force of more than 125 million, the United States could absorb
80,000 people released from military service without much difficulty, economists
say. Their ''effect on the overall economy would be fairly minor,'' said James
P. Markey, an economist at the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Jobs for Ex-Servicemen

Sar A. Levitan, a labor economist who serves as director of the Center for
Social Policy Studies at George Washington University, said that servicemen
might have some difficulty in finding civilian jobs in certain parts of the
country with higher unemployment rates, like West Virginia. If the national
economy weakens and companies lay off workers, that could make it more difficult
for veterans to find jobs, he said.

Others researchers said the American economy was stronger now than when the
United States curtailed military spending in the later years of the Vietnam War,
from 1968 to 1975. As military spending slows, they said, many companies can be
expected to diversify their work and emphasize commercial activities so that the
adverse effect, if any, on the gross national product would be temporary.

West Germany benefits financially from the stationing of American troops on its
territory, economists say. There are more than 225,000 G.I.'s with perhaps
75,000 dependents in West Germany.

A recent study by the Institute for the German Economy, an industry-supported
research center in Cologne, estimated that the American troops generated $5.6
billion a year in economic benefits for West Germany. That includes, among other
things, $1.8 billion in goods and services purchased by the military, $903
million in goods and services bought by individual servicemen, $590 million
worth of construction and $353 million in rent paid for houses and apartments.

Thomas Vajna, an economist at the institute, said that costs to West Germany
resulting from the presence of American troops totaled $1.4 billion a year. That
figure includes damage to property resulting from military maneuvers. The net
effect, he said, is $4.2 billion worth of benefits for the West German economy.

Robert Gerald Livingston, director of the American Institute for Contemporary
German Studies at Johns Hopkins University, said the departure of American
troops could ''cause dislocations in some of the poorer parts of West Germany.''
In such areas, he said, unemployment has been rising, partly because of the
influx of East Germans and ethnic Germans, and some people who lose jobs at
American military installations might have difficulty finding work.

On the other hand, he said, the departure of American troops would make housing
available for Germans at a time when there is a shortage of low-cost housing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Manfred Worner, the Secretary General of NATO, said President
Bush's plan to reduce the number of troops in Europe satisfies ''the will to
disarm and the security interests of Europeans.'' (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 2, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

LEGISLATION EASES LIMITS ON ALIENS

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 868 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 1


In yet another sign of diminishing world tensions, the Senate this week gave
final Congressional approval to repealing a provision of a McCarthy-era law that
bars foreigners from visiting the United States because of their political
beliefs.

The restriction has been anathema to civil liberterians and others for decades,
but only in recent years have they gathered enough support in Congress to kill
it.

The law, the McCarran-Walter Immigration Act, was passed in 1952 over the veto
of President Harry S. Truman. In that period 38 years ago, conservatives said it
was needed to protect American citizens from subversive ideas, mainly communism.

Over the years, the law has been used to deny entry to such acclaimed figures as
the writers Gabriel Garcia Marquez and Graham Greene, the actor Yves Montand,
the naturalist Farley Mowat, and Ian Smith, the former Prime Minister of
Rhodesia.

'Fearful, Muddled, Intimidated'

''For a generation and more these miserable provisions made the United States
present itself to other nations as a nation of fearful, muddled, intimidated
citizens,'' said Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who
sponsored the repeal legislation. ''We were not that; we are not that, and now
at last our statutes accord with the facts.''

The measure was passed 98 to 0 by the Senate on Tuesday, as an amendment to a
State Department spending bill. It was approved by the House in November and
President Bush is expected to sign it, Republican Senate aides said.

Legislation temporarily repealing the restrictions was passed in 1987 and again
in 1988. The State Department objected, warning that repeal could have
''potentially serious adverse consequences'' for the conduct of foreign policy.

But this time the State Department has raised no objections to permanent repeal
of the section of the McCarran-Walter Act that excludes aliens for ideological
reasons.

Only Short Visits Affected

The Senate action was praised by civil libertarians and advocates of immigration
law revisions, but other people contended the legislation does not go far
enough.

The measure covers only aliens seeking to enter the United States for short
visits. Those seeking permanent status can still be barred because of their
beliefs or memberships.

Over the years thousands of foreigners have been barred by the provision in the
McCarran-Walter Act. In 1984, for example, the Immigration and Naturalization
Service estimated that it blocked 8,000 people from 98 countries because of
their beliefs or political affiliations.

Among those who have been denied entry are Hortensia Allende, widow Salvador
Allende Gossens, the former President of Chile; Yasir Arafat, chairman of the
Palestine Liberation Organization; Dario Fo, the Italian satirist and
playwright, and Pierre Elliott Trudeau of Canada, whose attendance at an
economic conference in Moscow in 1952 prompted immigration officials to brand
him as a Communist sympathizer. Mr. Trudeau's name was struck from the list
after immigration officials interviewed him in Montreal in 1954. He wasCanadian
Prime Minister from 1968 to 1979, and 1980 to 1984.

''Pierre Trudeau!'' said a theatrically incredulous Mr. Moynihan in a telephone
interview. ''Graham Greene! There is not a college in this country that does not
assign his book.'' Among the British author's books is ''The Quiet American,''
which was set in South Vietnam.

Terrorist Exception

Mr. Moynihan's legislation still allows the Secretary of State to deny entry an
alien who is identified as a terrorist or is seen as likely to engage in
terrorist activity. Under this section, someone like Mr. Arafat can still be
barred.

Another portion of the act, dealing with resident aliens, is under legal attack.

In Dec. 1988, a Federal District Court judge in Los Angeles barred the
immigration service from deporting seven Jordanians and one Kenyan. The
Government had charged them with being members of a group called the Popular
Front for the Liberation of Palestine, which had claimed responsibility for
airline hijackings and other terrorist acts.

In preventing the deportations Judge Stephen V. Wilson declared the language of
four the sections the act ''unconstitutional on its face'' as a restriction on
the right of free speech.

The ruling applied only to the Central District of California and has been
appealed by the Government.

Little Change Expected

A State Department spokesman said the legislation would not markedly change
policy. A 1977 measure sponsored by George McGovern, the former Senator from
South Dakota, required that people denied entry based on their beliefs be
granted waivers unless it could be shown that they posed a threat to national
security. Since then, most people initially turned away have been admitted,
officials said.

''It's no longer a practical fact that people are kept out of the United States
for their ideological beliefs,'' said the spokesman, Philip Covington.

The McCarran-Walter Act sets up 33 categories for excluding visitors and those
seeking to become residents. They range from espionage and drug trafficking to
believing in polygamy and practicing ''deviant sexual behavior.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 3, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about the repeal of a provision of the McCarran-Walter
Immigration Act referred incorrectly in some copies to a novel by Graham Greene.
He wrote ''The Quiet American,'' not ''The Ugly American.''

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 2, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

LONDON JOURNAL;
New Name and New Age (Is There a New Party?)

BYLINE: By SHEILA RULE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Feb. 1


A cartoon in The Guardian recently depicted two women reading a sign that said,
''Communist Party of Great Britain - General Secretary Nina Temple.''

''Typical,'' one woman said with a grimace. ''Women always get the lousy jobs.''

Given the current state of the British Communist Party, the sentiment might
appear to have some merit. Dismissed by politicians and academics as politically
irrelevant, the party fielded 17 candidates for Parliament in the general
election of 1987 and won only 6,000 votes, or two-hundredths of 1 percent of all
votes cast. Its membership has plummeted from a postwar high of 56,000 to 7,500,
most of that decline over the last decade.

Only two Communists have ever been elected to the House of Commons, the last one
about 40 years ago. The party, founded in 1920, has nowhere near the strength of
its Continental counterparts, which themselves are riven by dissent and far
weaker than they were 15 years ago.

First Woman as Leader

But Ms. Temple - who last month was elected as the first woman and, at 33, the
youngest leader of Britain's Communist Party - says she hopes to turn the party
upside down, shake off its tattered image and apply such a fresh face that
British Communism may appear nearly unrecognizable.

The party is currently involved in a free-for-all debate over options for its
future, which include ceasing to exist and changing into a distinctive element
in a loose left-wing alliance.

''It's going to be such a thorough overhaul that we might not be the Communist
Party anymore,'' Ms. Temple, articulate, relaxed and friendly, said in an
interview at the party's comfortably frayed headquarters behind the busy meat
district in East London.

''We do think Eastern Europe has big implications for us. We were founded as a
Leninist party after the Russian Revolution. If we are arguing that the era of
1917 failed and that that is over, it seems right to look at ourselves and look
at what it is we still maintain from that approach and what should go so that we
can be part of the contribution to new progressive politics in Britain.''

Husband a Travel Agent

If nothing else, Ms. Temple will no doubt help to dispel what she says is the
popular image in Britain of a Communist, ''an 80-year-old Leonid Brezhnev.'' She
was introduced to leftist politics by her parents and became a member of the
Communist Party when she was 13 years old.

She lives with her 1-year-old son and 3-year-old daughter, and the children's
father, a schoolteacher. Ms. Temple's father operates a travel agency that
advertises summer vacations to Siberia and Cuba, as well as Russian language
courses and ecology programs.

She says it was her participation in London protests against the Vietnam War
that led her to a commitment to Communism.

For Decades a Maverick

Communist parties throughout Western Europe are searching for ways to be
politically relevant without turning their backs on their principles, as they
struggle to survive the collapse of traditional Communist governments in Eastern
Europe.

But unlike some pro-Soviet parties, the British Communist Party has for decades
been a maverick and has distanced itself from governments in the East. Hard-line
Stalinists have even accused it of being anti-Soviet and a so-called class
traitor, leading to major splits in the party in the past.

Over the years, it has opposed Moscow on a string of issues, including the
Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 and the war in Afghanistan, as
well as criticized the British labor movement for policies like those that
discriminated against blacks and women.

Nonetheless, Ms. Temple said, the public continued to identify British
Communists with Eastern-bloc governments. Also contributing to the party's
weakness was the decline of mining and other heavy industries where its
influence was traditionally based and an overwhelmingly white and male
membership that, in the view of Ms. Temple and others, failed to quickly grasp
changing times.

'Lost Time in 60's and 70's

''We lost a lot of time in the 60's and 70's,'' said Ms. Temple, who has a
degree in material science, the study of things like plastics, metals and
alloys, from Imperial College in London, but she has made the Communist Party
her career.

''The party didn't see the way in which class was becoming much more diverse and
the importance of women working, the role blacks were playing in transport and
health services and the way people in the their working class today had
different working experiences. It was a failure to keep right on the pulse of
the working class. It left us mouthing slogans that didn't connect with
people.''

The new General Secretary says the party's influence is limited to its magazine,
Marxism Today, the most striking example of the new thinking within the British
left as it struggles to formulate a popular alternative to the free-market
policies of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.

The magazine's standing is such that leading journalists from The Economist and
The Financial Times write for it without payment, and its rigorous analysis of
economic and social issues is read with respect by many of the intellectual
torchbearers of Thatcherism.

'A Very Utopian View'

But as the party sets out to reinvent itself, Ms. Temple says she hopes that its
influence will eventually be forceful enough to transform the landscape of the
British left.

''My own definition of Communism is a very utopian view of how the world might
be without class, racial or sexual prejudice, with respect for the natural
environment and people living at a sustainable level within an egalitarian
society,'' said Ms. Temple, who will earn about $12,000 a year in her new job.

''I don't expect to live in a society like that, but the importance of having
those ideals is how they affect your practice and politics. Your daily practice
determines your political end. As a Communist, in my daily practice I have to
try to empower people, to open up politics that involve people. There is a
connection between what I want to see in the long term and how I work today.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Nina Temple, the new Secretary General of the Communist Party of
Britain, who says she hopes to turn the party upside down and give it a fresh
face that will be nearly unrecognizable. (NYT/Jonathan Player)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              245 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 4, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 942 words




$

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     1    WEB OF DREAMS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket,
            $5.50.) The origin of a curse that has haunted a
            family of orphans in five previous novels.

 2     15   THE DRAWING OF THE THREE, by Stephen
            King. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.) Continuing the horror
            story begun in ''The Gunslinger.''

 3     2    MUTATION, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $4.95.) A
            physician's attempt to create a superior child.

 4     12   THE SANDS OF TIME, by Sidney Sheldon.
            (Warner, $5.95.) A struggle between the Spanish
            Army and Basque separatists.

 5     4    THE LONG DARK TEA-TIME OF THE SOUL, by
            Douglas Adams. (Pocket, $4.95.) The detective of
            ''The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy'' pursues
            the meaning of an explosion at an airport.

 6     4    TOO DEEP FOR TEARS, by Kathryn Lynn
            Davis. (Pocket, $5.50.) Three half sisters become
            acquainted as their father dies in Scotland.

 7     7    A THIEF OF TIME, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper
            Paperbacks, $4.95.) Tracking down a missing
            archeologist, missing artifacts and a murderer.

 8     1    BILLY BATHGATE, by E. L. Doctorow. (Harper
            Paperbacks, $5.95.) The life of the 1930's gangster
            Dutch Schultz, as seen by a youth from the Bronx.

 9 *   5    SPY HOOK, by Len Deighton. (Ballantine, $5.95.)
            A financial scam within the British secret service.

10 *   1    FRENCH KISS, by Eric V. Lustbader. (Fawcett,
            $5.95.) Three people whose lives are menaced by
            the disappearance of a dagger, a Buddhist symbol
            of mystic power.

11     51   THE SHELL SEEKERS, by Rosamunde Pilcher.
            (Dell, $4.95.) Three generations of a family.

12 *   1    THE FORTUNE, by Michael Korda. (Warner,
            $5.95.) A young woman's ill-fated romance with
            the head of America's richest family.

13     1    RULES OF ENGAGEMENT, by Peter Morwood.
            (Pocket, $4.50.) The Enterprise on a mission to
            rescue personnel at peril on a faraway planet; a
            new ''Star Trek'' novel.

14 *   30   THE GUNSLINGER, by Stephen King. (Signet/
            NAL, $4.95.) Volume One of ''The Dark Tower,''
            about a young man's pursuit of an evil force.

15     1    NIGHT STORM, by Catherine Coulter. (Avon,
            $4.95.) A young woman's desire to save her
            family's fortune leads to a stormy romance with a
            roguish sea captain.
  Weeks This On Week List Nonfiction    1 11 ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED
IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.     2 8
NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK, by Grace Catalano.  (Bantam, $3.50.) The lives and
predilections of the five members of a teen-age singing group.     3 1 IN BROAD
DAYLIGHT, by Harry N. MacLean.  (Dell, $4.95.) The 1981 killing of a man on Main
Street in Skidmore, Mo., witnessed by 45 people; a case that was never brought
to court.     4 328 THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (Touchstone/S&S,
$10.95.) Spiritual inspiration.     5 11 THE BLOODING, by Joseph Wambaugh.
(Bantam, $5.95.) The murder of two girls in an English village is solved through
genetic clues.     6 2 BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, by Ron Kovic. (Pocket,
$4.50.) The autobiography of a former marine, gravely wounded physically in
Vietnam, spiritually on his return home.     7 88 LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by
Bernie S.  Siegel. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The importance of a
patient's mind and emotions.     8 19 BLIND FAITH, by Joe McGinniss.
(Signet/NAL, $5.95.) The family tragedy that came to light after the 1984 murder
of a Toms River, N.J., woman.     9 69 THE POWER OF MYTH, by Joseph Campbell
with Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $19.95.) The ways in which mythology illuminates
the stages of life.    10 * 2 DESPERADOS, by Elaine Shannon. (Penguin, $4.95.)
The murder of the Federal agent Kiki Camarena and how the United States is
losing the drug wars.    Weeks This On Week List Advice, How-to and
Miscellaneous    1 75 CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie.  (Hazelden/Harper
& Row, $8.95.) Solving your own problems while caring for other people.     2 9
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1990. (World Almanac, $6.95.) The latest
edition.     3 8 RAND McNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $6.95.) The 1990
edition.     4 70 DIANETICS, by L. Ron Hubbard. (Bridge Publications, $5.95.)
The Scientology handbook.     5 * 1 ERNST & YOUNG'S ARTHUR YOUNG TAX GUIDE 1990,
edited by Peter W. Bernstein.  (Ballantine, $11.95.) Income tax advice.     6 *
1 HEALING THE SHAME THAT BINDS YOU, by John Bradshaw. (Health Communications,
$9.95.) Ways to recover from addictions, compulsions and other self-destructive
forces.

 These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              246 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE CHICKEN AND I

BYLINE: By JOSEPH OLSHAN; Joseph Olshan's most recent novel is ''The
Waterline.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 27, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 898 words



SWEET TALK
By Stephanie Vaughn.
194 pp. New York:
Random House. $16.95.

This powerful first collection of short stories takes place primarily on highly
efficient Army bases and in stucco apartment buildings with phony architectural
details. The hard-edged world of ''Sweet Talk'' is filtered through the gentle
lens of Stephanie Vaughn, a gifted writer whose work has previously appeared in
The New Yorker and Antaeus magazines.

Ms. Vaughn's strong suit is an ability to make harrowing situations alternately
funny and sad. In ''We're on TV in the Universe,'' a woman is driving, with a
caged chicken in the front seat, through a blizzard en route to a birthday
party. Suddenly the car hits black ice. ''My car did a kind of simple dance
step. . . . It threw its hips to the left, it threw its hips to the right, left,
right, left, right, then turned and slid, as if it were making a rock-and-roll
move toward the arms of a partner.''

The image of black ice - a condition that can form suddenly in cold weather,
leaving cars without traction - is used more than once as metaphor by Ms.
Vaughn, who views relationships as fragile states of motion that can on a whim
become derailed. And yet her characters distinguish themselves by having a sense
of humor about their own failures.

In ''The Architecture of California,'' Megan realizes that her husband is
responsible for her best friend Vera's latest pregnancy. The revelation bubbles
up one night when the three are cooking dinner, the author skillfully twining
Megan's realization around a debacle of ruined pasta. ''You gave me self-rising
flour, you didn't give me regular,'' Vera says to Megan, bursting into tears.
''Think of it as an accident,'' Megan replies. ''I couldn't help myself.''

We may spend years trying to find friends and lovers who embody the impossible
standards set by our parents, Ms. Vaughn suggests. But the disappointment of the
adult women in these stories becomes all the more poignant when we compare it to
the childhood of Gemma, the narrator of several deeply felt interconnected tales
that feature her brother, her mother and her father, Zachary, an Army man.

''Keep your voice low and you can win any point,'' Zachary advises in ''Able,
Baker, Charlie, Dog.'' He upholds the power of rhetoric and ethical conduct
while torturing the family with emotional distance. Unfortunately, Zachary
betrays his own principles by insulting a general. Realizing her father may have
sabotaged his career, Gemma watches him flirt with danger by trying to walk
across the frozen Niagara River. ''The last thing I heard, long after I had lost
sight of him far out on the river, was the sound of his laugh splitting the cold
air.''

When Gemma's brother, ''Kid MacArthur,'' tries to give her the ear of a Vietcong
soldier sent through the mail by a friend, her simple thought - ''I didn't think
that something like this could look exactly like itself so much later and so far
away'' - is actually an insight into her brother. At Zachary's insistence,
MacArthur trains to be a high-accuracy marksman. The skill serves him well in
Vietnam but proves unusable in civilian life, leaving him to a life of drifting.

In her pithy descriptions, Ms. Vaughn not only brings her characters to life;
she invests them with a raison d'etre, compelling us to love them. In ''My
Mother Breathing Light,'' Gemma's mother goes ''up the stairs with a fierce,
eager step, the hem of her white robe rippling behind in a satin fury, like
water swooshing uphill,'' a description that evokes the vicissitudes of a woman
determined to gloss over the fact that she has terminal cancer.

Ms. Vaughn does not always construct her stories as smoothly as she might, and
in a few places she underestimates her emotional building power. In ''Dog
Heaven,'' for example, she goes on several paragraphs too long and diminishes
the impact. Yet if she occasionally sacrifices form to content, the choice is
well worth it; the writing in ''Sweet Talk'' is pure and elegiac, as though it
were piped in directly from the soul.

THE CHICKEN AND I

The happiest person I met that night was the tow-truck driver. She was making
lots of money in the bad weather and knew how to handle the roads. ''My policy
is people first and then their wrecks,'' she told us. ''You might have some
aches and pains, or your feet might be froze.'' So we got in the cab, the
juggler, the chicken, and I, and rode one mile to the exit and a gas station,
where we waited for the tow truck to bring in our cars. . . . At the station,
there were already three other drivers waiting for their cars. We all still had
that adrenaline high you get from a close call, and we kept taking turns
describing our accidents. We kept embellishing as we went, so that the accidents
got more frightening as we added the sounds of breaking glass (my taillights)
and the screech of metal (the juggler's bumper scraping the end of the
guardrail), things you hear but don't listen to when the car is still moving.
Someone wanted to know if I was a veterinarian. In the spirit of the moment, I
said, ''Not exactly,'' and they all looked skeptical. . . . ''Actually, this is
a birthday present for a veterinarian who lives in the country,'' I said. That
was true enough to make sense of where I was and how I happened to arrive there
with a live chicken.

From ''Sweet Talk.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Stephanie Vaughn (Harvey Ferdschneider)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              247 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ARCHITECTURE VIEW;
LEWIS MUMFORD: PREACHER, PROPHET, ROMANTIC

BYLINE: By PAUL GOLDBERGER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 38, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1775 words


''One of our giant redwoods has fallen, and left a space we cannot fill by any
quick plantation of lesser trees,'' Lewis Mumford wrote of Frank Lloyd Wright
after Wright's death in 1959, and today we might use these words to speak of
Lewis Mumford himself. His death a few days ago at the age of 94 brings to a
close a life of extraordinary breadth, sweep, ambition and passion. Our century
has had no other figure like Lewis Mumford: essayist, historian of culture and
technology, literary critic and surely the greatest architecture critic of our
age. His life was committed to the idea that scholarship is not a mere
assemblage of facts but a guidepost for civilization. To Lewis Mumford, writing
was a means of setting out a moral compass: he had no hesitation about playing a
role that was part preacher. He wrote history not to entertain us but to tell us
how to live, and nearly everything he produced had a touch of the sermon about
it. Perhaps that is why his short critical essays please more than his
book-length works, for his temperament was really less that of the historian
than that of the critic, searching always for the points at which scholarly
insights intersected with contemporary life.

He could be annoyingly moralistic at times, and pompous and self-obsessed. He
was not a man given to much irony in his view of the world. But now that he is
gone, it is the other side of his character that seems strongest in memory. He
was a gentle man, and even at the end of his life, as his memory failed and his
ability to carry on a conversation faded to near nothingness, he possessed a
quiet, firm dignity. With Sophia, his wife of 68 years, he set out to live a
life that would be true to his principles - moving in stages away from the
frantic bazaar of urban pressures toward a life of private writing and thinking.
Right after their marriage in 1921 the Mumfords were part of the literary
community centered in Greenwich Village, and then from 1925 to 1936 they put
Mumford's views about architecture and community into practice by living in
Sunnyside, Queens, in the celebrated Sunnyside Gardens housing complex with
communal gardens designed by Clarence Stein and Henry Wright. After 1936 they
withdrew further, to a farmhouse outside the Dutchess County town of Amenia,
N.Y., that they had bought as a summer residence in the 1920's and which became
their permanent home for the rest of Mumford's life.

In the simple, white-clapboard house, its rooms lined with books, the Mumfords
lived a quiet and private life that could not have been more distinct, in its
external qualities at least, from the media-obsessed culture of this era. Not
that he was a recluse: he believed profoundly in the idea of the public man, and
he took active, and in many cases heroic, public stands on critical issues from
the urban-renewal plans of Robert Moses in New York to the war in Vietnam. (He
was an early and passionate opponent of both.) But his public role was not the
15 minutes of celebrity we are accustomed to today, but something with much more
staying power: he spent his life trying to foster a public dialogue focused on
issues, not on personalities. It tells us much that he would have appeared on
the cover of Time magazine back in 1939, but that a later generation of editors
at Time Inc. never thought of him as the type to make it into People.

Mumford was often criticized for his move to the country; how could someone
whose business was thinking about cities refuse to live in one? In the
beginning, the withdrawal was for the best of reasons - to have time to write,
away from the intense social and professional obligations the city thrusts on
any well-known writer - and Mumford spent several days a week in New York
anyway, researching and writing ''The Sky Line,'' his architecture column for
The New Yorker. Years later, though, his separation from the city became more
marked; he came to detest New York, visiting it less and less, and sending
Jeremiah-like pronouncements about its doom down from Amenia. On one of his last
trips to New York, to receive the National Medal for Literature in 1972, he
described the city as ''horrid'' and a ''monstrosity.''

He was among the first to see the effect of overbuilding in New York, the city
of his birth in 1895. He saw it, perhaps, for the wrong reason, which was his
lifelong belief that in rationally planned, moderately sized cities lay the
answer to our urban problems. Mumford's idealization of planned garden cities
put him completely at odds with a whole generation of architects and urban
planners, to whom density, variety and randomness are not the death of cities
but their very lifeblood. To architects brought up on Jane Jacobs, Lewis
Mumford's insistence that cities should be viewed as rational organisms -
indeed, his idea that they can be rationally planned at all - makes him the very
embodiment of old-fashioned, tiresome thinking.

But if we have been right in learning that density can be energizing and is
hardly the destructive force that Mumford so often portrayed it as, that should
not blind us to the remarkable insight in so many of his observations. You do
not have to believe in garden cities to be struck by Mumford's observation, in
one of his New Yorker columns in 1955, that there would soon be a time in New
York when architecture would no longer matter.

If the city ''ceases to be a milieu in which people can exist in reasonable
contentment instead of as prisoners perpetually plotting to escape a
concentration camp,'' he wrote, ''it will be unprofitable to discuss
architectural achievements - buildings that occasionally cause people to hold
their breath for a stabbing moment or that restore them to equilibrium by
offering them a prospect of space and form joyfully mastered.''

The tone was Olympian, the phrases eloquently crafted, and the point, we must
now admit, entirely correct. Architecture does not matter in New York as it once
did, simply because it is harder and harder to see the buildings through the
chaos. Paradoxically, the architecture of individual buildings today is more
ambitious than it was in the 1940's and 1950's, when Mumford wrote the bulk of
his criticism for the New Yorker, but the overall fabric of the city, the
context in which these buildings have been placed, grows weaker and weaker,
destroyed by the mad rush to build more and more, faster and faster.

Was Lewis Mumford merely ahead of his time there, or pursuing his own agenda? A
little bit of both. His words now seem prescient: no one else in 1955 was
worrying about too many skyscrapers in Manhattan. But it is worth remembering
that his complaint came in part because, though he was loathe to admit it, he so
hated an environment controlled, as New York's is, by the values of the
marketplace. And his views were colored by a skepticism toward technology that,
as the years went on, became less a healthy doubt and more an angry mistrust.

Mumford was among the first critics to remind us that bigger is not always
better; in his later years, he came to exaggerate that view so much that he
seemed almost to be saying that big must be bad. Yet even at his most angry,
Mumford's criticism was always informed by a desire to see architecture in a
social context. His eye was never seduced by the beauty of form; he consistently
sought to view architecture in terms of social purpose, and made his judgments
accordingly. Today, as we come to the end of a decade of visual overkill and
social indifference, his standards seem in one sense out of step, in another,
desperately needed.

At a time when housing appears to be the city's most urgent crisis, it is
difficult not to think of such splendid Mumford essays as ''The Plight of the
Prosperous,'' which deftly puts dark Park Avenue apartments in their place, or
his critique of Le Corbusier's Unite d'Habitation in Marseilles, France, in
which Mumford insisted upon evaluating the celebrated building in terms of its
success as a community, seeming almost willfully blind to the power of its
sculptural forms.

Mumford's view of New York was intensely personal, and - strange as this would
seem for a writer who took such pride in his ability to put everything in
rational terms - highly romantic. In his youth, the city was like a parent to
him. He was the illegitimate child of a woman who ran a boardinghouse, and the
city filled much of a father's role for him, stimulating him and teaching him,
entertaining him in his idle hours and setting a kind of example for what life
should be like. New York was his mentor. But when the city began to grow bigger
and harsher, this was for Mumford not merely a physical change, but a kind of
betrayal, as if an idealized parent were suddenly revealed as not nearly so
noble as he had appeared to be.

Some of Mumford's disillusionment about the city is understandable on purely
architectural grounds, of course. The city of today is meaner, harder, its
buildings vastly too big. On this subject, Mumford was a realistic prophet. But
he was also a romantic, yearning both for the city that was and for the city he
dreamed of that was greater than the one that was. And he was never willing to
admit that the values of the city that existed in his childhood were not really
much better or worse than the values of the city of today.

But we should end with Mumford's own words, from his book ''Sketches From
Life,'' as he recalls the epiphany he experienced walking across the Brooklyn
Bridge as a young man, and tells us all that a work of architecture, and the
presence of a city, can do for the human spirit.

''Here was my city,'' he wrote, ''immense, overpowering, flooded with energy and
light; there below lay the river and the harbor, catching the last flakes of
gold on their waters, with the black tugs, free from their barges, plodding
dockward, the ferryboats lumbering from pier to pier, the tramp steamers slowly
crawling toward the sea, while the rumbling elevated trains and trolley cars
just below me on the bridge moved in a relentless tide. And there was I,
breasting the March wind, drinking in the city and the sky, both vast, yet both
contained in me, challenging me, beckoning me, demanding of me something that it
would take more than a lifetime to give, but raising all my energies by its own
vivid promise to a higher pitch. In that sudden revelation of power and beauty
all the confusions of adolescence dropped from me, and I trod the narrow,
resilient boards of the footway with a new confidence that came not from my
isolated self alone but from the collective energies I had confronted and risen
to.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mumford sent down jerimands abut New York from his farmhouse in
Amenia. (Jill Krementz)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              248 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'Stanley and Iris' Carries a Message Of H-O-P-E

BYLINE: B SONIA TAITZ; Sonia Taitz is a playwright who writes frequently about
the arts.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 28, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 982 words


''I have a poster i should show you,'' said Harriet Frank Jr., who, with her
husband, Irving Ravetch, co-wrote ''Stanley and Iris,'' which opens Friday. ''It
says, 'America: one out of every four people can't read this word.' '' The
writer adds: ''It's impactful, it's true and it's a tragedy.''

''When I found out that so many American people were functionally illiterate, I
was horrified,'' said Martin Ritt, who directed the film. (''Conservatively, I'd
say 23 million,'' said Bonita Summerfield, executive director of the Barbara
Bush Foundation for Family Literacy, launched at the White House last March.)
''Harriet and Irving,'' he said, referring to the writing team with whom he has
collaborated for more than 30 years, most recently on ''Norma Rae,'' ''have a
feeling for the stupidity of the system. It will finally cost us,'' he said
darkly.

''Oh, God, we sound so serious,'' said Ms. Frank. ''You know, we're a larky
pair; we do like life in Paris.''

Paris - or Hollywood - is far from the world of ''Stanley and Iris,'' in which
Jane Fonda portrays Iris, a widowed New England mother who ices cakes in a
factory, and Robert De Niro is Stanley, a reclusive hash slinger. Stanley is
illiterate, a fact that he has managed to conceal from everyone through clever
compensation. (''Many of these people go through life faking it,'' said Patrick
Palmer, executive producer of the film. ''They seem to be functioning normally,
but they aren't.'') When Stanley and Iris eat Chinese food, he refuses to crack
open the fortune cookie - he isn't lucky, he says. Unable to get a driver's
license, he rides an old bicycle to work - and claims to like the freedom. Only
after Iris asks him for a Tylenol and gets, one after another, bottles of other
remedies, does she begin to fathom that Stanley - wise, warm and almost 40 -
cannot decipher a single word, anywhere. And only after a long period of
struggle (with what Mr. Ritt called ''terrific shame and helplessness'') does he
agree to let her help him learn to read.

''I think the results of a movie like this are twofold,'' said Ms. Fonda. ''On
the one hand, it says to anyone who is illiterate, don't hide it, don't fake it,
don't pass. You can get help; it's never too late. On the other hand, it says to
everyone else, don't equate illiteracy with lack of intelligence.

''There are many reasons why someone highly intelligent and sensitive can reach
adulthood and not know how to read,'' she continued. ''They might think, 'It
must mean I'm stupid,' but a lot of illiterate people I spoke to were moved from
school to school'' - as Stanley was in the film.

''I've traveled all over the world in the last few months,'' said Ms. Fonda.
''And in some respects, it's depressing to compare. There is virtually no
illiteracy in Japan, yet we're supposed to be No. 1! Did you read Jonathan
Kozol's book on American illiteracy [''Illiterate America'']? That's what turned
me on to the issue,'' said the actress. During the filming of ''Stanley and
Iris'' in Waterbury, Conn., Ms. Fonda raised the hackles of some veterans who
remembered her trip to Hanoi during the Vietnam War.

''Jane was very brave,'' said Ms. Frank. ''She ran into a lot of flak. A lot of
hate. Vicious placards. She was steadfast.'' Ms. Fonda dismisses the praise:
''It was really a small group of veterans, about 10, mostly from the Second
World War.

''In Jane, we got someone really strong,'' said Arlene Sellers, a producer of
''Stanley and Iris.'' ''And that was right for the character. At the same time,
Iris is not some young career woman on her way up.'' Both she and Stanley are
drawn from characters in a book called ''Union Street,'' by Pat Barker, a
British writer. ''Pat's sort of the Carson McCullers of the English Midlands,''
said Ms. Sellers, who felt - with Mr.Ritt - that the book could be adapted for
the American screen. ''She writes exclusively about working-class women in
factories. Working towns, like Waterbury, with hopeless people like Stanley and
matriarchal women like Iris.''

Matriarchal or not, Ms. Fonda was determined not to look matronly. ''Stanley has
to fall in love with her,'' she said, disclaiming vanity. ''I could have played
her dour, drab, drawn. I could have made her poorer, more polyester. It might
have made her perhaps more real - but I chose not to. You need to draw the
audience in.'' Indeed, Mr. Ritt acknowledged that the subject of illiteracy may
have lacked inherent drama. ''So we decided,'' he said, ''to make it a love
story.''

Another concession to the audience involved the portrayal of Stanley's reading
lessons. ''Adult literacy certainly doesn't happen overnight,'' said Ms.
Sellers. ''We didn't want to bore people with the real process of teaching
people in their 20's and 30's, all the charts and lessons.'' Iris does, indeed,
teach Stanley to read on screen, displaying charts and using the visual and
phonic techniques proposed by Laubach Literacy Action, based in Syracuse, N.Y.
(which, with Literacy Volunteers, also in Syracuse, comprises one of the major
tutoring organizations in America). ''A little of that goes a long way,'' said
Ms. Sellers.

Long enough to convince the expert audience at any rate. ''We went in with a
critical eye,'' said Peter Waite, executive director of Laubach Literacy Action.
''We didn't want the process sensationalized.'' Mr. Waite gives high scores to
Mr. De Niro's portrayal of ''emotional isolation.'' The actor studied videotapes
of illiterate men to prepare for the part of Stanley.) As for Ms. Fonda's
portrayal of a literacy volunteer, Mr. Waite says: ''We joked that she stands on
the wrong side of the charts - where you'd end up covering the letters - but
clearly she studied everything we sent very meticulously. It's not an easy
process - our tutors go through 18 hours of training - but she conveys it. And I
hope it does some good.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Martin Ritt, the director; Jane Fonda as the widowed factory
worker Iris and Robert De Niro as the illiterate Stanley in the film opening
Friday (S. Karin Epstein)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              249 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 9, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AT THE MOVIES

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 847 words



A Lesson in Love

''I tell you that Turgenev has written this book as a kind of warning to young
people,'' Jerzy Skolimowski was saying.

The Polish-born film maker was explaining how he had become gripped years ago by
the Russian author's novel ''Torrents of Spring'' and had, at last, been able to
turn it into his latest film, opening today.

''I read it a very long time ago, when I was in school in Poland,'' said Mr.
Skolimowski, who has been living for the last five years in Santa Monica, Calif.
''And that was a time when we had Stalinism blooming, in the early 50's; and our
contact with real literature was limited. And what we had to read were Social
Realism books of that period. Very few classics were allowed. Among them,
fortunately, was Turgenev, whose works I read early and liked very much.''

''Not only this,'' Mr. Skolimowski said of ''Torrents of Spring,'' ''but
'Fathers and Sons.' Those were my favorite books at the time.''

After many years, Mr. Skolimowski happened to mention his interest to Jeremy
Thomas, the producer of the Academy Award-winning ''Last Emperor,'' among other
films, while the two were working on Mr. Skolimowski's memorable 1979 film,
''The Shout.''

About a year ago, Mr. Thomas heard that the Italian producer Angelo Rizzoli was
planning a film of ''Torrents of Spring,'' and mentioned Mr. Skolimowski's
interest. And that was how Mr. Skolimowski eventually found himself on location
in Venice, Rome and Prague (the latter standing in for the central Germany of
150 years ago), with a cast led by Timothy Hutton, Valeria Golino (who played
Tom Cruise's girlfriend in ''Rain Man'') and Nastassja Kinski.

Mr. Hutton portrays a young Russian aristocrat, who, during a brief stopover in
a quiet German town during a journey home, falls in love with a pastry-shop
owner's daughter, played by Miss Golino. But within a short time of declaring
his love, he finds himself enraptured and seduced by the wanton Russian woman
played by Miss Kinski, with devastating consequences.

''This,'' Mr. Skolimowski said, ''is the story of the very first love of a young
man who kind of jumps into it, like an empty pool, and only 48 hours later
realizes that there are other women and that he can easily be attracted to them
as well.''

Mr. Skolimowski says he sees ''Torrents'' as a cautionary tale, adding, ''Be
careful with the recognition of what love is and what it is not.''

In recent months, he has been a frequent visitor to Warsaw, applying his vote
and prestige to the first open elections in 40 years and their rebuke to the
Communist Government.

Mr. Skolimowski said it was difficult to predict what effect the liberalization
sweeping Eastern Europe might have on Polish film making, ''because it's all in
chaos.''

''But,'' he said, ''I believe there is a strong indication that people will have
enough patience and good will to go through the difficult times. Probably this
year will be the most difficult to get through. But once the whole country gets
into the new economy, I believe everything will start to be different and will
be blooming.

''Poles are rather talented and dedicated people, and I believe once they taste
freedom - not only political but the freedom of the economy -I believe it's
going to work.''

Referring to film making, he said: ''What is clear is that there won't be any
political contributions anymore. Several of the creators under the Communist
regime were just paying tribute to the authorities, and some of the stuff they
were making was really rubbish. So that will never happen again.

''On the other hand, the healthy competition between talented artists may create
a kind of stimulation. There won't be so much sponsorship from the Government.
Everyone will have to be dealing with his own economic problems.

''I believe film production will become more Western.''

Mr. Skolimowski said that when the time arrives for production of his next film,
perhaps he will seek some Polish participation. ''I'm willing to take a
chance,'' he said. ''That would be another patriotic act.''

Berlin Film Festival

Oliver Stone's ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' starring Tom Cruise as the
paraplegic Vietnam veteran Ron Kovic, is to be screened on both sides of the
Berlin wall during the Berlin Film Festival this month. The West German showing
is scheduled for Feb. 17; the East German, the next day.

Costner, Revolutionary

Kevin Costner is to star for Orion Pictures in a film about the life of Michael
Collins (1890-1922), the Irish revolutionary leader who led the battle for
independence from British rule that resulted in the founding of the Irish Free
State before he was assassinated by Sinn Fein irregulars. Filming is to begin in
September.

A Retrospective

A retrospective devoted to Merchant Ivory Productions is to begin next Friday at
the Angelika Film Center and run through March 2. Between start and finish, 15
films are to be shown, beginning with ''Shakespeare Wallah'' and including
''Maurice,'' ''The Europeans,'' ''A Room With a View'' and ''The Bostonians.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              250 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 9, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Berkeley Journal;
Art Contest Resurrects Memories Of 1964

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: BERKELEY, Calif., Feb. 8


In 1964 at the University of California at Berkeley, a police car was pressed
into service as a podium after hundreds of students, blocking the arrest of a
civil rights organizer, trapped it on a campus plaza. Leaders of the newly
formed Free Speech Movement climbed atop the dented car, demanding the right to
set up campaign tables on campus.

Twenty-six years later, an artist's tribute to the Free Speech Movement would
place a full-size ceramic police car in the plaza. The car ''can easily take
graffiti, posters and physical usage,'' the artist said, adding that it would
''inspire future generations to question authority and defend their rights.''

The proposal was one of 275 entries in a nationwide contest to commission a work
of art to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the Free Speech Movement, four
months of student protest against a ban on campus political activities,
including fund raising and recruiting. The movement eventually forced university
officials to change the rules, leading to years of vigorous antiwar and civil
rights demonstrations at Berkeley.

The art contest, organized by four faculty members without official approval,
has underscored a lingering divisiveness at Berkeley over the Free Speech
Movement and has touched off a debate over whether events described as anarchy
by Edmund G. (Pat) Brown, the Governor at the time, warrant a celebration now.

It has also generated a variety of artistic salutes to the First Amendment and
student activism, salutes for placing in Sproul Plaza, the brick-lined commons
where the Free Speech Movement was born.

The five finalists, chosen last weekend by a jury of artists and art critics,
include a simple yellow soapbox, to be imbedded in the plaza, and a big display
board, called a ''Hyperboard,'' to be hung from the Student Union Building. The
board could be ''a kind of electronic cafe,'' its artist says. The board, to be
hooked to computers from around the world and open to anyone, could flash
''writings by local kids, anonymous poetry and daily news.''

Another finalist, described as ''strongly conceptual'' by the jurors, is a
6-inch column of earth and air to be classified, through an act of Congress, as
an autonomous nation. Its small size, the designer says, prevents anyone from
entering it and completely leaving the United States.

Two other finalists propose renovating the floor of Sproul Plaza, one with
chrome-filled cracks and the other with varigated bricks in a wavy pattern. Both
would use inscribed quotations.

The winner is to be selected in March, after a month of collecting written
comments from the public. The organizers of the project, who have the backing of
more than 100 faculty members, the student government and the Mayor of Berkeley,
have raised one-fourth of their goal of $120,000. Of this amount, $70,000 would
go to the winning artist, and the rest would be used to pay for the contest's
expenses.

But the university's highest official, Chancellor Ira Michael Heyman, cast
uncertainty on the process when he announced last month that he had ''personal
misgivings'' about the project and predicted that the winning artist would have
trouble getting approval from the necessary committees to install the work.

In a letter to the contest organizers, the chancellor questioned the idea of
celebrating an event ''viewed by many in the community with negative or mixed
emotions.''

The Free Speech Movement ''was not in 1964, or in the campus community today, a
universally shared value,'' he continued. ''For many, perhaps most, 1964 was a
time of agony.''

But Peter Selz, a professor emeritus of art history who is the principal
organizer of the contest, said the contest sought to honor the concepts of
dissent, student activism and freedom of speech.

''We don't want a monument,'' he said. ''We don't want to look into the past.

''This really focuses on the celebration of an idea.''

Professor Selz also said a good piece of art could help heal relations on the
campus and noted that the Vietnam War Memorial ''dealt with the most divisive
event in this country since the Civil War.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              251 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 11, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 874 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     2   WEB OF DREAMS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           origin of a family curse.

 2     3   MUTATION, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $4.95.) A physician's
           attempt to create a superior child results in a prodigy
           that turns into a terror.

 3     2   THE FORTUNE, by Michael Korda. (Warner, $5.95.) A young
           woman's ill-fated romance.

 4    16   THE DRAWING OF THE THREE, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL,
           $5.95.) Continuing the horror story begun in "The
           Gunslinger."

 5     5   TOO DEEP FOR TEARS, by Kathryn Lynn Davis. (Pocket,
           $5.50.) Three half-sisters from far-flung parts of the
           British Empire become acquainted as their father dies in
           Scotland.

 6     2   BILLY BATHGATE, by E. L. Doctorow (Harper Paperbacks,
           $5.95.) The life of a 1930's gangster.

 7*    2   NIGHT STORM, by Catherine Coulter. (Avon, $4.95.) A woman
           tries to save her family's fortune.

 8    13   THE SANDS OF TIME, by Sydney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.95.) A
           struggle between the Spanish Army and Basque separatists.

 9     1   BLACK SAND, by William J. Caunitz. (Bantam, $5.95.) A New
           York cop joins a Greek policeman in a deadly pursuit of a
           stolen ancient artifact.

10*    2   RULES OF ENGAGEMENT, by Peter Morwood. (Pocket, $4.50.) A
           new 'Star Trek' novel.

11     5   THE LONG DARK TEA-TIME OF THE SOUL, by Douglas Adams.
           (Pocket, $4.95.) The detective of "The Hitchhiker's Guide
           to the Galaxy" pursues the meaning of an explosion at an
           airport.

12     8   A THIEF OF TIME, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks,
           $4.95) Tracking down a missing archeologist, missing
           artifacts and a murderer.

13     2   FRENCH KISS, by Eric V. Lustbader. (Fawcett, $5.95.) The
           disappearance of a mystical dagger.

14     6   SPY HOOK, by Len Deighton. (Ballantine, $5.95.) The agent
           Bernard Samson on the trail of a financial scam within
           the British Secret Service.

15    31   THE GUNSLINGER, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL, $4.95.)
           Volume One of "The Dark Tower," about a young man's
           pursuit of an evil force.

16*   10   CAT'S EYE, by Margaret Atwood. (Bantam, $5.95.) A woman's
           visit to her native Toronto leads her to reflect on the
           changes time has wrought.

17*   52   THE SHELL SEEKERS, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dell, $4.95.)
           Three generations of a family.

18*    1   FOR LOVE OF EVIL, by Piers Anthony. (Avon, $4.95.) A man
           who is the incarnation of evil engages in a deadly duel
           with God.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    12   ALL I REALLY NEEDED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by
           Robert Fulghum (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.

 2     9   NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK, by Grace Catalano (Bantam, $3.50.)
           The lives and predilections of the five members of a
           teen-age singing group.

 3     2   IN BROAD DAYLIGHT, by Harry N. MacLean. (Dell, $4.95.) The
           1981 killing of a man on Main Street in Skidmore, Mo.,
           witnessed by 45 people, a case that was never brought to
           court.

 4    329  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck (Touchstone/S
           & S, $10.95.) Spiritual inspiration.

 5    89   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel.
           (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The importance of a
           patient's mind and emotions.

 6     3   BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, by Ron Kovic. (Pocket, $4.50.)
           The autobiography of a former Marine, gravely wounded
           physically in Vietnam, spiritually on his return home.

 7    29   BLIND FAITH, by Joe McGinness. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.) The
           family tragedy that came to light after the 1984 murder of
           a Toms River, N.J. woman.

 8    70   THE POWER OF MYTH, by Joseph Campbell with Bill Moyers.
           (Doubleday, $19.95.) The ways in which mythology
           illuminates the stages of life.

 9*   12   THE BLOODING, by Joseph Varnbaugh. (Bantam, $5.95.) The
           murder of two girls in an English village is solved
           through genetic clues.

10    41   CHAOS, by James Gleick. (Penguin, $8.95.) A science that
           sees order in what appears erratic.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     1   50 SIMPLE THINGS YOU CAN DO TO SAVE THE EARTH, by The
           Earthworks Group. (Earthworks Press, $4.95.) Ways to
           combat environmental problems.

 2    76   CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie. (Hazelden/Harper
           & Row, $8.95.) Solving your own problems while caring for
           other people's afflictions.

 3    10   THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1990. (World Almanac,
           $6.95.) The latest edition of a reference work.

 4     9   RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $6.95.) The 1990
           edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.

 5     2   HEALING THE SHAME THAT BINDS YOU, by John Bradshaw.
           (Health Communications, $9.95.) How to recover from
           addictions, compulsions and other self-destructive forces.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              252 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE GOD THAT FAILED;
Renouncing the Revolution's Holy Writ

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1042 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


LENINISM, a doctrine with roots in the 19th century that was a scourge of most
of the 20th, has finally begun to lose its hold over the Soviet Union on the eve
of the 21st.

As a moment in history, the decision on Wednesday by the Communist Party
leadership to surrender its monopoly on power caused more excitement elsewhere
around the world than it did outside the Kremlin. There were no crowds like
those in East Berlin, Prague and Bucharest that late last year cheered and
forced the downfall of Communism in Eastern Europe.

Marxism-Leninism, Stalin's extension of the doctrine of coercive control by a
single Communist Party over all aspects of political and economic life, may be
discredited now in the country that produced it, but it is not dead in the
world. In China, where neither Marxism-Leninism nor the willingness of the
Communist leaders to call in the army to keep them in power has disappeared, a
Leninist party still rules more than a billion people. In Cuba, Fidel Castro
shows no sign of giving up the old creed.

But the willingness in Moscow to surrender the core belief that made this
country what it is - the idea, lately enshrined in the Soviet Constitution, that
only the Communist Party can run the nation - reflects the uncertainty of a
historic turning point.

Thus, for the first time, the Communist Party that Lenin created has expressed
doubt about whether his turn-of-the-century doctrines, preserved like their
creator as venerated relics from another age, offer guidance about how to
proceed to the next one.

The genius of Lenin was to take Marx's 19th-century philosophy and use it like a
machine gun on the essentially 19th-century social and economic conditions of
early 20th-century Russia. Never a proletarian, Lenin created a party of the
proletariat, organized with the discipline and rigor of a military machine on
the principle of ''democratic centralism.'' When party leaders gave orders, they
had to be obeyed without question by the rank and file. After easily wresting
power from the leaders of the befuddled Russian bourgeoisie, who had forced the
czar to abdicate, this ''party of a new type'' set out to build socialism in the
name of the international proletariat, which Lenin expected would soon follow
the Russian example.

But success abroad was elusive. And at home, after Lenin's death in 1924,
Leninism was manipulated brilliantly and ruthlessly by Stalin, under whom the
term Marxism-Leninism first appeared, to legitimize what he had made of the
original creed. And that was something quite different. Stalin eliminated
challenges to his leadership, and then claimed for himself the authority to
speak for the working class. Those thought to stand in his way died by the
millions in purges and prison camps. Historians may agree with Aleksandr
Solzhenitsyn that the seed of all this lay in Lenin's own actions. But soon a
vast, swollen party bureaucracy, some of it hidden in secrecy, took control over
everything from the size of the army to who could go to school to how many
needles and spools of thread the country should produce.

This system, and the outcome of World War II, made the Soviet Union into one of
the two global superpowers and allowed it to impose Marxism-Leninism on the
eastern half of Europe. But it was also exacting a price: it kept the Soviet
Union firmly anchored in a 19th-century economic and social view of the world, a
world that in the last few decades rapidly began to leave it behind.

At the time of its birth, Leninism had seemed like a bold idea, one that struck
terror into the hearts of presidents and potentates all over Europe. Later, as
the great empires crumbled, Leninism seemed like the answer to the dreams of
many revolutionaries in the exploited and oppressed regions of Asia and Africa.
Mao Zedong and Ho Chi Minh rode the wave to ''liberate'' China and the northern
part of Vietnam. Castro and Che Guevara were only a few of the others who were
inspired by its promises, or appropriated them.

Curing an Illness

But was all that really Leninism, and is it really all over now? ''Lenin lives,
Lenin will live,'' the slogans around Moscow still say, and Soviet Communists
seeking to find a way to cure their party of the illness that has all but
destroyed its offspring in Eastern Europe still look to Lenin for guidance as
they prepare for a party congress that will meet in June to ratify last week's
Central Committee decisions. As a speaker at last week's plenum said: ''We must
have the courage to look the bitter truth straight in the eyes. The party is
ill. The party is feverish. The whole question is this: Can the organism be
fully cured and immunized in a few weeks, or is the illness chronic and
dangerous?''

Lenin spoke those words in January 1921, and in the following year suffered the
first of a series of strokes that ended his political life and allowed Stalin to
succeed him as party leader. Stalin ended the New Economic Policy, the so-called
NEP period, that relaxed the rigors of war Communism, and soon made clear his
view that socialism would not be safe in the Soviet Union until the capitalist
encirclement was destroyed. ''It followed from this that the victory of the
proletarian revolution in the capitalist countries was a matter of vital concern
to the working people of the U.S.S.R.,'' Stalin later wrote in the ''Short
Course'' on party history usually attributed to him.

That kind of thinking set the stage for decades of confrontation. Now Mikhail S.
Gorbachev's ''new thinking'' seeks to find a way out of confrontation abroad and
economic stagnation at home. At least one Communist here wonders if that is not
the kind of thing Lenin would have done, long before today, if he had not died
so early, at the age of 53.

''Lenin always brilliantly understood what the command of the hour was, and what
should be done,'' said Anatoly S. Pankov, a party member and journalist who is
running as a candidate in local legislative elections next month.

''The Lenin of the war, of the Revolution, was different from the Lenin who
started NEP,'' he added. ''Lenin always grasped reality.''

That may be entirely so. But to grasp the reality of the 1990's, the party he
created had to give up Leninism.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Moscow, 1957: Preparing for the 40th anniversary of the
Revolution (Magnum/Elliott Erwitt)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              253 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Why, in the Movies, the South Rises Again

BYLINE: by ROSELLEN BROWN; Rosellen Brown's most recent novel is ''Civil Wars.''

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2571 words


Is it a coincidence that the stores these days are full of ''country''-inspired
furniture (heavy maple tables, dry sinks and roll-top desks), that menus are
heavy on grits and blackened everything, and that all the successful young
lawyers seem to be wearing suspenders?

Could there be a relationship between such down-home nostalgia and the sweet
harmonica that accompanies Daryl Hannah through the calendar-pretty small-town
Louisiana neighborhood of ''Steel Magnolias'' in search of salvation at Truvy's
beauty shop? Or the dewy morning, warm as a Turner painting, across which the
camera in ''Blaze'' pans until it comes upon Lolita Davidovich as the
still-innocent Blaze Starr at home in a West Virginia holler? Honest to Hoagy
Carmichael, she sits picking ''Mockingbird Hill'' on her guitar while her mama
shells peas on the porch under the sun-dappled trees, and judging by the way the
rest of the film works to keep her pure of heart even after she's conquered the
evil city, it's only half meant as a joke.

Joke or not, it surely is no coincidence. We've got our troubles these days out
here on our side of the screen - we've got drugs, legions sleeping on subway
gratings, and crime and racial mischief and, if public politics weren't murky
enough, sexual politics in threatening disarray, old assumptions under siege,
power in endless dispute. But on the screen there is a place removed, always and
still blessedly Other, where old history seems quite sufficiently current, every
house has flowers on the porch, and the people talk cuter than the rest of us.

If its current screen popularity is any measure, the South, especially the
historic South, like a giant tourist attraction, continues to represent -
however unrealistically - what the poet Allen Tate many years ago called ''Uncle
Sam's other province.'' ''Steel Magnolias,'' for example, opened Thanksgiving
weekend and has been among the top box-office draws ever since, joined during
the Christmas season by ''Driving Miss Daisy.'' Both are expected to glean
several Oscar nominations.

From ''The Color Purple'' to ''Crimes of the Heart,'' ''The Miss Firecracker
Contest'' and ''The Trip to Bountiful'' through ''Mississippi Burning'' to
''Steel Magnolias,'' ''Driving Miss Daisy,'' ''Blaze'' and ''Glory,'' the recent
inundation by films set south of the Mason-Dixon line is only the latest
faux-naive manifestation of an old fascination.

But the mood has changed. Back in the 50's and 60's, Hollywood held in an odd
embrace Tennessee Williams's vision of sexual tawdriness and familial
suffocation. Moviegoers were shamelessly bewitched by the hothouse secrets of
Blanche and Stanley's New Orleans and Big Daddy's covert lusts, by Eli Wallach
in ''Baby Doll,'' even as they were served up in the mumble-and-glower style of
New York's Actors Studio.

And when Peter Fonda in ''Easy Rider'' rode across the wide horizon and into the
gunsights of some horrific Southern locals, our outrage was assured: those nasty
rednecks, the ones who galloped around in sheets way back in ''Birth of a
Nation,'' had just gone and shown their colors again. If the South was Other in
these films, it wore a more sordid, not a more innocent, face than ours.

But in the intervening years the rest of the country seems to have come up with
enough of its own corruption - what we want now is coziness, love of family,
neighbors who know each other. It's no surprise that we would turn to this
geographically identifiable territory that seems, as we all tumble together in
the relentless blender of American culture, to have kept its own texture and
flavor more than most.

Stereotypes On the Veranda

''Crimes of he Heart,'' the 1986 film of Beth Henley's play, was the perfect
exemplar. Filmed in and around a house as realistic as a Hallmark card, this is
the kind of movie in which the bullet fired by a woman who's trying to kill her
husband hurts about as much as the pop of a cartoon gun. It's Southern Gothic
gone lovable.

The sisters in ''Crimes of the Heart'' are classic steel magnolias, a little
daffy in their unwillingness to imagine consequences, so unattuned to politics
that they might not know who was President if you were crazy enough to ask them.
They are outspoken at all costs - they are the reason A. J. Liebling, in his
biography of Earl Long, many-time Governor of Louisiana, suggests that the famed
book that analyzes ''The Mind of the South'' ought to be renamed ''The Mouth of
the South.'' In the end, blood thicker than the lemonade the murderous wife
offers her gunned-down husband, they huddle for security and support each other
without the useless assistance of no 'count men.

''Steel Magnolias'' is this season's entry in the loony-irreverent category. It
is the perfect joining of two genres long popular in regional theater: the
small-town play like ''Greater Tuna,'' whose lunacy is based on the intimate
knowledge of one's neighbors, and a variation on Southern grotesque, the
sometimes lurid sentimentality that Dolly Parton as Truvy here calls ''laughter
through tears.''

The ingredients are boldly (perhaps outrageously) mixed in Robert Harling's
play-turned-movie. Take Annelle (Ms. Hannah), an ugly duckling abandoned by a
petty-criminal husband, who with the help of a beauty salonful of ministering
angels goes through many moltings of stereotype, including tacky-glamorous, to
bloom finally in the arms of Jesus. By the end of the movie, she's spending more
time on her knees than doing comb-outs. Half of Shirley MacLaine's
outrageousness as Ouiser consists of the sheer tireless familiarity of her
40-year bad mood.

And so on - each character makes terrific sport for gossip, lovable because her
every foible is known, its genesis (usually in the form of an impossible man, or
the absence of one) is understood and can be anticipated and accommodated. If
these women know how to support one another in their recurrent hours of need,
it's because they've had plenty of practice. There's not an ounce of urban
anonymity in Chinquapin, La.

Last season brought us a harsher but no less unrealistic historical fantasy.
''Mississippi Burning'' did a fine job of showing a new generation the enormity
of the problem of unbridled racist violence - the kind that we assumed only
happened in the South, certainly not, say, in Boston. But by neglecting the
vigor of the black-inspired and led civil rights movement and by creating from
whole cloth a heroic F.B.I. presence, it improvised a solution that its authors
presumably thought was the only one that would go down in moviegoing America.

The current Southern fantasies are equally distant and equally reassuring. If
the real New South is more accurately represented by the urban yuppie
lawyer-husband in ''Sex, Lies and Videotape'' or by the confusions of the
characters populating ''In Country,'' whose lives are lived at the ragged edge
where Kentucky farmland meets shopping mall and fast-food joint, then the only
way to go in search of the South as Another Country is backwards.

'Daisy' Drives Through The Past, Gently

What a relief to return to the days when the South felt like its own easygoing,
slightly quaint, heat-hushed kingdom. Morgan Freeman, for example, as Hoke,
drives Jessica Tandy's Miss Daisy through the streets of Atlanta beginning in
the late 1940's, when life was a lot simpler and more polite than it is today.

The movie version of Alfred Uhry's play ''Driving Miss Daisy'' is, of course,
not meant to be about such abstractions as civil rights or bigotry; you can
almost hear the sighs of relief go up as audiences realize that for a few hours
they will not be called upon to be more than mildly angry on anyone's behalf.
Insofar as it acknowledges the presence of bigotry - the impacted, unconscious,
merely habitual kind, as if that were less hurtful - it supplies the sweet
exception that softens the pervasive ugliness of segregation, servanthood and
the shuffling of decent men in search of a livelihood.

The charm of ''Miss Daisy'' challenges no one; it goes down easy as Key lime
pie. The movie turns out to be about friendship, about dignity and aging, but it
plays teasingly, almost always by indirection, with the very unlikeliness of the
nearly forbidden alliance of two humans of different colors breaking through to
each other's deeper needs. If the change of status of blacks in the last 30
years can be seen as the new Civil War, then we are back in antebellum times,
before the politics of black assertiveness disrupted peaceful Georgia kitchens.

Miss Daisy is a better Miss than most (perhaps, we are gently prodded to
believe, because she is Jewish and thus marginal herself, though not so marginal
as not to be rich, as Hoke well understands). Still, neither Hoke nor Idella,
the other wise black servant in the kitchen, played with an unillusioned
gruffness just this side of bitterness by Esther Rolle, would ever overtly
question the status quo.

Paradoxically the movie hints (but would never say) that although we follow Hoke
and Miss Daisy up to 1973, had their friendship begun in the mid-60's in a time
of racial turmoil, let alone today, this individual triumph of affection over
status could never have taken place. When a man like Hoke stops being
ingratiating (and flawless in every detail of his performance of duty), such
friendships are doomed. At one point, Hoke insists to Miss Daisy, who is
routinely abusing him from the back seat, that he is a man, not just the back of
a neck. But she is being rude and he means this personally; it is certainly not
an assertion of his troublesome black manhood.

We see in the rear-view mirror a stern, pursed-lipped Daisy and her driver
looking tolerant, amused and superior under his chauffeur's cap. In most
Southern movies it is the women, addled but vigorous, who are clearly in charge.
Daisy's supposed (as opposed to her real) superiority is assured by her
whiteness. But Hoke has the assistance of her age and her generous dash of
foolish stubbornness, plus a dignity equal to hers, to help him fight her to a
draw. Still, it will be more than a generation before a Hoke dare dream of
anything but covert power couched in the obsequious tones of Amos 'n' Andy.

'Blaze': One Up On Scarlett

''Blaze,'' the story of the real-life stripper who purportedly sweetened the
last days of Governor Earl Long of Louisiana, supplies another, more familiar
kind of history: the saga of a legend, or perhaps two legends, having it out.

Earl's older brother, Huey Long, preceded him in the governorship, outdid him in
outrageousness, and ended up shot in his tracks. Liebling, in ''The Earl of
Louisiana,'' says of Huey, ''It is hard to put yourself across as a buffoon and
a potential martyr at the same time.'' Add to that Earl's role of randy lover
and you have an order so tall that even Paul Newman in geriatric drag can't
quite fill it.

But it's instructive to measure ''Blaze'' against the 1949 film about a
fictionalized Huey, ''All the King's Men.'' Huey (Broderick Crawford's Willie
Stark) is a flavorless, accentless character from no identifiable place. Though
the Robert Penn Warren novel from which it was made speaks Deep South from its
first page, the film Willie is a generic Political Man, an idealist corrupted by
power and perhaps by excessive zeal, but not a man made by his unique time and
place.

Not so Newman's Earl Long. By the time we meet him well along in his career, the
scratchy-voiced hellion is calling himself one of the best friends Louisiana
ever had, along with Jesus Christ and Sears Roebuck. Real names are named,
hallowed institutions come in for some salty scolding and his woman is that
guitar-picking country gal transformed by a little harsh experience into a
take-charge type in pasties, as solicitous as a wife but sexier than most. We
even hear a minute or two of the real Earl's recorded voice as the credits roll
by. He seems to be assuring us that this is fiction grafted onto authentic fact.

Whether this is Blaze's story or Earl Long's is sometimes hard to make out.
(Adapted from her autobiography, it leaves out such incidentals as the fact that
the Governor had a wife through this whole courtship.) Though she tells Earl
''in a certain way we're both in show business,'' the camera also manages to
make the stripper only slightly less virginal-looking than Laurey in her
''Oklahoma'' dirndl, about to spin out into a dance.

True to required form, it's her cleverness and pluck that arouse the dying old
man's last ambition and seduce him into running for office one last time to
restore his name after the viper-tongued connivery of his opponents has sent him
to a state mental hospital and trounced him at the polls.

Women's Lib, crudely envisioned, is alive and well, if not exactly advertised as
such, in Scarlett's backyard. A hundred and fifty years later she's the one who
frankly doesn't give a damn.

'Glory': Distance From Difficult Truths

Finally, the best and most complex of the current Southern historical films,
''Glory,'' is not really a Southern film at all. Only insofar as we can call the
Civil War a local event can this stirring tribute to the singleness of purpose
of the all-black 54th Massachusetts Regiment be considered regional. The
intentions of its creators are clearly to teach us a little-known lesson about
the agonizing ironies of a national policy so benighted that these men had to
fight a ferocious battle of their own just to be allowed to be killed and
mutilated like other Americans.

''Glory'' makes use of the tranquilizing power of the historical film, which
works by rendering old events intimate at the same time that it distances us
from their most difficult truths. In many of the multiplex cinemas around the
United States, ''Glory'' is playing on a screen right alongside ''Born on the
Fourth of July.'' For a nation desperately bereft, after Vietnam, of a shred of
the simple heroism of war, there is something profoundly restorative in the
valor of the black troops futilely assaulting their adversaries with a kind of
joyous pride. Again, in spite of its complacency and blindness, still innocent
of all it has not yet had to confront, the past caught at such a noble moment
seems a changeless haven from contemporary complexity and disillusionment.

To their credit, the makers of ''Glory'' have included at least one
uncompromising character, Denzel Washington's Trip, the ex-slave whose prophetic
bitterness envisions the enduring intransigence of white America. And the troops
and officers who mock the resolve of these men to fight with skill and courage
are, of course, not meant to be seen solely as men of their own time; for better
or worse, it isn't hard to feel superior to such bigots. For those who choose to
feel sincerely embittered on behalf of the regiment and of their
still-frustrated descendants, the film is amply painful.

But it is certainly possible to see in ''Glory'' the last bright flare of
unassailable heroism. In 1863, at Fort Wagner, manhood was asserted by the way a
soldier shouldered the flag or handled a bayonet. And the villains were not only
the enemy, they were also fellow Northerners who unaccountably sneered at
honest, hopeful, humble blacks like these (who will never ask to live on our
block or marry our daughters), safe on the other side of the great divide of
time and space.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Southern Comfort
Dolly Parton and Daryl Hannah in ''Steel Magnolias,'' above left; Jessica Tandy
and Morgan Freeman in ''Driving Miss Daisy,'' and, at left, Paul Newman and
Lolita Davidovich in ''Blaze''-Audiences can feel reassured in the easygoing,
slightly quaint, heat-hushed kingdom. (Sidney Baldwin) (pg. 1); Denzel
Washington as Trip in ''Glory''-the past caught at a noble moment 9pg. 22)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              254 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 13, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
How a Grim Black Area Got That Way

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 578 words


The ''Throwaway People'' of tonight's ''Frontline'' live in Shaw, a beat-up,
beaten-down district of Washington where the facts of life are grimly familiar:
unemployment, single-parent welfare families, school dropouts, drugs and crime.
This hour, on Channel 13 at 9 P.M., offers a close-up of sites off the Beltway.

The reporter and narrator, Roger Wilkins, looks back on the way Shaw, once a
vibrant black community, got this way. Families from the rural South, who came
north between 1910 and 1970, found opportunity; low-skilled jobs paid enough for
a man to support his wife and children. They lived in ghettos, but life had
stability.

The civil rights movement changed that. The most successful won the opportunity
to leave; a quarter of a million moved from Washington to its suburbs between
1970 and 1980.

''America creamed off the luckiest and best-trained blacks and assimilated them
to some degree,'' says Mr. Wilkins. ''And Shaw was left with the less
fortunate.''

The neighborhood guides are Ernest Peterson, who owns a messenger service that
employs 16 young black men, and Frank Wright, who works at a settlement house.
They are gloomily realistic about Shaw's thousands of ill-educated, unskilled
young men, a third of whom are destined to be arrested on drug charges by the
time they are 30 years old.

''They're true businessmen,'' Mr. Peterson says of the boys of Shaw. ''Just got
a terrible product.'' What they don't have, he adds, is the sort of hero that
luckier American boys have: the father who comes home after work, has dinner
with them and asks what they've been up to.

Mr. Wilkins, who teaches history at George Mason University in Virginia and is
associated with the Institute for Policy Studies, a left-leaning think tank in
Washington, faults Washington for diverting war-on-poverty money to Vietnam and
is particularly tough on the Reagan Administration for ''crippling'' training
and job programs. Taken together with the coming of crack in the mid-1980's, he
says, Administration indifference has proved devastating.

More conservative voices have blamed the wrong sort of Government assistance in
pre-Reagan years for some inner-city ills. All parties might agree with Mr.
Wilkins's message: ''The crisis of black poor men is now the central destructive
fact of community life.''

''Throwaway People'' also goes into prisons, where so many of Shaw's youths wind
up. (''The black man,'' says an inmate, ''is on the 10 most endangered species
list.'') And it goes into nurseries, where babies, some born crack-addicted, are
beginning a life of misery. Mr. Wilkins reports there are only three such
nurseries in Washington, helping 30 children, about 2 percent of those in need.

The facts are not new, but they cannot be reported too often, and this hour does
it in a quietly forceful way. It ends by noting yet a further assault on what
remains of a community in Shaw: gentrification. Mr. Peterson predicts, ''And
when enough people come in here who don't look like the people who are here now,
you'll see the schools improve, you'll see public safety improve, the garbage
will get picked up, the streets will get swept.'' The losers, presumably, will
be swept into another neighborhood, perhaps a little further from the White
House.

NO LIGHT, NO END, NO TUNNEL - THROWAWAY PEOPLE, a documentary produced by Sherry
Jones for ''Frontline''; David Fanning, executive producer; Judy Woodruff,
anchor. On PBS at 9 P.M.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              255 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

'Miss Daisy' Leads On the Oscars Ballot In a Year of the Small

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1668 words

DATELINE: BEVERLY HILLS, Calif., Feb. 14


''Driving Miss Daisy'' came away today with nine Oscar nominations, the largest
number for any film this year. The low-budget movie adaptation of Alfred Uhry's
Pulitzer Prize-winning stage play about changing social mores in the post-World
War II South was made by the Zanuck Company, a fledgling production concern.

Its 80-year-old star, Jessica Tandy, was nominated as best actress for her
performance as the aging widow Daisy Werthan; if she wins it will be her first
Academy Award in a long, distinguished career that has focused mainly on stage
roles.

Her co-star, Morgan Freeman, who played her chauffeur, Hoke Colburn, was
nominated for best actor. The film also received nominations for Dan Aykroyd as
supporting actor, for Mr. Uhry for the adapted screenplay and for art direction,
costume design, film editing and makeup.

Surprises of Varying Sizes

The Academy Award nominations this year were wide open, dominated by none of the
blockbuster films that have crowded out the small, offbeat movies of recent
years. There were many surprises, some large, some small.

For example, Michael Moore's acclaimed documentary, ''Roger and Me,'' about
General Motors' plant closings in Flint, Mich., drew no nominations, possibly
because of a barrage of recent criticism that Mr. Moore changed the sequences of
events. Conversely, ''My Left Foot,'' a British import about Christy Brown, a
man with cerebral palsy who wrote and painted with his left foot, came up with
five nominations, including best picture, best actor for Daniel Day-Lewis and
best director for Jim Sheridan.

Marlon Brando startled some people with a nomination for best supporting actor
for his cameo role as a South African lawyer in ''A Dry White Season.'' Yet one
of the year's most talked-about movies, ''Sex, Lies and Videotape,'' received
only one nomination, for best screenplay for its director, Steven Soderbergh.

Nor did ''Steel Magnolias'' do well despite its box-office success; it received
one nomination, for Julia Roberts as best supporting actress. And Spike Lee was
nominated for the original screenplay for his highly acclaimed ''Do the Right
Thing,'' not as best director.

The release of the nominations is something of ritual for Hollywood. Crowds of
press agents and reporters turn up at the Wilshire Boulevard headquarters of the
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences at 5:30 in the morning, just in time
for the announcement to make the morning news shows on the East Coast.

Announcements on March 26

Simultaneously, the reporters stampede to the phones to tell the world. The
5,000 members of the film academy vote for the winners, which will be announced
on March 26 in a televised ceremony that the organizers expect to reach an
international audience of hundreds of millions.

Many people expected ''Born on the Fourth of July'' to do well, and it did. The
searing story of the passage of Ron Kovic, a paraplegic Vietnam veteran, into
political radicalism garnered eight nominations, for picture, actor for Tom
Cruise, director for Oliver Stone, adapted screenplay for Mr. Stone and Mr.
Kovic, cinematography, film editing, original score and sound.

Also cited for best picture were two sleepers, ''Dead Poets Society,'' a film
about a maverick teacher in a boys' school, and ''Field of Dreams,'' a fantasy
about baseball.

For awards that primarily celebrate American film, foreigners did exceptionally
well this year. There was ''My Left Foot,'' and Isabelle Adjani, the French
actress, captured a chance at best actress for her role in ''Camille Claudel,''
the story of the tormented sculptor who was apprentice to and mistress of
Auguste Rodin.

Kenneth Branagh of Britain was nominated for both best actor and director in
''Henry V,'' the low-budget adaptation of the Shakespeare play. Should he win as
director, he would be one of only five directors who have ever won for a first
feature film.

And everyone seemed amazed, and many pleased, to see Pauline Collins nominated
for best actress for her role in ''Shirley Valentine,'' the film based on the
one-woman play about an unhappy English housewife whose life changes when she
takes a trip to Greece; the film had done little box-office business.

'The System Works'

Gilbert Cates said all of this foreign influence was a wonderful surprise. Mr.
Cates is the director who is producing this year's Academy Award show, to be
seen on ABC. ''They are small films, made outside the United States, films that
the smart money did not think would make a big gross,'' he said. ''In a strange
way, it shows the system works.''

Indeed, the nominations showed again that commercial box-office success does not
always gain respect in Hollywood. One of last year's biggest popular hits,
''Batman,'' received a single nomination, for art direction.

In addition to Oliver Stone, the academy's directors' branch, as expected,
nominated Woody Allen for ''Crimes and Misdemeanors'' and Peter Weir for ''Dead
Poets Society.'' But Mr. Branagh for ''Henry V'' and Mr. Sheridan for ''My Left
Foot'' were more difficult to predict.

The 'Daisy' Story

The emergence of ''Miss Daisy'' as the leader is something of a Hollywood
Cinderella story. It is a slow-paced comedy-drama about a widow who is forced to
hire a driver after she has an accident with her 1948 Packard.

The 25-year friendship between Miss Daisy and the chauffeur is used to reflect
the subtle racial and social changes that overcame the South between 1948 and
1973. The widow is Jewish, the chauffeur black.

The original play, which is still running in New York, opened in 1985 at the
Studio Theater, Off Broadway on 42d Street, under the auspices of Playwrights
Horizons. It won a Pulitzer Prize and was bought by a Hollywood production
company started by a husband and wife, Richard D. Zanuck and Lili Fini Zanuck.
It was their first production.

Mr. Freeman also has a prominent role in ''Glory,'' a story about a black
regiment in the Civil War. ''Glory'' received five nominations, including
supporting actor for Denzel Washington.

And the Oscar Nominees Are . . .

PICTURE: ''Born on the Fourth of July''
''Dead Poets Society''
''Driving Miss Daisy''
''Field of Dreams''
''My Left Foot''

ACTOR: Kenneth Branagh, ''Henry V''
Tom Cruise, ''Born on the Fourth of July''
Daniel Day-Lewis, ''My Left Foot''
Morgan Freeman, ''Driving Miss Daisy''
Robin Williams, ''Dead Poets Society''

ACTRESS: Isabelle Adjani, ''Camille Claudel''
Pauline Collins, ''Shirley Valentine''
Jessica Lange, ''Music Box''
Michelle Pfeiffer, ''The Fabulous Baker Boys''
Jessica Tandy, ''Driving Miss Daisy''

SUPPORTING ACTOR: Danny Aiello, ''Do the Right Thing''
Dan Aykroyd, ''Driving Miss Daisy''
Marlon Brando, ''A Dry White Season''
Martin Landau, ''Crimes and Misdemean ors''
Denzel Washington, ''Glory''

SUPPORTING ACTRESS: Brenda Fricker, ''My Left Foot''
Anjelica Huston, ''Enemies, a Love Story''
Lena Olin, ''Enemies, a Love Story''
Julia Roberts, ''Steel Magnolias''
Dianne Wiest, ''Parenthood''

DIRECTOR: Oliver Stone, ''Born on the Fourth of July''
Woody Allen, ''Crimes and Misdemean ors''
Peter Weir, ''Dead Poets Society''
Kenneth Branagh, ''Henry V''
Jim Sheridan, ''My Left Foot''

ORIGINAL SCREENPLAY: Woody Allen, ''Crimes and Misdemeanors''
Tom Schulman, ''Dead Poets Society''
Spike Lee, ''Do the Right Thing''
Steven Soderbergh, ''Sex, Lies and Videotape''
Nora Ephron, ''When Harry Met Sally . . .''

ADAPTED SCREENPLAY: Oliver Stone and Ron Kovic, ''Born on the Fourth of July''
Alfred Uhry, ''Driving Miss Daisy''
Roger L. Simon and Paul Mazursky, ''Enemies, a Love Story''
Phil Alden Robinson, ''Field of Dreams''
Jim Sheridan and Shane Connaughton, ''My Left Foot''

FOREIGN FILM: ''Camille Claudel,'' France
''Cinema Paradiso,'' Italy
''Jesus of Montreal,'' Canada
''Santiago, the Story of His New Life,'' Puerto Rico
''Waltzing Regitze,'' Denmark

ART DIRECTION: ''The Abyss''
''The Adventures of Baron Munchausen''
''Batman''
''Driving Miss Daisy''
''Glory''

CINEMATOGRAPHY: ''The Abyss''
''Blaze''
''Born on the Fourth of July''
''The Fabulous Baker Boys''
''Glory''

COSTUME DESIGN: ''The Adventures of Baron Munchausen''
''Driving Miss Daisy''
''Harlem Nights''
''Henry V''
''Valmont''

DOCUMENTARY FEATURE: ''Adam Clayton Powell''
''Common Threads: Stories From the Quilt''
''Crack U.S.A.: Country Under Siege'' ''For All Mankind''
''Super Chief: The Life and Legacy of Earl Warren''

DOCUMENTARY SHORT SUBJECT: ''Fine Food, Fine Pastries, Open 6 to 9''
''The Johnstown Flood''
''Yad Vashem: Preserving the Past to Insure the Future''

FILM EDITING: ''The Bear''
''Born on the Fourth of July''
''Driving Miss Daisy''
''The Fabulous Baker Boys''
''Glory''

MAKEUP: ''The Adventures of Baron Munchausen''
''Dad''
''Driving Miss Daisy''
ORIGINAL SCORE: John Williams, ''Born on the Fourth of July''
David Grusin, ''The Fabulous Baker Boys''
James Horner, ''Field of Dreams''
John Williams, ''Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade''
Alan Menken, ''The Little Mermaid''

ORIGINAL SONG: ''After All'' from ''Chances Are''
''The Girl Who Used to Be Me'' from ''Shirley Valentine''
''I Love to See You Smile'' from ''Parenthood''
''Kiss the Girl'' from ''The Little Mermaid''
''Under the Sea'' from ''The Little Mermaid''

ANIMATED SHORT FILM: ''Balance''
''Cow''
''The Hill Farm''

LIVE ACTION SHORT FILM: ''Amazon Diary''
''The Child Eater''
''Work Experience''

SOUND: ''The Abyss''
''Black Rain''
''Born on the Fourth of July''
''Glory''
''Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade''

SOUND EFFECTS EDITING: ''Black Rain''
''Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade''
''Lethal Weapon 2''

VISUAL EFFECTS: ''The Abyss''
''The Adventures of Baron Munchausen''
''Back to the Future, Part II''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Clockwise from above, performers in the films nominated for
best picture: Robin Williams in ''Dead Poets Society,'' Jessica Tandy in
''Driving Miss Daisy,'' Tom Cruise in ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' Daniel
Day-Lewis in ''My Left Foot'' and Kevin Costner in ''Field of Dreams.'' (

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              256 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Crash of Indian Airlines Plane Kills 89

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 771 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Feb. 14


A new Indian Airlines plane, flying for less than two months in this country,
crashed today in the southern city of Bangalore, killing at least 89 people.
About 50 survivors were reported taken to hospitals from the fiery crash site.

The plane, an Airbus 320 delivered to the national domestic carrier on Dec. 24,
1989, was carrying 135 passengers, 4 additional passengers who were infants not
assigned seats and a crew of 7, an airline spokesman here said. It was about to
land after a flight from Bombay when it undershot the runway in Bangalore by
about 1,000 feet just after noon, under clear skies. It hit an empty reservoir.

When the final death toll is known, the crash could be nearly as bad as an
Indian Airlines accident on Oct. 19, 1988, in the western city of Ahmadabad that
killed 133 people. That crash, involving an old Boeing 737, was apparently
caused by pilot error. On the same day, a small Fokker Friendship plane
belonging to the feeder airline Vayudoot also crashed in the Indian northeast,
killing 34 people.

The accident today came as India's domestic airline, which has a virtual
monopoly on internal flights, is under intense criticism and strain, unable to
meet the needs of at least 30,000 travelers daily. #18-Hour Plane Days Planes
often fly 18-hour days with multiple take-offs and landings. Delays and
cancellations, along with the worst cabin service in Asia outside China and
Vietnam, have become legendary. Strikes, walkouts and the occasional sitdown
protest by enraged passengers have added to the airline's problems.

In 1988, when the first of the Airbus 320's, built by a European consortium,
were about to be delivered to India, pilots at Indian Airlines threatened to
refuse to fly them, saying the sophisticated planes could not be properly
maintained in India.

Engineers later went on strike demanding to be sent to France to be trained to
look after the planes, whose operations Indians describe as ''fly by wire.''

Nineeteen of the planes were purchased in 1986, and additional orders were made
later. As they began to enter Indian Airlines service, they encountered peculiar
local conditions: dust, severe monsoon rains and flocks of vultures that live on
illegal trash dumps and slums that have encroached on airport lands.

Issue of Advanced Technology

The Airbus 320, the plane that crashed during the Paris air show in June 1988,
has such advanced computer technology that Indian aviation experts questioned
whether it would deprive pilots of the power of quick response in an emergency.

Capt. S. S. Gopchujakar, the pilot of today's flight, IC 605, was reported to be
one of the airline's most experienced. A survivor told an Indian news agency
reporter in Bangalore tonight that the quick reaction of the crew in opening
aircraft doors immediately after the crash saved the lives of many passengers.

But this survivor, Hem Chand, who was identified as a bank officer, said it
appeared that the pilot had misjudged the landing. Both the pilot and copilot
were killed.

India has seen a series of bizarre accidents over the last several years,
including one in which pilots forgot to lower the plane's wheels and another in
which the plane hit a wandering bull crossing the runway. Crews have flown on
the authorization of unqualified examiners. Passengers have sacked airline
offices or commandeered planes.

Delays Are Long

Indian airports have outdated equipment, forcing long delays and unannounced
rerouting in fog or heavy rain. Ground staff members are often careless. Hardly
anyone traveling in India is without stories of near-disaster in the skies or
unbelievable management on the ground.

On a flight in October from New Delhi to Goa, an aircraft was more than an hour
late taking off because someone had parked another plane too close behind it,
and to start the engines of the first aircraft would have destroyed the second,
the pilot said. Passengers had to wait for a change of shift when someone would
be authorized to move the other aircraft.

India's growing consumer movement, led by the Common Cause organization, and the
new Minister of Civil Aviation, Arif Mohammed Khan, have tried to force the
airline to improve services. Mr. Khan recently announced that cabin crews, whose
sloppy service is notorious, would be retrained by a team from the Scandinavian
Airlines System.

Mr. Khan, who took office in December, has tried to introduce a telephone
information on flight schedules. But when he made an unannounced check at Delhi
airport one morning, he found most of the numbers out of order within days of
their installation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The wreckage of the Indian Airlines plane that crashed yesterday
in Bangalore, killing at least 89 people. (Agence France-Presse); map of India
showing location of Bangalore (The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              257 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Revenge Is Seen As the Motive In a Bomb Death

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 928 words


Suffolk County investigators are focusing on revenge as the probable motive for
the car-bombing death of a highly decorated county narcotics detective outside
his home in North Patchogue. L.I., on Thursday.

The noon-time blast that fatally wounded 41-year-old Detective Dennis Wustenhoff
and tore through the front of the white Cadillac he used in undercover work
stunned both his quiet residential area and the police force on which he had
served for nearly 20 years.

Yesterday, as Federal explosives experts began searching through the car with
lasers, operating on the belief that a sophisticated bomb had been attached to
the Cadillac's undercarriage and directed upward, county investigators pored
over files of Detective Wustenhoff's cases, looking for names of defendants or
others who might have wanted to strike back at the detective.

The Suffolk County Police Commissioner, Daniel P. Guido, said the ''leading
theory'' was an act of revenge. He said the detective had ''put a lot of bad
people away who would have reason to take great pains to do away with him.''

But the Commissioner, at a news conference at police headquarters in Yaphank,
said a review of Detective Wustenhoff's recent work turned up no cases ''of the
seriousness to warrant this kind of response.''

'Extremely Active'

The focus, he said, was now on ''an in-depth analysis'' of the detective's
closed cases. As a secondary matter, the Commissioner said, the police were
examining Detective Wustenhoff's private life.

The detective, who joined the county police force in 1970, was a narcotics
detective for 17 years. Although there was no indication of the number of cases
he had handled over the years, he was described by Mr. Guido as having been
''extremely active.''

Federal drug officials said Detective Wustenhoff worked late last year with
Federal and local agents in a Suffolk case involving the sale of perhaps five
kilograms of cocaine. One defendant was convicted, the officials said.

Drug Paraphernalia

A spokesman for James Catterson, the Suffolk County District Attorney, declined
to identify that or any other case on which Detective Wustenhoff had worked.
''Whether the defendant is still incarcerated or out, we're investigating prior
cases for potential suspects,'' said the spokesman, Peter Pitsiokos.

Also in 1989, Detective Wustenhoff testified at an evidentiary hearing on Long
Island in a Federal case in which supposed drug paraphernalia worth millions of
dollars was seized from a Happauge distributing company. But Federal prosecutors
said the detective had been involved in that case, which is still pending, only
as ''a sort of expert witness'' to identify the paraphernalia.

Detective Wustenhoff was off duty at the time of the car bombing.

The detective, police officials said, finished work and went home around 2 A.M.
Wednesday, parking the Cadillac in front of the modest shingle home on Maple
Avenue where he lived with his wife of 16 years, Francine, and three children.

The police declined to say whether Detective Wustenhoff was known to have left
the house again before 11:55 A.M. on Thursday, though at some point he was
apparently seen jogging in the neighborhood.

Died at Hospital

When the detective got into the car -he was not scheduled for work - the
explosion occurred with such force that it blasted out the car windows, tore off
the roof, and, for blocks around, shattered the peace of the neighborhood. The
police said Detective Wustenhoff's wife, whom they understood was a teacher, was
at work at the time and the children - ages 10, 12 and 14 -were in school.

Detective Wustenhoff was conscious when removed from the car by an emergency
medical team. But he died around 3 P.M. at University Hospital in Stony Brook,
where he had been transferred by helicopter.

Dr. Zigmund Menschell, the county's Chief Medical Examiner, performed an autopsy
Thursday night. He said in an interview yesterday that the findings were the
expected - ''multiple blast injuries, homicide'' - and that he did not see
anything to suggest the type of bomb used. ''I'm not an explosives expert,'' he
said.

Mr. Guido said the police had not yet determined how the bomb was detonated, but
he said the least likely method was a ''timing device.'' He said the rigging was
sufficently sophisticated and required enough ''preparation'' that it was
unlikely anyone had followed Detective Wustenhoff home and installed it quickly.

The police declined to say whether neighbors or others had noticed anyone
suspicious near the Cadillac on Wednesday or early Thursday.

Unaware of Any Death Threats

Whatever enemies he might have picked up in his work, Detective Wustenhoff - a
1966 graduate of Uniondale High School who went on to win a Bronze Star in
Vietnam and to become a police officer in 1970 - appears to have been a popular
and much-respected member of his community and the force. He received 21 police
decorations.

The police said they were unaware of any death threats against Detective
Wustenhoff.

''You could say that he was probably the best, a very 'up' kind of guy who could
fit in with any group,'' Mr. Guido said yesterday. ''You have to understand that
he worked at all levels; he was a master at street buying.''

A former partner, Officer Randy Jaret, described Detective Wustenhoff as ''a
cop's cop.'' Others who had worked with or observed him said that while he might
have been ''high strung,'' he was a ''street smart guy'' who had molded himself
perfectly into the life of an undercover officer.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Suffolk County detective questioning motorists yesterday
outside the North Patchogue, L.I., home of Dennis Wustenhoff, a county narcotics
detective who was killed there on Thursday by a car bomb. (NYT/Michael Shavel)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              258 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

2 Public Relations Styles Clash in Battle of Trumps

BYLINE: By SUZANNE DALEY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1337 words


One is a mild-mannered man who once had a client bring a live elephant to the
steps of City Hall, but who has since more often relied on his skills as a
conciliator to build a large public relations firm and a reputation as a man you
need to know in New York City.

The other is a bearded, burly opera-lover who is much more of a one-man show and
known for stepping in in times of crisis, taking on tough and complicated causes
and wrestling them to the ground.

These are the two public relations men representing Donald and Ivana Trump, men
who behind the headlines are now locked in combat so bitter that it includes a
threat from one to sue the other.

The two men, Howard J. Rubenstein, the conciliator, and John Scanlon, the crisis
manager, have both been in the business a long time, moving from producing press
releases and publicity stunts to becoming powerful middlemen guiding their often
highly visible clients - ranging from the likes of Diana Ross and Covenant House
to Philip Morris and the Gucci family -through the tangles of city government
and the journalistic establishment.

Art of a Deal

Yet each has his distinctive style. In Mr. Trump's corner is the smooth-talking
Mr. Rubenstein, who now has more than 140 employees and 300 clients and has
become known not only for image making but for deal making: For instance, he is
widely credited with bringing two of his clients together - Rupert Murdoch and
Peter Kalikow - and keeping them talking long enough to negotiate the sale of
The New York Post.

In Mrs. Trump's corner is Mr. Scanlon, who is good friends with half the city's
press corps, has only a handful of clients at anyone time and is usually called
in when a client is already in deep trouble or unlikely to appear sympathetic.

Mr. Scanlon, who works for Daniel J. Edelman Inc., is probably best known for
his dogged maneuvering on behalf of CBS News after Gen. William C. Westmoreland
sued the network for libel over a documentary called ''The Uncounted Enemy: A
Vietnam Deception.''

'Back in the Game'

At stake, beyond the suit, was CBS's credibility as a news organization. George
Crile, the producer of the program, credits Mr. Scanlon with persuading CBS
management to speak up for itself. Mr. Scanlon also counseled Mr. Crile to go on
the same television shows everytime the author of a book attacking the
documentary appeared. And Mr. Scanlon was noted for appearing in court everyday
to provide journalists with documents that supported the CBS position.

''After John, we had the opportunity to get in the arena,'' Mr. Crile said. ''We
were back in the game.''

The case was eventually settled out of court with both sides claiming victory.

Former Mayor Edward I. Koch, a man who has had plenty of dealings with both men,
said that what you get when you hire Mr. Rubenstein ''is someone who opens doors
for you.''

John Scanlon, Mr. Koch said, ''is the guy who comes in when you have a tough
sell.''

Neither Mr. Scanlon nor Mr. Rubenstein said he was willing to discuss his
strategy in the Trump case but others in their business say that some of the
strategy is evident.

Scanlon Is More Aggressive

Mr. Scanlon, they say, has been more aggressive, trying to get news
organizations to portray Mrs. Trump as an integral part of the Trump business
empire, a tactic apparently intended to disrupt Mr. Trump's business dealings by
creating uncertainty over who is in control.

If the divorce can be made to look like enough of a potential disruption to the
organization, Mr. Trump may then move to settle with his wife quickly and more
generously, regardless of any prenuptial agreement and its legal validity.

Public relations experts say Mr. Trump's camp has been reacting to this ploy by
trying to discredit her business skills.

Such strategies are not what Mr. Rubenstein, 56 years old, made his name on.

He is most noted for his representation of the real-estate industry and for
bringing real estate, business, union and government leaders together over a
variety of enterprises.

He started his business by representing a Brooklyn nursing home. But his father,
Samuel, a reporter for The New York Herald-Tribune, helped him get other
clients, including young Democratic politicians from Brooklyn who would within a
decade made their mark.

Among them was Abraham D. Beame, who when he became Mayor of New York, included
Mr. Rubenstein among his closest advisors. Mr. Rubenstein's business boomed and
he has retained influencial political friendships. At a 30th anniversary party
for his business in 1984, Gov. Mario M. Cuomo referred to Mr. Rubenstein's
''enormous power and influence.''

Mr. Rubenstein declined to discuss his fees. Others in the industry said they
ranged from about $2,000 to $10,000 a month.

Mr. Scanlon, 54, had several false starts before settling in as a public
relations man. The son of a transit worker, Mr. Scanlon taught in a parochial
school, was a textbook salesman and a book editor. He became involved in
politics in the 1960's, working for Eugene McCarthy and then becoming a deputy
commissioner in the Economic Development Administration under Mayor John V.
Lindsay. Later, he briefly served as a press secretary for Felix G. Rohatyn,
before senting up his own public relations firm in 1976.

After a heart attack, Mr. Scanlon went to work for Daniel J. Edelman where he
now charges clients $300 an hour, he said.

Whether Mr. Scanlon or Mr. Rubenstein will be the most successful is unclear.
Some see small victories for Mr. Scanlon already in the way the story has
developed. Although Liz Smith, the gossip columnist for The Daily News, said she
did not need Mr. Scanlon to tell her what to say when she was the first to
announce that the Trumps were divorcing, her story did include a description of
Mrs. Trump as her husband's full-time business partner.

And, other journalists have referred to a collection of excerpts and television
clips showing Mr. Trump praising his wife for her management skills, which Mr.
Scanlon made available.

Almost since the beginning the Donald Trump publicity camp has been reacting to
events. In fact, when the story first broke, a Rubenstein spokesman denied the
couple was separating, refusing to comment on ''idle gossip.''

Within a day quotes attributed to a spokesman for Mr. Trump appeared in many
newspaper articles saying that Mrs. Trump had no decision-making abilities. Also
quoted anonymously were sources comparing Mrs. Trump with Leona Helmsley,
someone who has a reputation for being imperious and difficult.

It is the comparison to Mrs. Helmsley that triggered the threat of a lawsuit
from Mr. Scanlon, who denounced it as libelous.

'The Greatest Carrier of Water'

He has also been quick to point out that Mrs. Helmsley is a client of Mr.
Rubenstein's.

''Howard is the greatest carrier of water on both shoulders since Rebecca at the
well,'' said Mr. Scanlon, who has a penchant for literary and Biblical
allusions.

For his part, Mr. Rubenstein maintains that no one in his organization ever went
so far as to compare Mrs. Trump to Mrs. Helmsley.

In keeping with his reputation as a conciliator, Mr. Rubenstein said he hoped
that the press coverage of the Trumps' marital woes would quiet down and that
the Trumps ''could work things out.''

But some in the public relations field are skeptical of that assertion, pointing
out that Mr. Trump has repeatedly been available for interviews and has
consistently downplayed his wife's role in his business.

From an image-making point of view, some public relations experts said such
attacks on Mrs. Trump have left Mr. Trump, who for years praised his wife's
abilities, looking like a liar.

''The Rubenstein strategy has a real flaw - it's inconsistent,'' said Alan
Metrick, a partner in the public relations firm of David M. Grant & Partners.
''People are going to be saying: Well, Donny, which is it? Were you telling the
truth then or now? That's never a good position to be putting a client in.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              259 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 18, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 867 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction


 1     3   WEB OF DREAMS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           origin of a curse that has haunted a family of orphans in
           five previous novels.

 2     4   MUTATION, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $4.95.) A physician's
           attempt to create a superior child results in a prodigy
           that turns into a terror.

 3     3   THE FORTUNE, by Michael Korda. (Warner, $5.95.) A young
           woman's ill-fated romance with the head of America's
           richest family.

 4     3   BILLY BATHGATE, by E. L. Doctorow (Harper Paperbacks,
           $5.95.) The life of a 1930's gangster.

 5     2   BLACK SAND, by William J. Caunitz. (Bantam, $5.95.) A New
           York cop joins a Greek policeman in a deadly pursuit of a
           stolen ancient artifact.

 6     3   FRENCH KISS, by Eric V. Lustbader. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Three
           people whose lives are menaced by the disappearance of a
           mystical dagger, a Buddhist symbol of mystic power.

 7*   17   THE DRAWING OF THE THREE, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL,
           $5.95.) Continuing the horror story begun in "The
           Gunslinger."

 8     3   RULES OF ENGAGEMENT, by Peter Morwood. (Pocket, $4.50.) A
           new 'Star Trek' novel.

 9     6   TOO DEEP FOR TEARS, by Kathryn Lynn Davis. (Pocket, $5.50.)
           Three half-sisters from far-flung parts of the British
           Empire become acquainted as their father dies in Scotland.

10*    3   NIGHT STORM, by Catherine Coulter. (Avon, $4.95.) A young
           woman's desire to save her family's fortune leads to a
           stormy romance..

11*   14   THE SANDS OF TIME, by Sydney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.95.) A
           struggle between the Spanish Army and Basque separatists.

12     9   A THIEF OF TIME, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks,
           $4.95) Tracking down a missing archeologist, missing
           artifacts and a murderer.

13     2   FOR LOVE OF EVIL, by Piers Anthony. (Avon, $4.95.) A man
           who is the incarnation of evil engages in a deadly duel
           with God.

14     6   THE LONG DARK TEA--TIME OF THE SOUL, by Douglas Adams.
           (Pocket, $4.95.)The detective of "The Hitchhiker's Guide to
           the Galaxy" pursues the meaning of an explosion at an
           airport.

15    53   THE SHELL SEEKERS, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dell, $4.95.) A
           woman and a painting tie together three generations of an
           English family.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    13   ALL I REALLY NEEDED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by
           Robert Fulghum (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.

 2     3   IN BROAD DAYLIGHT, by Harry N. MacLean. (Dell, $4.95.) The
           1981 killing of a man on Main Street in Skidmore, Mo.,
           witnessed by 45 people, a case that was never brought to
           court.

 3     4   BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, by Ron Kovic. (Pocket, $4.50.)
           The autobiography of a former Marine, gravely wounded
           physically in Vietnam, spiritually on his return home.

 4*    1   MURDER IN LITTLE EGYPT, by Darcy O'Brien. (Onyx, $4.95.)
           The Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde life of a physician in an
           Illinois community.

 5    10   NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK, by Grace Catalano (Bantam, $3.50.)
           The lives and predilections of the five members of a
           teen-age singing group.

 6    21   BLIND FAITH, by Joe McGinness. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.) The
           family tragedy that came to light after the 1984 murder of
           a Toms River, N.J. woman.

 7    330  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck (Touchstone/S & S,
           $10.95.) Spiritual inspiration.

 8    90   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel.
           (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The importance of a
           patient's mind and emotions.

 9    71   THE POWER OF MYTH, by Joseph Campbell with Bill Moyers.
           (Doubleday, $19.95.) The ways in which mythology
           illuminates the stages of life.

10*   13   THE BLOODING, by Joseph Varnbaugh. (Bantam, $5.95.) The
           murder of two girls in an English village is solved through
           genetic clues.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     2   50 SIMPLE THINGS YOU CAN DO TO SAVE THE EARTH, by The
           Earthworks Group. (Earthworks Press/Publishers Group West,
           $4.95.) Ways to combat environmental problems.

 2    77   CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie. (Hazelden/Harper &
           Row, $8.95.) Solving your own problems while caring for
           other people's afflictions.

 3     1   J. K. LASSER'S YOUR INCOME TAX 1990. (Lasser Institute,
           $11.95.) Financial planning and tax advice.

 4    10   RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $6.95.) The 1990
           edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.

 5     2   ERNST & YOUNG'S ARTHUR YOUNG TAX GUIDE, 1990, edited by
           Peter W. Bernstein. (Ballantine, $11.95.) Income tax
           advice.

 6*    3   HEALING THE SHAME THAT BINDS YOU, by John Bradshaw. (Health
           Communications, $9.95.) How to recover from addictions and
           compulsions.

These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              260 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEW JERSEY Q & A: TOM MORAN;
Acquiring Art to Show in Public Spaces

BYLINE: By PATRICIA MALARCHER

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 3, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1477 words

DATELINE: TRENTON


TOM MORAN, the visual arts coordinator at the State Council on the Arts,
oversees the implementation of the Arts Inclusion Act, which provides for the
purchase of art for public spaces in state government buildings. Since joining
the council in 1982, he has coordinated more than 50 projects that are
enlivening the plazas, lobbies and grounds of new and renovated structures built
by the state.

A sculptor who has exhibited widely in New Jersey, New York and California and
as far away as Poland, Mr. Moran has lectured on public art throughout the
country. He has taught at Rutgers University, where he earned a Master of Fine
Arts, as well as at Middlesex and Somerset County Colleges and the School of
Visual Arts in New York.

Mr. Moran, 34 years old, previously worked with Dumont Landis, a New Jersey art
consulting firm. In 1987, he was involved in the development of a design arts
program at the Arts Council through a National Endowment for the Arts planning
grant.

Q. Is the Public Building Arts Inclusion Act subject to change with a new state
administration?

A. The law does not mandate that art be put in public spaces. The wording is
that the state ''may'' incorporate art in public buildings. If the powers in
government don't want it, they could, effectively, not have it. It's been the
feeling, though, that the Byrne and Kean administrations have applied the law
successfully.

Q. What is the law's purpose?

A. The intent is to reunite art and architecture, and also to give artists
visibility. The law can give artists the opportunity to do what may be the most
important work in their careers.

Q. How many projects have there been since the law was passed?

A. The total number statewide is 104; $2.5 million worth of those are completed,
$600,000 are under construction and another $1.5 million are awaiting the
selection of artists. We're talking about close to $5 million.

Q. How is the law put into effect?

A. The decision to apply it is made building by building. The state government
comprises different divisions that build their building. Each agency has a
contracting officer - for example, for the Division of Building and
Construction, it's the state architect and the director - who puts in a request
for a building and a construction cost estimate. In addition, a request is made
for the art, which can run up to 1.5 percent of the estimate. Nothing is
sacrificed from the building itself.

Q. Can the public art program be compared to the W.P.A. of the 1930's?

A. In the 30's, the country was struggling out of the Depression; the need to
put food on the table and to function in society was as important to artists as
to everyone else. The W.P.A. was vital to their survival. It's still difficult
for artists to survive but not as desperate. The public art of today serves a
different need. In our highly automated information society, we tend to lose our
personal identities little by little. Artists symbolize the creative spirit.
When you have an artwork in a public space, it becomes a reflection of the
individuality of those who perceive it.

Q. In general, what are the requirements for public art?

A. Any artist who applies for public commissions anywhere has to deal with the
issue of permanency. When we do the specifications for a project, the artists
are told up front that the materials must be permanent. We're looking for
low-maintenance approaches because things get abused from weather, from people
touching them, from graffiti - but we've never had a graffiti problem.

Q. By permanent, do you mean 10, 20, 50 years?

A. Generally, it means 10 to 15 years free of maintenance with sculpture, but
that's naive because bronze must be waxed every year. We have a tolerance level
for what we are willing to take on. All government facilities have maintenance
staffs, but we can't expect them to be experts in caring for art. Certain art
materials are more permanent than others.

Q. Don't you have to work with a great variety of buildings?

A. The state builds just about every type of structure from large office
buildings to small facilities with very specialized purposes. For example, in
Trenton there is the Beneficial Insect Rearing Laboratory, administered by the
Department of Agriculture, where good bugs are raised to eat the bad bugs. It
has public visitation, and school groups go there. We decided that the art
should deal with the function of this facility, so we commissioned a 20-foot
ceramic mural by Beatrice Landolt that depicts the good insects.

Q. How are artists chosen for these projects?

A. There are three types of selection. The first is open competition, where, for
example, we could invite all the painters or all the sculptors in New Jersey.
There would be a prospectus, a request for proposals, a mailing to county or
national art councils. That's very time-consuming and is only used on certain
projects, one of which is the New Jersey Vietnam Veterans Memorial. Anyone who
lived in New Jersey or had a substantial commitment here, such as a job, could
enter. We got 425 proposals from every type of person imaginable -
elementary-school children, veterans of all ages, grandmothers and mothers of
deceased veterans, architects and artists. But that type of program takes 18
months to administer.

The second type is the direct commission to an artist. This is used when we know
what we want.

The third type, which we use most, is the limited competition, where a core
group of finalists are selected and invited to submit proposals.

Q. At what point does the Arts Council get involved?

A. It depends on when the contracting officer approaches us. The earlier the
better. In some cases I'm planning two years in advance, and in some the steel
is already going up, and in some the building is already finished.

Q. What percentage of the commissions has gone to New Jersey artists?

A. I would say between 60 and 75 percent.

Q. Doesn't that speak well for the quality of art being done in New Jersey?

A. I think so. We have a strong sculptural presence in the state. Art schools
such as Mason Gross, Stockton State College, Rutgers-Camden are turning out
young artists who stay here because this is where the world art market is.
People are attracted to New Jersey from all over the country because of the
proximity to the art market. New Jersey has one of the strongest collections of
regional museums in the country and incredible outlets for artists.

Q. How do you determine the success of a project?

A. Judging the work itself is very different from judging a model or
two-dimensional proposal. You judge the success of a project by its scale, the
way it's put together, whether the techniques used were as effective as
proposed.

There are pieces that I think are not successful, but we're talking about a
creative process. The important thing was that the risk was taken. I would say
that the majority of projects have achieved their stated intention, and some
have risen above it.

Q. What sort of documentation follows up a project?

A. We did a catalogue five years ago, and now we plan to do a major catalogue
that documents all the projects up to date and, because they were interesting
ideas, a lot of the maquettes that were not accepted. This will include essays
by people who write about art in public places from an art-history perspective.

Q. Have there been any problems after work was in place?

A. There's a sculpture by Beverly Pepper at the Justice Building, a project
initiated in the spirit of the arts-inclusion legislation before it was passed.
About three years ago a security desk was built right around the piece, negating
it. In this case, the concern for security and the art didn't marry.

Then, there was a sound sculpture for a regional day school. No one foresaw
this, but the sound was disturbing to the emotionally disturbed children, so the
piece was not used and a second piece intended for a similar facility will go
someplace else.

Q. What project most excites you now?

A. We're doing the State House renovation. It's second-oldest statehouse in the
country. We've given artists information on its history and the state and asked
them to consider some of the factors, not to put limitations on their styles but
because we think this project has real historical impact. I'm probably most
excited about that.

Q. Is public art related to the state's environmental needs?

A. We live in the most densely populated state in the country. It's important
that we pay attention to the visual environment that psychologically affects how
we deal with our day-to-day business. We have to surround ourselves with things
we feel positive about. We can learn from the great civilizations of the Far
East and Europe: every monument, every building, every town works toward a
livable environment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo; Tom Moran, who oversees purchase of art for public buildings, by
model of George Segal's ''Constructors.'' Original is outside Commerce
Department's new building in Trenton (NYT/William E. Sauro)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              261 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Trial Shows a Strong Valdez Crew With Some Flaws

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 32, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: ANCHORAGE, Feb. 17


When the Exxon Valdez left the port of Valdez one night last March, her crew
included a timid helmsman, a second mate who may have had mental problems and a
captain with a history of drinking, according to testimony at the trial here of
Capt. Joseph J. Hazelwood.

As the prosecution ended the second week of its presentation Friday and prepared
to complete its case, a picture emerged of a cohesive navigational team
strengthened by educated and experienced officers, but weakened by a troubled
few.

Questions were raised in court about the skipper's drinking, his knowledge of
the crew and his judgment in leaving the bridge in the hands of others for a
maneuver that required care.

Did he know that Robert Kagan, the man at the helm, was known to have problems
with steering? Did he rely too much on the veteran third mate, Gregory T.
Cousins? And, once the ship was grounded on Bligh Reef, did Captain Hazelwood
try a dangerous maneuver in an effort to rock her off?

Jury Will Scrutinize Actions

The jury in Anchorage Superior Court must decide whether any of Captain
Hazelwood's actions constituted the reckless behavior with which he is charged.

Captain Hazelwood, a 43-year-old veteran seaman from Huntington, L.I., and the
only person prosecuted as a result of the nation's worst oil spill, is charged
with second-degree criminal mischief, a felony, and three misdemeanors: reckless
endangerment, the negligent discharge of oil, and operating a vessel while
intoxicated.

The grounding of the 987-foot Exxon Valdez resulted in a spill of nearly 11
million gallons of crude oil into Prince William Sound, killing birds, fish and
other wildlife and coating hundreds of miles of rocky coast.

As crew members took the witness stand this week, their struggle to remain loyal
to the captain while testifying against him was evident.

Mr. Cousins, who was in charge of the ship when she ran aground, blamed the
helmsman, Mr. Kagan, for failing to follow Mr. Cousins's orders to steer hard
a-starboard at a point where, the witness said, doing so would have allowed the
tanker to miss the reef. ''I think Mr. Kagan didn't really understand the
command,'' Mr. Cousins said.

Crewman Says Captain Was Calm

The third mate credited Captain Hazelwood with being calm and clearly in command
after the accident.

Mr. Kagan conceded under oath that he had become timid about steering because he
had once been accused of ''chasing the compass'' - oversteering a ship.

James Kunkel, the chief mate, a graduate of the Merchant Marine Academy at Kings
Point, L.I., and a 20-year veteran of the seas, suggested that the skipper knew
or should have known that Mr. Kagan was the weak link.

''I mentioned I'd sailed with him before and I thought he needed extra
supervision and extra practice in steering,'' Mr. Kunkel said, recalling a
conversation he said he had once had with Captain Hazelwood. He said Mr. Kagan
had been unable to perform even the simplest tasks without being watched. Once,
he said that he assigned Mr. Kagan to paint a bulkhead but that he knew he would
have to keep an eye on him to make sure he used the right paint and brush.

Yet, Mr. Kunkel credited Captain Hazelwood with keeping everyone calm and said
the captain had made prudent decisions in the wake of the grounding.

'Keep an Eye on Him'

The second mate, Lloyd LeCain, said he had assessed Mr. Kagan's capabilities as
slightly below normal. ''I talked to Captain Hazelwood about it,'' he testified.
''He knew he had a problem. He told me to keep an eye on him when he was
steering.''

Captain Hazelwood's defense team immediately attacked Mr. LeCain's credibility,
telling Judge Karl Johnstone that Mr. LeCain was on leave from Exxon for mental
problems. They asked that the jury be told that Mr. LeCain had boasted of being
a submarine commander in the Falklands, a Green Beret in Vietnam and a figure in
the Iran-contra affair.

Dick Madson, a defense lawyer, said that when Captain Hazelwood left his ship
after the accident, Mr. LeCain approached the captain, declared that he was
''Ninja-trained'' and said he had two cyanide pills in case the skipper needed
to commit suicide.

Judge Johnstone ruled that the jury should not hear these allegations because
they were confusing and constituted ''character evidence'' not permitted under
Alaska law.

For Captain Hazelwood, who has a history of drunken-driving convictions and is
accused of being intoxicated on the night of the accident, one contention made
by every crew member was important: They said the captain seemed sober and in
command after the accident. They also said they had not smelled alcohol on his
breath.

Blood and urine tests taken about 10 hours after the accident detected alcohol
in his system, and a Coast Guard investigator has said that he had smelled
liquor on Captain Hazelwood's breath.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              262 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1529 words



INTERNATIONAL/A2-9



Japan's Liberal Democratic Party under Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu held onto
its parliamentary majority in elections, according to early returns. But the
Japan Socialist Party scored significant gains.          Page A1



In Japanese business life, an unusually and unlikely radical           D1



Protesters in Bucharest seized the headquarters of the Romanian provisional
government, demanding the ouster of President Ion Iliescu.          A1



Conspiracy theorists in Azerbaijan believe the Kremlin manufactured the ethnic
unrest in Baku leading to the imposition of an emergency decree. There is no
proof, but circumstantial evidence abounds.          A8



Mood of gloom sweeps Russians about the process of change           A8



Ethnic groups in Chicago aiding Eastern European homelands           A9



Vaclav Havel says the aim of his trip to U.S. is to learn           A9



Obscure U.S. agency pressing foreign economic policy           D1



The South African Communist Party has been battered by the collapse of Communism
in Eastern Europe. While its authority seemed persuasive under repression, it
has been forced under freedom to jettison bits of its ideology.          A1



Ethiopian prisoners of war held by two Eritrean rebel groups now exceed 55,000.
Neither group will give the Red Cross access to them. But the prisoners, many of
them teen-agers, are thought to be in generally good condition.          A6



Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland's second largest city,
Londonderry, are joining hands in a determined effort to revive areas devasted
by the strife. But the alliance, as many realize, is fragile.          A1



India grounds 14 Airbus aircraft after fatal crash           D1



Police battle protesters in Nepal; four killed           A3



Largest anti-Sandinista rally ever is held in Managua           A3



The Prime Minister of Cambodia, Hun Sen, plans to urge Prince Sihanouk, leader
of one of three guerrilla groups fighting Phnom Penh, to break with the Khmer
Rouge and return to Cambodia as President.           A3



China considerably eases economic controls           D1



Shaoshan Journal: The Bethlehem of Maoism is revived           A4



NATIONAL/A10-14



Rules and regulators shackle doctors with paperwork and intrusive scrutiny, they
say. And they are taking their toll on morale. As one Boston doctor said, ''I've
become irrelevant.''          A1



Some point to Massachusetts as extreme of regulation           A13



A university retirement community in Ames, Iowa, is one of a new breed of
retirement centers linked to universities and intended to appeal primarily to
retired faculty and alumni.          A1



The risk of radiation in airliners as a cause of cancer deaths is 17 times
greater than was reported last week in a Government study, Department of
Transportation officials said.          A11



Nuclear weapons industry records compiled by the Energy Department are
mismanaged, the National Archives says. Flaws in record-keeping could undermine
efforts to make the nuclear weapons industry safer and more accountable.
           A12



Washington Talk: The war on drugs was seemingly embracing economic tactics at
the drug conference in Colombia last week, but President Bush is still looking
for ways to use the American military.           A10



Moving California's primary from June to March will transform the Presidential
campaign. But already there are warnings of unintended consequences.
A11



Overnight mail delivery will end for millions of Americans, the Postal Service
announced, saying it was trading speed for reliability. Express Mail, the
premium overnight service, will not be affected.          A10



Soviets tour Kennedy Space Center on eve of shuttle launch           A11



Dark clouds hang over paradise in Vero Beach, Fla.           A14



Court overturns conviction of female Marine in sex case           A10



Four are killed in motel explosion in Maryland           A10



In Maine, a move to rewrite guidelines on rafting           A12



Government buys supposedly faulty weather radar system           A14



Vermont suspends some jury trials            A14



Couple is acquitted in death on son in religious healing           A14



''America's Funniest Home Videos'' is the first hit for network television this
season. The ABC program, the hottest show on television, has the potential of
becoming the most profitable show as well.          D1



Merger of giant utilities in New England worries industry           D1



REGIONAL/B1-4



New York State's financial problems appear to be growing increasingly dire. Many
analysts and politicians are warning that drastic steps are needed to arrest the
state's slide toward fiscal crisis.          A1



Have New Yorkers become chicken? Amid a sense that the city has become more
menacing, New Yorkers' combativeness has given way to caution. Abdication, after
all, is safer than confrontation.          B1



A contributor to Senator D'Amato had a planned route for a Iroquois Gas Company
pipeline moved off his empty field and into nearby homeowners' front yards after
complaining to the Senator.          B1



John Gotti's celebrity status has been enhanced after being acquitted for the
third time in four years. The cheers and even fireworks disturb law-enforcement
officials.          B1



A pledge to stop using welfare hotels to house homeless families may not be
fulfilled by June as promised, New York City officials say.          B1



The New Jersey State Police is under pressure to submit to independent oversight
of its operations after complaints that it aims investigations at minorities and
homosexuals.          B3



Jesse Jackson urges blacks to learn from Mandela's life           B3



Second suspect arrested in killing of veteran in S.I.           B3



BUSINESS DIGEST          D1



SportsMonday



Autos: Cope takes Daytona 500           C3



Baseball: Amid impasse, a look to the future           C2



 Mets seek workout, find frustration           C2



Basketball: Missouri eyes No. 1 again           C4



 Suns' Chambers gets 56           C9



Boxing: Douglas shuns Tyson for Holyfield bout           C1



Column: Berkow on N.F.L. and college athletes           C3



Golf: Trevino wins again           C7



Hockey: Impossible Dream plus one decade           C1



 Islanders lose 3d in row           C1



 Weinrich fills void for Devils           C4



 Lake Placid triumph opened doors to N.H.L.           C5



 Islander recalls watching gold-medal moment           C5



Horse Racing: Wunderkin wins           C9



Track and Field: O'Sullivan seeks old form           C3



Obituaries          A18



Erik Rhodes, actor

Arts/Entertainment



News anchors' network-switching has been profitable, but not without adverse
consequences. Diane Sawyer and Connie Chung in particular left positions as
highly regarded newscasters for programs that have been ratings failures.
          C11



George S. Kaufman revived           C11



Art in Embassies program           C11



Music: Delta blues           C15



 Musica Sacra plays Brubeck           C15



 Muir String Quartet           C16



 A journey with sound           C16



Dance: Joseph Holmes troupe           C16



 Warsaw Ballet's ''Giselle''            C16



Word and Image: Larry McMurtry's ''Montana''           C18



 A. N. Wilson's ''C. S. Lewis''           C18



Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed



Editorials           A16


 Startling spring of 1990
 Bidding for the best, poorest
 Washington, de-debunked
 Crimes of hate

Letters           A16



Tom Wicker: Force 6 on the Coast           A17



William Safire: Castro's last stand           A17



Roger Guenveur Smith: The rap on Frederick Douglass           A17



Michael Krepon: 'Open skies' -money in the bank           A17



Toan Truong: Hollywood's Vietnam, not mine           A17


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SUMMARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              263 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Crimes of Hate

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 333 words


Add Mr. and Mrs. Wilfred Phillip and James Zappalorti to the list of bias-crime
victims in New York. The Phillips, a black couple, recently bought a house in a
predominantly white Brooklyn neighborhood. A week later, the house burned in
what investigators say was a case of racially motivated arson. Mr. Zappalorti, a
Staten Island resident, was killed last month, allegedly because he was gay.

Such incidents are lamentable. No less lamentable is the failure of New York's
Legislature to address the hate behind these crimes.

In the three years following the racial assaults in Howard Beach, Governor Cuomo
and the State Assembly have supported bills that would allow prosecutors to
upgrade the severity of the charge in bias-related crimes - crimes involving an
assailant who seemed to be motivated by racial, religious, ethnic or sexual
bigotry.

But each year, the State Senate has balked. Some of the senators resist
extending protection to homosexuals. Others, however, question the whole idea of
making bias crimes into a special category.

These are outdated concerns. Attacks against homosexuals, or those believed to
be, may be growing faster than other bias-related crimes. Mr. Zappalorti, an
emotionally disturbed Vietnam veteran, was allegedly killed by two men after
they taunted and harassed him, calling him ''queer'' and ''faggot.'' Though not
deadly, the hate directed against Mr. and Mrs. Phillip was equally heinous.

Such crimes threaten the tolerance required to sustain a heterogeneous society.
That's why legislation passed recently by the U.S. Senate authorizing the
Justice Department to compile national statistics on hate crimes is welcome.
Society has a right to declare that crimes motivated by bigotry deserve special
notice and punishment.

Some politicians in Albany understand that. Governor Cuomo is soon expected to
introduce a revised, strengthened version of the legislation passed earlier by
the Assembly. It's time for the Senate to join the struggle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITOR

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              264 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Korean's Novel Is Anti-War But Not Anti-American

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 801 words



Silver Stallion
A Novel of Korea
By Ahn Junghyo
Translated by the author. 269 pages. Soho Press. $19.95.

As this Korean War novel opens, the great American General Megado (as the
Koreans pronounce MacArthur) has just landed his troops at Inchon. It is 1950,
five years after the defeat of Japan in World War II. Among the townspeople,
unpleasant memories of the Japanese Army's occupation of Korea still linger. Now
a new United Nations army, made up mainly of American soldiers, has arrived and
established its tanks and tents near villages within the defensive perimeters.
For the first time, war comes to the mountain village of Kumsan, and its small
world will never be the same.

What makes ''Silver Stallion'' sound authentic is that Ahn Junghyo, a Korean
novelist and journalist, tells his story from the perspective of the villagers.
They are not concerned about the larger aims of the war. As long as they are let
alone, they do not seem disturbed by the fact that the South Koreans are trying
to stop the North Koreans from imposing a Communist government on the whole
country. They certainly are not aware that they are minor players in the cold
war. These farmers are interested in their family traditions, their crops and
their unchanged way of life.

Enter American soldiers, shadowy figures with long noses, heavy boots and
clothing, cans of rich food and bottles of beer. They smile at the children,
toss them chocolate, seduce the peasants with their goods and money. After dark,
when in bivouac and not fighting, some of these American soldiers break into
houses and rape the women. Mr. Ahn reports such incidents in a straightforward
way, almost without comment, as if to show that such terrible things happen in
small countries like Korea when they are invaded - whether by Mongols, Chinese,
Japanese or United Nations forces. He succeeds in writing an antiwar novel that
might have been, but is not, an anti-American novel.

Mr. Ahn breaks his story into three parts: the first is a picture of the village
with its old chieftan, who tries to keep things the way they once were but whose
authority is not recognized by the Americans just as it begins to change under
the pressure of a foreign presence; the second is called ''Texas Town,'' a name
given to the brothel area across the river from Kamsun where the Korean
prostitutes are known as Yankee wives; the final part is about how the war
affects the young children, some of whose mothers work as Yankee wives.

These youngsters are divided into rival gangs. Their hero is not General Megado
but a legendary warrior sent by the mountain spirits to save a Korean king. In
the country's hour of need, the boys imagine that this ancient hero will return,
riding a silver stallion, and liberate the country without, the author suggests
on behalf of his characters, the need for the United Nations forces.

Here, as in some of the magical contemporary literature from Japan, China and
Latin America, Mr. Ahn breaks into a modern crisis to introduce a mythic element
that temporizes and idealizes his story:

''The legend said that long, long ago in the ancient days of the Chosun Dynasty,
savage Mongols invaded the country, burned all the beautiful palaces and
Buddhist temples, killed the valiant Korean warriors in droves in one fierce
battle after another, and destroyed all the great cities as they marched on the
capital city of Songak. At this time of impending crisis for the kingdom, the
benevolent mountain spirits sent a seven-foot-tall general to this world to save
the distressed king and his doomed people.''

This Korean hero was able to save the whole nation with his mighty sword. And so
while fighters and bombers fly overhead, sometimes dropping their explosives on
rice fields, these boys search for the legendary cave where their indomitable
hero dwells. The farmers were told by their parents, generation after
generation, that the cave entrance would open again if the nation faced another
crisis that required the return of its savior, the general on the silver
stallion. He did not return when the Japanese invaded and enslaved the Koreans
for four decades. Perhaps the Korean War is a big enough crisis for the general
to ride out once more to smite the enemy - but the author cooly refrains from
having his young boys say who they think the enemy is during the Korean War.

''Silver Stallion'' is the second novel published here by Mr. Ahn (who
translates his own work from the Korean into slangy English) in 10 months.
''White Badge,'' his previous novel, centered on a Korean division that fought
alongside the Americans in Vietnam and whose veterans suffered from a postwar
syndrome of their own. Both novels are worth reading because they light up a
little-known corner of literary Asia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ahn Junghyo

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              265 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Pop Life

BYLINE: By Stephen Holden

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words


LaVern Baker's Back ''I'm a fighter when it comes to my career,'' the
rhythm-and-blues singer LaVern Baker said last week. ''It was my private life
that has kept me away.''

The 60-year-old singer, whose rough-and-ready voice powered such early
rock-and-roll hits as ''Tweedle Dee,'' ''Jim Dandy'' and ''I Cried a Tear,'' was
speaking by telephone from a nightclub run by the United States at the Subic Bay
Naval Station in the Philippines, where she books shows and performs several
nights a week. She has not lived in the United States since 1970.

But on Friday evening, Miss Baker is to sing at the John F. Kennedy Center for
the Performing Arts in Washington in her first American appearance in more than
25 years, not counting one special performance two years ago at the
40th-anniversary concert of Atlantic Records held in Madison Square Garden. The
concert on Friday is to celebrate the fact that she was among the eight
recipients of of the first Career Achievement Awards given by the
Rhythm-and-Blues Foundation in November.

Begun two years ago by Howell Begle, a Washington lawyer, and largely financed
by Atlantic Records, the foundation honors recording musicians who have made
significant contributions to rhythm-and-blues. An aim of the organization is to
help compensate performers for record royalties they should have received in the
1940's, 50's and 60's, when contracts were not as secure as they are today.
Recipients receive grants of $15,000.

On Saturday evening, Miss Baker and the singer Charles Brown, another recipient
of the award, are to perform at the Lone Star Roadhouse, 240 West 52d Street.

Miss Baker said her self-imposed exile from the United States began 20 years ago
when she traveled to Vietnam to entertain American troops. While she was away,
she said, her husband divorced her and sold her house.

''I decided to stay away until I got cool,'' she said. ''Because I was
steaming.''

While in the Philippines, Miss Baker remarried (she has since divorced) and had
two children, who are now 18 and 12. She also adopted two children, who are 16
and 8.

''It's a nice job, and I like my bosses,'' she said of the club where she works.
''Though I don't make the big money that I used to, I can hold up my head with
pride. You've got so many stars of yesterday who, once they're not stars
anymore, go down the drain or commit suicide.''

Miss Baker said she was thinking about returning to the United States. In 1988,
she made her first recordings since the 1960's when she contributed two songs to
the sound track of ''Shag, the Movie.'' They reveal a voice lower in pitch than
it had been and still in good condition.

Although Miss Baker is best known for singing rhythm-and-blues, she says her
favorite of all her records is a gospel album she made for Atlantic, ''LaVern
Baker Sings Precious Memories.''

''A lot of things have happened in my life that I didn't deserve,'' she said.
''If I'd come back to the states 20 years ago, I probably would have got into
trouble. But now I'm not bitter.''

'Dick Tracy' Tunes

Between leading his eight-member rock band, Oingo Boingo, and composing film
scores (for ''Batman,'' ''Midnight Run,'' ''Beetlejuice'' and ''Pee-wee's Big
Adventure''), Danny Elfman is one of the hardest-working musicians in Los
Angeles.

Just when MCA Records has released Oingo Boingo's newest album, ''Dark at the
End of the Tunnel,'' Mr. Elfman is composing the score for Warren Beatty's film
''Dick Tracy,'' to be released in the summer. The film is expected to spin off
two sound-track albums, as did ''Batman,'' last summer's film based on a comic
strip. One album is to feature the singing of Madonna, the female star of ''Dick
Tracy''; the other is to feature only Mr. Elfman's music.

Oingo Boingo, which Mr. Elfman formed 11 years ago, grew out of a 12-piece
theatrical music-theater ensemble he and his friends put together in the
mid-1970's and called the Mystic Knights of the Oingo Boingo. The nontheatrical
band that emerged from the troupe sang songs strongly influenced by the bouncy
pogo beat of English ska bands like Madness and the Specials.

''From being very frenetic, we've become more diverse,'' the 34-year-old Mr.
Elfman said the other day in a telephone interview from Los Angeles. The best
songs, including ''When the Lights Go Out,'' which imagines civilization
becoming savage during a blackout, have the dark, vivid imagery of comic-book
nightmares. Writing the music for ''Batman'' and ''Dick Tracy,'' calls on the
same ability to relate music to cartoonish fantasy.

Mr. Elfman's film-scoring career began when the director Tim Burton, who had
attended many Oingo Boingo concerts, invited him to try out as the composer for
''Pee-wee's Big Adventure.'' He recalled that he impressed Mr. Burton and the
children's star Pee-wee Herman with his notions of timing the music very closely
to the details in the movie, something that has not been fashionable in scoring
movie comedies.

''Since 'Pee-wee's Big Adventure,' I've had the reputation for being able to
score serious comedies,'' Mr. Elfman said. ''Now I'd liked to try my hand at
horror and adventure.''

'Girl Crazy' Again

A performance of George and Ira Gershwin's 1930 Broadway musical ''Girl Crazy''
is to take place at 8 P.M. on Monday in Alice Tully Hall. The concert, which is
part of Lincoln Center's Composers' Showcase series, is to use Robert Russell
Bennett's original orchestration, which was discovered three years ago in a
trove of Gershwin materials in a warehouse in Secaucus, N.J.

''Girl Crazy,'' whose best known songs are ''Embraceable You,'' ''But Not for
Me'' and ''I Got Rhythm,'' featured Ginger Rogers and Ethel Merman in its
original cast. Monday's concert is to feature William Sharpe, Gweneth Bean
(singing Ethel Merman's role of Frisco Kate), Kim Criswell and Margaret Jane
Wray. Michael Barrett is to lead the 28-piece orchestra and 30-voice chorus.
Tickets are $20, and they are available through CenterCharge (874-6770).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              266 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Underdogs, Favorites and California

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 534 words


Repeatedly, California's Presidential primary has been secondary. The state
contains 1 of every 10 Americans and yet, time after time, the race for one
party's nomination or the other has been settled before the first Tuesday in
June, when California voters cast their primary ballots.

That's likely to change tomorrow. The state's Senate is expected to move the
date to the first Tuesday in March. To do that would strike a blow for
provincial pride, like Iowa insisting that its caucuses start each campaign and
New Hampshire insisting that its primary be the first. But there's reason for
non-Californians also to hope the State Senate votes yes. By voting early,
California could change national politics for the better.

Since the Democratic Party reforms of 1972, the present system has tilted toward
underdogs, candidates who lack fame, fortune and following. The campaign
calendar enables them to rely instead on imagination, energy and endurance,
campaigning retail - handshake by handshake, door by door, month by month. They
can thus hope to win Iowa and New Hampshire, and thus win the national standing
needed to compete as the campaign moves on to the big states.

This system has created two problems, one for California and one for American
politics generally. For California, the problem is irrelevance. It is by far the
largest state. Its delegates could provide one of every four votes needed, for
example, to win the Democratic nomination. But not since 1972 has its primary
counted for much.

For politics generally, the present system tilts too far in favor of underdogs.
Even if they are not well known to the general electorate, candidates can win
nomination with the votes of their party faithful even though they lack the
stature probably needed to win election.

California's date change would affect both problems. As befits the largest
state, its voters would gain a louder voice. And because California is so big
and varied, an early primary would fairly test the breadth of a candidate's
appeal.

The change would thus inevitably re-weight the scale toward nationally known
candidates whose chances looked good enough to attract the essential early
money. It is extremely hard to campaign retail in so vast a state. Campaigning
wholesale means big events and big television. And that means big money.

Even so, an early primary would not rule out an underdog. The little-known
champion of a burning cause could still catch fire, as Senator Eugene McCarthy,
voice of Vietnam protest, did in 1968. By winning Iowa and New Hampshire, such a
candidate might attract enough free media attention to offset a big paid
advertising campaign.

An underdog might even ride the tide of momentum (Big Mo, as George Bush once
called it after winning Iowa in 1980) to victory in California - and beyond. And
an early California primary might have bizarre consequences no one has yet
dreamed of.

These are real risks, but worth running. Californians can't change the clock
that puts them three hours behind the East on Election Day, when America chooses
a President. But they can do something constructive about the calendar that
makes them three months late in choosing the nominees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              267 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Washington Talk;
President and the Press: A Clash of 2 Obsessions

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 726 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 20


To understand the way the President deals with the press, his charm and his
tirades, you must think sports.

Long the butt of jokes and barbs as a clinging Vice President and slashing
Presidential candidate, Mr. Bush came to regard the press corps as his nemesis.
His aides hated to call him in the morning because he would explode at the
latest negative article.

For an intense competitor who hates to lose, the experience was akin to being
humiliated on the tennis court, 6-0, 6-0.

Once he was elected and shed his George the Silent and George the Ripper masks,
however, Mr. Bush began to get a new, improved image. He fell in love with his
performances and nice-guy image at news conferences. The reason he has held an
unprecedented 39 televised news conferences so far, the reason he seems to get a
little giddy sometimes, is that he regards the volleying with reporters as yet
another sport he has mastered. Sort of verbal lawn tennis. So, given how
seriously he takes competition, Mr. Bush's outburst with reporters on the way to
the drug summit in Colombia last week is not so surprising. Anger flashed again,
and using his familiar argot, he declared that he was starting a ''new thing''
with the press because there had been ''overexposure to the thing.''

The President was angry over articles charging that he and his top advisers have
been guilty of a pattern of secrecy and deception. But no one believes Mr. Bush
will be able to keep his distance for long. He is as obsessed with the press,
those close to him say, as he is with secrecy.

If Ronald Reagan read little, Mr. Bush devours everything printed about himself,
including pool reports that reporters prepare for each other, and he often zeros
in on a single word that he doesn't like. Amid the whirlwind drug summit, he
found time to read the wire service report about his press tirade. He fumed to
an Associated Press reporter that he had not been ''fuming,'' as the AP
reported.

He takes his coverage personally, often puzzling over how a reporter who has
been over for dinner or horseshoes could write a critical article. ''But he was
at my house,'' the President will complain, as though a courtesy has been
breached.

Will the President's twin compulsions collide and cause him credibility
problems? On the one hand, he wants to be liked by reporters and he enjoys being
the center of attention. But he also likes to hold things close to the vest.

Just as he relishes leaving the Secret Service boats tangled in lobster lines in
Maine while he zooms ahead in his cigarette boat, so he enjoys playing
hide-and-seek with reporters, trying to leave them tangled in conflicting lines
of information while he zooms ahead to spring a surprise on the world. Nothing
pleases him more, his aides agree, than winning at the game of ''Gotcha!''

On the secret missions to China, the Malta summit, military cuts and a
conference on Germany, he and his aides have elaborately camouflaged their
intent with semantic dodges, pointing the press and public in the wrong
direction so that they could operate in a fog of ambiguity.

Reporters, scarred by experiences with official deception in Vietnam, Watergate
and Iran-contra, are skeptical of Mr. Bush's argument that he must employ
secrecy to run the country ''the way I think is best.''

The President, those close to him say, has an old-fashioned attitude. ''He
thinks that the wartime model of the tame press, who only wrote about the
invasion after you tell them it's O.K., was a great time,'' said one former Bush
adviser. ''He thinks the press must be controlled because otherwise, they will
screw things up.''

Some in the Bush circle worry that John H. Sununu, his chief of staff,
reinforces the President's darker feelings toward reporters, scars left from
years of belittling coverage, and his fixation about leaks.

Stephen Hess, an analyst at the Brookings Institution who specializes in
Presidential press relations, says Mr. Bush is beginning to suffer from ''the
Pinocchio syndrome.''

''Every President begins to tell little white lies and with each statement that
is not quite true, their nose gets a little longer,'' Mr. Hess said. ''When
reporters begin saying on national television 'Look at the President's nose,'
then Bush has a real credibility problem. No President ends up with the same
nose he starts with.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              268 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Police Search Officer's Home In Bomb Death

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1057 words

DATELINE: BETHPAGE, L.I., Feb. 21


Suffolk County investigators, seeking clues in the car-bombing death last week
of a Suffolk narcotics detective, continued searching today at the home of a
Nassau County police officer who has been called a prime suspect.

Officials announced early and often that there would be no arrest today in the
slaying of Detective Dennis Wustenhoff.

Stephen P. Scaring, a lawyer for Robert Horan, the officer identified by
law-enforcement authorities as the suspect, said his client had cooperated with
the Suffolk police. ''He denies any involvement with the crime,'' said Mr.
Scaring, who refused to answer any other questions about Officer Horan or the
case.

But in the two-story, red-shingled house here where Officer Horan lives with his
wife, Nancy, and their two small children, county and Federal forensic experts
sorted through rooms, closets and personal belongings for any evidence that
might link Officer Horan to the car bombing. The search began Tuesday night.

Bomb Fragments Analyzed

Laboratory technicians at the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms in
Washington are analyzing pieces of the bomb that the police said was placed
under the front seat or attached to the car's undercarriage.

A spokesman for the agency, Jack Killorin, refused to disclose the agency's
findings but said that specialists would try to ''reconstruct that vehicle at
two seconds before the blast'' to determine the type of explosive used and how
it was detonated.

As the investigation in Bethpage stepped up, 25 miles away in North Patchogue
officers were taking down the yellow barrier tapes around the area on Maple
Avenue where a bomb detonated last Thursday as Detective Wustenhoff stepped into
his undercover Cadillac Eldorado.

Suffolk detectives questioned Officer Horan on Tuesday near Cooperstown, N.Y.,
where he and his family were vacationing, but his whereabouts today were not
known.

The police originally suspected vengeful drug dealers in the car bombing. But
within hours of the bombing, a Suffolk law-enforcement official said, Detective
Wustenhoff's narcotics squad colleagues also tipped investigators to a motive
involving the detective's personal life. Officer Horan, they said, knew that
Detective Wustenhoff was having an affair with Nancy Horan, a part-time
secretary in the Long Island office of the Federal Drug Enforcement
Administration.

This theory rapidly gained currency over the weekend, when a check of the
detective's cases turned up few leads, the Suffolk official said. Investigators
briefed Detective Wustenhoff's wife, Francine, about the case, the official
said, and she told the police that she was aware of her husband's affair but
believed that it had ended a year ago.

As the investigation widened to include Officer Horan and his wife, Suffolk
officials rallied to the defense of Detective Wustenhoff's reputation. More than
5,000 police officers from as far away as Michigan and Virginia had attended his
funeral on Monday, forming a line of blue that stretched a half mile as a silver
hearse carried the detective's flag-draped coffin from a funeral home in
Patchogue. $100,000 Reward Offered ''If his funeral was to be held tomorrow, we
would turn out in the same numbers, perhaps more so, to demonstrate our respect
for this working-street cop who was so brutally executed, whatever the reason
may be,'' Police Commissioner Daniel P. Guido said at a news conference in
Yaphank.

In addition the Suffolk County Patrolmen's Benevolent Association reaffirmed its
$100,000 reward to anyone with information leading to the arrest of those
responsible for the bombing.

Investigators, as well as neighbors, friends and colleagues of the three people
under scrutiny, tried to make sense of how their lives could so tragically
cross.

Detective Wustenhoff, 41, who won a Bronze Star in the Vietnam War before
joining the Suffolk force in 1970, was remembered as a dedicated narcotics
detective who taught scores of cadets at Suffolk's Police Academy with unusual
energy.

''He wasn't a 9-to-5 cop; he was 9-to-5 and whatever else it took,'' said
Raymond Perini, the former narcotics bureau chief of the Suffolk District
Attorney's Office.

'It Makes You Feel Bad'

Outside Detective Wustenhoff's home, neighbors recalled a warm husband and
father of three children. ''It makes you feel bad,'' said Darlene Trava, 33, a
neighbor. ''But everybody is human.''

Neighbors of the Horans, in a neighborhood of single-family houses in North
Patchogue, said the couple had bought their house on North Windhorst Avenue nine
years ago.

''We'd barbecue, they'd barbecue,'' said Marcia Scharen, who lives next door to
the Horans. ''It's very, very sad.''

John and Constance Corso, next-door neighbors for nine years, said Officer Horan
cared for his two daughters, Erin, 6, and Megan, 2, when Mrs. Horan was at work.

''She is a very quiet, homey girl,'' Mrs. Corso said of Mrs. Horan. ''She's
always around the house when she's not working, sitting by the pool with the
children, reading a book.''

Meeting at Work Reported

It was at work that Mrs. Horan met Detective Wustenhoff, law-enforcement
officials said. As a narcotics officer, the detective had worked on occasion
with the Long Island Drug Enforcement Task Force, made up Federal, state and
county law-enforcement officials. He last worked with the task force on a case
in September, the officials said.

Workers at the agency's Melville office refused to discuss Mrs. Horan or the
case when reached by telephone.

According to the Nassau police, Officer Horan, 43, joined the force in 1967
immediately after graduating from the county police academy. He was promoted
twice, to detective in 1972 and then to sergeant in 1977.

But in 1978 he was demoted to police officer and suspended for 30 days on
administrative charges after a police hearing found that he had used a ''blue
box,'' a device that enables callers to make long-distance calls without paying
for them. No criminal charges were filed.

In 1984 Officer Horan was assigned to the Emergency Services Bureau, a 37-member
police unit that responds to hazardous spills and chemical threats, including
potentially explosive products.

Officer Horan was reassigned yesterday from his the Emergency Services Bureau to
a desk job in the records bureau, the police said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Investigators looking for clues yesterday in the backyard at the
Bethpage, L.I., home of a Nassau County police officer. Law-enforcement
officials say the officer is a prime suspect in the car-bombing death last week
of a Suffolk County detective. (The New York Times/Michael Shavel)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              269 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 23, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
Where Artists Are Fascists And Civilians Are Dissidents

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 908 words


Steve Tesich doesn't care who knows it: he favors humanity over oppression,
individuality over conformity, life over death. These positions are set forth
with clocklike regularity in ''Square One,'' a futuristic fable that has
attracted such gifted theater people as the actors Richard Thomas and Dianne
Wiest, the director Jerry Zaks and the designer Tony Walton to the Second Stage.

A two-character piece staged in a mostly empty space, ''Square One'' is ''Brave
New World'' reduced to dimensions that would allow it to be performed by any and
all casts of ''Love Letters.'' Mr. Thomas is Adam, a ''state artist third
class'' and apparatchik in an unnamed bureaucratic society where he is a regular
vocalist on television's wildly popular ''Patriotic Variety Hour.'' Ms. Wiest is
Dianne, a daffy free-thinker whom he woos and weds. It is not a happy union.
Adam subscribes unblinkingly to a system that confines the elderly to internment
centers, refuses to concede a difference between right and wrong, and doles out
freedom like meager gruel. Dianne refuses to ignore the unacknowledged suffering
around her and decides to take a courageous stand of ''noncompliance'' against
the state that produces it. Which side are you on?  There is much time to
wrestle with one's conscience as ''Square One'' waltzes through its secondhand
absurdist jokes. The author of colloquial American comedies like ''Division
Street'' and the film ''Breaking Away,'' Mr. Tesich does not seem comfortable
with spaced-out dating scenes and an Albee marriage (complete with symbolic
children). His funniest material, all in the second act and usually given to Ms.
Wiest as digressionary stand-up shtick, could just as easily have appeared in
other Tesich plays as in ''Square One'': a riff about melodramatic movie music,
an updated parable about Jesus Christ's return to earth, a parody of the cliches
in political punditry.

The one challenging idea within the knee-jerk portentousness of ''Square One'' -
the notion that artists can be a society's fascists and ordinary civilians its
dissidents - is not seriously explored. Clearly Mr. Tesich wants to make a
point, and by no means a frivolous one, about the deadening, opportunistic mass
culture that exists in the West, where art is more likely to ''intimidate life''
than imitate it. At a time when totalitarian governments are falling elsewhere,
Mr. Tesich perhaps wants self-satisfied Americans to see that television and its
many tentacles can strangle freedom, morality and feeling surreptitiously as the
heavy-handed state of ''Square One'' does by force. But by setting this
provocative issue within the confines of an arch, vague nowhere land, Mr. Tesich
diffuses its urgency, never threatening to hit his audience where it actually
lives.

If anything, ''Square One'' lets the audience off the hook entirely by allowing
it always to feel superior to Adam, an intellectual thug and narcissist whose
idea of helping the disadvantaged is to sing them a Pollyannaish ditty. Smug
laughter was also a byproduct of another recent (and much better) Tesich play,
''The Speed of Darkness,'' seen at the Goodman Theater in Chicago last year. In
that sometimes searing reckoning with the Vietnam War, the author frequently
presented an all-American family as subhuman, again allowing one to leave the
theater blaming other people for national woes whose eradication may require
self-examination, not finger-pointing.

Mr. Zaks, as always, directs with animation, and ''Square One'' keeps spinning
about visually while standing in place in other respects. The most dramatic
moment is achieved by the lighting designer Paul Gallo as he delicately wraps
Mr. Thomas in incriminating, forlorn shadows at that instant when Adam refuses
to reach out to the needy, grief-stricken Dianne. This silent, fleeting tableau
depicting Adam's pitiful terror of intimacy is also the apex of Mr. Thomas's
performance. There is not much this fine actor can do with a chirpy automaton
who is as smarmy as a game-show host and is the butt of every joke. For his
travails, Mr. Thomas does get to sing two Irving Berlin songs, ''Always'' and,
for ironic purposes, ''This Is a Great Country,'' a patriotic anthem from ''Mr.
President'' that has rarely been disinterred in 30 years.

Since Ms. Wiest's character shares her first name, I guess she can't be blamed
for playing herself - or at least the public persona created in Woody Allen
movies. ''Square One'' begins with her twittering and squinting to music; later
she gets to demonstrate anguish, anger and the comic diction that can produce
laughs simply by adding pejorative inflection to a word like genre. But why
should Ms. Wiest be milking her mannerisms and packaging emotions as if they
were audition routines, untethered to a character? She is much too talented an
actress and at far too high a point in her career to go back to square one.

FREEDOM DOLED OUT LIKE GRUEL - SQUARE ONE, by Steve Tesich; directed by Jerry
Zaks; set, Tony Walton; lighting, Paul Gallo; costumes, Ann Roth; sound, Aural
Fixation; hair, Antonio Soddu; musical director, Norman Weiss; production stage
manager, Leslie Loeb; stage manager, Scott Rodabaugh. Presented by Second Stage,
Robyn Goodman and Carole Rothman, artistic directors, in association with the
A.T.&T. New Plays for the 90's Project. At 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street.

Dianne...Dianne Wiest
Adam...Richard Thomas

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Dianne Wiest in ''Square One,'' at Second Stage Theater. (Susan
Cook)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              270 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

METRO DATELINE;
Suspect in Slaying On S.I. Is Returned

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 188 words

DATELINE: ST. GEORGE


The second suspect in the death of a man who was fatally stabbed because his
attackers believed he was homosexual waived extradition and was returned from
Florida yesterday, the police said.

The suspect, Philip Sarlo, 26 years old, of 132 Joseph Avenue, Willow Brook,
S.I., was arrested on Sunday in Ocala. He was taken last night to the 120th
Precinct stationhouse, where he was charged with murdering James Zappalorti,
said a police spokeswoman, Sgt. Mary Wrensen.

Another suspect, Michael Taylor, 24, of 83 Androvette Street, a neighbor of Mr.
Zappalorti, was arrested on Jan. 24 and charged in the death. Mr. Taylor was
arrested the day after Mr. Zappalorti's body was found on a beach on the Arthur
Kill where he had built a shack of scrap lumber.

The police said they believed that Mr. Zappalorti, 44, an emotionally disturbed
Vietnam veteran, was killed because his attackers believed he was homosexual.

On Sunday, Mr. Sarlo called someone on Staten Island whom the police have not
identified, and detectives alerted the Ocala police. Mr. Sarlo was seized two
hours later as he made a second call, at a restaurant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              271 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
A Necessary Cold War?

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 793 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Unraveling the cold war is causing enormous concern and unease. The big
headaches confronting Europe would have been settled long ago if World War II
hopes had been fulfilled for maintaining at least friendly East-West relations,
if not an actual alliance.

There's no counting the number of lives lost and ruined because of the cold war
- in wars such as Korea, Vietnam, Cambodia, Afghanistan, in repression, in
suspicion that led to persecution in the West as well as the East. There's no
counting the amount of resources wasted on huge armies and devastating weapons.

If hopes are fulfilled for an end to the global power-ideology conflict of the
last four decades, future generations will wonder what drove their forefathers
to such madness. Did they really mean to nuclearize each other out of existence?
Did each side really imagine it had the ultimate answer to the good society and
could only survive by doing in its rival?

Communism is an ideology, a system that claimed with ''scientific certainty''
that it knew how to resolve all social problems and that it had a monopoly on
historical foresight. Capitalism was never more than a method for bringing
together what it takes to produce - labor, tools, management - with no pretense
that constant adjustment of the social machinery would not be necessary. The
dispute wasn't between two creeds but between the messianic and the practical
view of making things work.

Now Mikhail Gorbachev and his Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, tell the
world there is no difference in basic values. In that case, what was the fight
about?

In Ottawa a week ago, Mr. Shevardnadze did admit that ''our country took too
much time grappling with the dilemma'' of truth versus happiness, whether ''to
prefer the anxiety of someone who knows the truth or the tranquillity of those
who ignore it.'' And to prove the right choice had been made at last, he said
candidly, ''Today our country is indeed sick.''

But having recognized ''universal human values and the dignity of the
individual,'' having ''renounced force as an instrument for solving any domestic
or foreign problems,'' seeking friends not enemies, he pronounced, ''Such a
state has to survive.''

''We shall become not only a big and strong country but a genuinely comfortable
and civilized home for women and men,'' he said.

Whether or not the Muscovite prediction comes closer to the target this time
than when Stalin proclaimed the ''inevitable'' victory of Communism, or when
Khrushchev told the West ''We will bury you,'' Mr. Shevardnadze's forecast had a
different tone.

So the answer probably has to be that the cold war was, unfortunately,
necessary. There were absurd excesses, of course, in the witch hunts, the
secrecy, the military extravagance of the American response. It is strange now
to recall what panic, what lack of confidence drove the democracies to feel they
were in danger of being overwhelmed by Communist ideas, not only by Red armies.

There was an unacknowledged link between the Victorian idea of inevitable
progress, the promise of the Industrial Revolution, and the Marxist idea of
inevitable collapse, the demons of the Industrial Revolution devouring
themselves. It stoked fears that the ideologists had a better crystal ball, or a
master plan, that might be irresistible and therefore had to be resisted at any
cost. President Kennedy pledged we would ''pay any price'' to preserve our own
vision.

We may have paid more than required. But it is questionable that the
understanding awakening in the world that there will always be problems, that
utopias are mythical, would have been achieved without the demonstration that
the cold war provoked. There is a more skeptical idea of progress now, a
realization that there will always be trade-offs that bring pain as well as
benefit.

The key lesson is not that righteousness will triumph - both sides wallowed in
righteousness - but that there is need for a certain humility in establishing
man's place. Perfect systems bring perfect disaster. Leaving room for error, and
admitting error in ways that encourage correction, offer a better chance. That
is the great strength of democracy, which isn't an ideology either but a way of
enabling people to settle quarrels by argument instead of force.

There is still a yearning for a grand design, a guaranteed formula to discern
and deflect the tide of history. It is a romantic notion, and while romantic
ideals have their role as inspiration, they are the source of catastrophe when
they are imposed by dreamers who acquire might. If it took the cold war to
destroy the illusion that the grubby real world can be ignored, it was worth it.
Now for getting on with everyday repairs, which make all the difference.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              272 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Spy Planes Begin Flight From Legend to Museum

BYLINE: By ERIC WEINER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 952 words


After more than 25 years of stratospheric snooping, the world's fastest and
highest-flying planes have begun making their final flights this week -to
museums across the country.

The 20 or so dagger-shaped Blackbird spy planes, which have photographed
countries from Vietnam to Nicaragua, have been grounded by cuts in military
spending as well as technological advances that enable satellites to do similar
work for less money.

But some members of Congress and some critics in the Air Force warn that the
loss of the planes, which cost as much as $400 million a year to maintain,
leaves a gap in the nation's reconnaissance at a time when compliance with
arms-control treaties now being negotiated will have to be verified from the
sky.

Three decades after it was designed by Lockheed, the SR-71 Blackbird is still
regarded as a technological wonder. It can outrun the fastest fighter jets and
any missiles fired at it. Skirting the edge of space at altitudes of nearly
100,000 feet, the unarmed plane has never been shot down, although hundreds of
attempts have been made.

''If we were getting shot at, we wouldn't bank or dive - we'd simply increase
speed,'' said one pilot. ''In 30 seconds we could outrun anything.''

Made almost entirely of titanium, the Blackbird's skin is no thicker than a soda
can's. The jet's two engines produce thrust equivalent to that of the Queen
Mary's. And the plane carries an array of sensors and cameras capable of
photographing the numbers on a license plate from 15 miles up.

Even as the Blackbird is being relegated to museums, details of the plane have
been kept a mystery. The Air Force says its top speed is 2,100 miles an hour.
But pilots who have flown the plane said it could go 2,600 miles, coast to
coast, in an hour.

Perhaps the most famous photographs from the Blackbird came from one of its
first missions, when it recorded China's first tests of a nuclear bomb in the
1960's. In 1982 its photographs revealed the presence of Soviet MIG's in
Nicaragua, setting off an international dispute. In 1973 it helped verify
compliance with the cease-fire in the Arab-Israeli war. The plane was used to
assess damage in Libya after the United States bombing in 1987.

While the Air Force will not disclose how much it costs to maintain the planes,
estimates range from $250 million to $400 a million a year - as much as it costs
to maintain 90 fighter jets. The fuel-guzzling Blackbird needs as many as six
refueling planes as escorts on a long mission.

The Bush Administration said it ended the program because of improvements in
satellites for spying. The decision last fall was undoubtedly also part of the
cutbacks flowing from eased relations with the Communist bloc. But the more
versatile Blackbird can photograph a larger area in less time than satellites,
which are locked into specific orbits and may have to wait days to pass over a
trouble spot. And the plane is less hindered by clouds and darkness than are
satellites.

Some Air Force officials said the program was ended because the Air Force viewed
it as a liability. Although its operations were paid for by the Air Force, the
decision of when and where to fly it rested with the Central Intelligence
Agency, National Security Agency and the Defense Intelligence Agency. ''The
plane does nothing for the Air Force,'' said an Air Force officer involved with
the program, who asked not to be identified. ''It doesn't drop bombs or shoot
missiles.''

Decision Sharply Criticized

''It's a national travesty,'' said a high-ranking Air Force officer, who asked
not to be identified, of the elimination of the Blackbird.

The Blackbird's predecessor was the U-2 spy plane. First flown in 1955, the U-2
is best known for its darkest day; in May 1960 Francis Gary Powers was shot down
and later captured by the Soviets. The U-2 flies lower and much more slowly than
the Blackbird, reaching speeds of less than 700 miles per hour.

The Air Force will continue to fly versions of the U-2, which costs much less to
maintain than the Blackbird. U-2 funds come from outside the Strategic Air
Command's budget. Therefore, the plane competes for money with other
intelligence resources like satellites.

Rumors have circulated that the Air Force is developing a new spy plane,
code-named Aurora, capable of flying five times the speed of sound, or 3,800
miles per hour. But the Air Force denies its existence.

Of the approximately 20 Blackbirds left (even that number is still classified),
nine will go to museums, three will be used by NASA for research and three will
be mothballed in Palmdale, Calif., to be recalled in emergencies. The fate of
the other planes was not clear.

Pilot Bemoans Life in Slow Lane

The small band of Blackbird pilots, accustomed to traveling faster than a
bullet, are finding it difficult adjusting to their slower assignments. ''After
this, it's going to be hard going on to anything else,'' said Maj. Dan Watkins,
the last to be trained to fly the Blackbird.

The first decommissioned Blackbird was delivered Thursday to Robins Air Force
Base in Georgia. Blackbirds will also be displayed at the National Air and Space
Museum in Washington and the Air Force Museum at Wright Patterson Air Force Base
in Ohio, and at Offutt Air Force Base in Nebraska, Lackland in Texas, and
Edwards, March, Castle and Beale in California.

Next month one plane that will be displayed at the National Air and Space Museum
will attempt to set a coast-to-coast speed record, flying from Palmdale to
Washington in less than an hour.

At first, the Air Force turned down the request for a record run, agreeing to it
only after pressure from the museum and some members of Congress.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              273 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 25, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 840 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     1   STAR, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.95.) The crossed paths
           of a man and a woman, both destined for stardom, one in
           Washington, the other in Hollywood.

 2     4   WEB OF DREAMS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           origin of a curse that has haunted a family of orphans in
           five previous novels.

 3     4   THE FORTUNE, by Michael Korda. (Warner, $5.95.) A young
           woman's ill-fated romance with the head of America's
           richest family.

 4     5   MUTATION, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $4.95.) A physician's
           attempt to create a superior child results in a prodigy
           that turns into a terror.

 5     4   BILLY BATHGATE, by E. L. Doctorow (Harper Paperbacks,
           $5.95.) The life of a 1930's gangster.

 6     3   BLACK SAND, by William J. Caunitz. (Bantam, $5.95.) A New
           York cop joins a Greek policeman in a deadly pursuit of a
           stolen ancient artifact.

 7     4   FRENCH KISS, by Eric V. Lustbader. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Three
           people whose lives are menaced by the disappearance of a
           mystical dagger, a Buddhist symbol of mystic power.

 8    15   THE SANDS OF TIME, by Sydney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.95.) A
           struggle between the Spanish Army and Basque separatists.

 9     4   NIGHT STORM, by Catherine Coulter. (Avon, $4.95.) A young
           woman's desire to save her family's fortune leads to a
           stormy romance..

10    10   A THIEF OF TIME, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks,
           $4.95) Tracking down a missing archeologist, missing
           artifacts and a murderer.

11*   18   THE DRAWING OF THE THREE, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL,
           $5.95.) Continuing the horror story begun in "The
           Gunslinger."

12*    7   TOO DEEP FOR TEARS, by Kathryn Lynn Davis. (Pocket, $5.50.)
           Three half-sisters from far-flung parts of the British
           Empire become acquainted as their father dies in Scotland.

13     4   RULES OF ENGAGEMENT, by Peter Morwood. (Pocket, $4.50.) A
           new 'Star Trek' novel.

14     1   POWER PLAY, by Penny Jordan. (Harlequin, $5.95.) A woman's
           passionate, sometimes violent relationship with four men
           over a dozen years.

15*   54   THE SHELL SEEKERS, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dell, $4.95.) A
           woman and a painting tie together three generations of an
           English family.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    14   ALL I REALLY NEEDED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by
           Robert Fulghum (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.

 2    22   BLIND FAITH, by Joe McGinness. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.) The
           family tragedy that came to light after the 1984 murder of
           a Toms River, N.J. woman.

 3    11   NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK, by Grace Catalano (Bantam, $3.50.)
           The lives and predilections of the five members of a
           teen-age singing group.

 4     4   IN BROAD DAYLIGHT, by Harry N. MacLean. (Dell, $4.95.) The
           1981 killing of a man on Main Street in Skidmore, Mo.,
           witnessed by 45 people, a case that was never brought to
           court.

 5     2   MURDER IN LITTLE EGYPT, by Darcy O'Brien. (Onyx, $4.95.)
           The Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde life of a physician in an
           Illinois community.

 6*    5   BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, by Ron Kovic. (Pocket, $4.50.)
           The autobiography of a former Marine, gravely wounded
           physically in Vietnam, spiritually on his return home.

 7    331  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck (Touchstone/S & S,
           $10.95.) Spiritual inspiration.

 8    91   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel.
           (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The importance of a
           patient's mind and emotions.

 9     1   FAMILY OF SPIES, by Pete Earley. (Bantam, $4.95.) The case
           of the United States Navy officer who sold secrets to the
           Russians for 17 years.

10*   14   THE BLOODING, by Joseph Varnbaugh. (Bantam, $5.95.) The
           murder of two girls in an English village is solved through
           genetic clues.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     3   50 SIMPLE THINGS YOU CAN DO TO SAVE THE EARTH, by The
           Earthworks Group. (Earthworks Press/Publishers Group West,
           $4.95.) Ways to combat environmental problems.

 2    78   CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie. (Hazelden/Harper &
           Row, $8.95.) Solving your own problems while caring for
           other people's afflictions.

 3     2   J. K. LASSER'S YOUR INCOME TAX 1990. (Lasser Institute,
           $11.95.) Financial planning and tax advice.

 4    11   RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $6.95.) The 1990
           edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.

 5     3   ERNST & YOUNG'S ARTHUR YOUNG TAX GUIDE, 1990, edited by
           Peter W. Bernstein. (Ballantine, $11.95.) Income tax
           advice.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              274 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Teachers Say Yesterday's Texts Can't Keep Pace in Today's World

BYLINE: By CHARLOTTE LIBOV

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 1, Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1439 words


LAST September, when students returned to Granby High School, they were greeted
with brand-new social studies textbooks. ''If only we had waited a year,'' said
Jeanette W. Wiggin, the school system's director of curriculum and instruction.
Within months, the textbooks, which cost $16,000, became outdated by the
sweeping changes in the world, especially in Eastern Europe.

School districts throughout Connecticut were caught with suddenly outdated
books.

''Even before all this was happening, textbooks were out of date before they
were printed,'' said Edward Bourque, Fairfield's Assistant Superintendent. ''But
now, you're looking at a 40- or 45-year history which was completely destroyed
in a very short period, and it's going to continue.''

Because of the sweep of world events - including the growing democratization of
the Soviet bloc, the changing role of the Communist Party in the Soviet Union
itself and the crumbling of the Berlin wall -social studies teachers are
scrambling to update their curriculums.

The social studies consultant for the State Department of Education, Daniel W.
Gregg, said he has long believed that textbooks should not be relied upon as the
main source of material, and the recent changes have proved the point.

Overnight Change

''When events like these happen, it shows how much we rely on textbooks,'' he
said. ''It points out a real problem - that in an area like social studies, the
changes are very, very rapid. It can change overnight.''

Although some changes always occur between the time a textbook is written and
distributed, the rapid pace of today's events has gone far beyond that, Mr.
Gregg said. ''In this case, we're talking about a change in perspective,'' he
said. ''Probably most teachers grew up with the cold war. It's just an accepted
fact. And it's difficult for all of us to believe, right at this moment, that
it's over.''

Like other educators interviewed, Mr. Gregg said he does not believe schools
will discard their textbooks. Instead, he said, the books will be supplemented
by newspapers and magazines. How are texbook publishers coping with the rush of
history? ''We're furiously editing,'' said Sharon Barton, executive editor of
the social studies division of Scott, Foresman & Company in Evanston, Ill. The
company publishes ''History and Life: The World and Its People,'' the high
school history textbook used in Granby.

The 1990 edition of the book had just been published when news came that the
Communist Party would relinquish its monopoly role in the Soviet Union. ''We had
to go into a reprint,'' Ms. Barton said. ''We wouldn't normally update unless
it's cataclysmic. And this is really cataclysmic.''

The textbook company generally does a thorough revision of its textbook every
three years. It has rushed updates into print only upon events like the
assassination of President John F. Kennedy and the resignation of President
Richard Nixon, she said.

Addison-Wesley Publishing is distributing a newsletter that focuses on the
changes in Eastern European to supplement its textbook ''World History
Traditions and New Directions,'' which is used in Norwalk. The company had made
newsletters to accompany its economics text, ''but we've never had to do one for
history before,'' said Thomas Prehn, executive editor of the publisher's social
studies division in Menlo Park, Calif.

Another textbook used in Norwalk, ''Links Across Time and Place,'' is published
by McDougal, Littel in Evanston, Ill. The book, published in 1988, was due for a
revision, said Mercedes Bailey, product manager for social studies. ''We took
out a picture of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and substituted a picture
Lech Walesa addressing the U.S. Congress,'' she said. The new edition also
expands coverage of Nelson and Winnie Mandela, although news of Mr. Mandela's
release from prison in South Africa came too late to be included, she said.

Despite the publishers' efforts to stay current, the speed of changes in the
world portends the end of the textbook as a classroom fixture, said Lee Hay, the
1983 National Teacher of the Year, who is now the Assistant Superintendant in
East Lyme.

Images Replace Words

''The written word is being replaced by the image,'' Mr. Hay said. ''I think
this will lead to radical changes in teaching. But many teachers are very
uncomfortable with that. There's almost a guilty feeling if you show a film.''

Edward Welsh, who teaches world and American history at Norwalk High School,
does not believe the textbook will become extinct.

''You can't eliminate the textbook,'' he said. ''If you teach history, you need
to teach the sequence of events.''

'Throw the Textbooks Away'

But he acknowledged, ''as for world politics, there isn't a single textbook on
the market today that can do it.''

''If you're talking about the Soviet Union, my God! You can throw the textbook
away,'' Mr. Welsh said.

With the help of newspapers, he said, he has become accustomed to devoting up to
half of his class periods to events that happened the night before.

''It's an unbelievable time,'' he said. ''I really can't describe it. If you
study history, one of the things that you stay with is that the really dominant
people, the Alexander the Greats and the Napoleons, shape the world. There is no
question that 200 or 300 years from now, Gorbachev will be considered one of
those. The students can see that, and it opens their eyes.''

Frank Gawle, the 1988 Connecticut Teacher of the Year and the chairman of the
social studies department at Enfield High School, said the recent events took
him by surprise.

Using Other Sources

''Last September, no one in our wildest dreams could have predicted what would
happen,'' he said.

Next year, his school will offer a new course, ''The World in Crisis,'' which
will deal with the changes, he said. It will use textbooks ''only as
background.'' he said.

''I've always believed that if you operate with a single textbook, you're in
trouble,'' he said. ''There isn't one with a decent history that deals with
Vietnam.''

Carolyn Rosenfield, Norwalk's Assistant Superintendent for curriculum and
instruction, said: ''Keeping textbooks up to date is becoming more frightening
budget-wise, given the astronomical cost of them. We have to use other sources
to fill in between the cracks.''

''Teachers are very creative, so they will be able to supplement these
materials,'' Mrs. Rosenfield said.

Francis Lynch, a social studies teacher at Granby High School, said one of the
school's textbooks talks about the hard-line approach of the Soviet Union.

''There is chapter entitled 'The Communist World Fragmented,' '' he said. ''But
what they're talking about is the fragmentation between the Soviet Union and
China. Nothing is said about the Soviet Union and its satellites.''

Good Guys and Bad Guys

Dennis Lobo, another Granby High School social studies teacher, who is also the
curriculum coordinator, said, ''The approach these textbooks take between the
United States and the Soviet Union is they're the bad guys and we're the good
guys.''

Mr. Lynch, who also teaches American history at Central Connecticut State
University, said he is encountering the same problem with his college textbooks.
''There's a time lag on whatever level you're functioning,'' he said.

''In my advanced high school class, I'm using a college textbook which talks
about the thaw between American and Soviet relations but simply didn't
anticipate the speed of the change,'' he said. ''So what's happened in the last
year or so simply isn't there.''

At Field Publications, the Middletown company that produces My Weekly Reader and
other national news publications for students, the recent events ''certainly
created chaos around here, because we've had to pull a lot of things apart,''
said Patricia Sears, a company spokeswoman.

Louise Butts, My Weekly Reader's managing editor, said: ''It's been frustrating.
The news happens so quickly, and its almost immediately seen on television.
There's no way in our printed schedule we can do that.''

The articles, she said, try to anticipate news events by ''raising the question
of what might happen.'' For example, a January article on the Berlin wall asked,
''Could there be a united Germany?''

For Mr. Gregg, at the State Education Department, the fact that textbooks are
now at least partially outdated is ''a lesson in itself.''

''There is no question in my mind that, 5 or 10 years from now, when you pick up
the history textbooks, the last half of 1989 and the first part of 1990 will be
very well covered,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo; Sweeping changes in world events have left many school texts
outdated, especially in references to Eastern Europe and South Africa. The pace
of events has brought into question the role of textbooks as a main source of
material in the classroom.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              275 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Exploring a New Berlin

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN; SERGE SCHMEMANN is chief of the Bonn bureau of The
Times.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 15, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 3502 words


BERLIN, it now seems likely, is to become once more the capital of the Germans.
In principle, that should make the city whole again, a megalopolis of three
million people free to reclaim its place among the great centers of European
culture and industry. But it is hard to imagine how the return of the capital
will do more than add one more Berlin to the bewildering set already shaped by a
tortuous history. Schizophrenia seems the natural condition of this city, where
for so long the Berlin Wall served not only to divide but to shape disparate
cultures and lives.

Even now, when the unceasing ring of thousands of chisels rapidly reduces the
Wall to rubble and the Germans wander back and forth with impunity, to cross
between East to West is still to walk between different worlds. But it is also
to witness these worlds at a moment of great and rapid change, and that is the
most compelling reason to be there now. The fall of the Communist order is
tangible, and the drama of German reunification is played out daily.

The signs of change are everywhere, from the rusted outline where the symbol of
the Communist party used to hang on the Central Committee headquarters on
Franzosische Strasse to the darkened windows of the immense hulk of the old
Ministry of State Security on Jacques Duclos Strasse. At the Museum of German
History in East Berlin, the old paeans to Communist achievements still dominate,
but the section on the Berlin Wall has been closed, presumably to replace the
old explanations about the ''anti-fascist protective barrier.''

With the defeat of Nazi Germany, the hand of fate and the wisdom of the Allies
left much of historic Berlin in the Communist East, and the zoo in the
capitalist West. This was somehow appropriate: East Berlin grew into the gray,
pretentious capital of the German Democratic Republic, a bland expanse of
mass-produced housing and polluting factories enclosing bullet-scarred pockets
of old Berlin and its imperial grandeur. Following Stalin's lead, the German
Communists sought to establish their might through expansive squares and
boulevards, topped by the giant lollipop of a television tower that dominates
the Berlin skyline (and on a clear day offers a splendid panorama of the city).

On the other side of the Wall, or rather surrounded by it, West Berlin developed
into a rambunctious island of urban glitter, funky counterculture, high culture
and self-conscious idiosyncrasy. It came to be the place for West Germans
seeking to escape their ordered land: the Wall sealed out not only Communism but
also much of the inhibitions and angst of West Germany.

To find the heart of West Berlin, follow the signs to the zoo. It is, in fact, a
fine old zoo, but the life around is even wilder. On a warm evening, punks and
skateboarders hang out around the memorial ruins of the Kaiser Wilhelm Church,
and during the day thousands of shoppers flow between the Ka De We, the largest
department store in Europe - with a better fine-food department on the sixth
floor than Harrods - and the boutiques and cafes of the broad Kurfurstendamm,
the Great White Way of West Berlin better known as the Ku'damm.

Even the common past took different shapes on either side of the Wall. In the
West, painful debates have raged over what to do with the remnants of the Third
Reich - the mound of rubble that was the Gestapo headquarters on Prinz-Albert
Strasse, the villa (now a children's home) at Wannsee where the ''final
solution'' was decreed, the railroad yard at Grunewald where Jews were gathered
for transportation to concentration camps.

The reminders are there in the East, too, but until recently the debate was
muted - the Communists officially rejected responsibility for the past, and the
plaques on the bullet-marked vestiges of the Third Reich treated them as curios
of some alien history. Some sites were not deemed worthy of survival: Hitler's
bunker, just south of the Brandenburg Gate, for example, has been obliterated by
new housing.

But the Jewish cemeteries at Weissensee and on Senefelder Platz still bear
haunting testimony to the dignity and roots of a doomed people, and the ornate
facade of the gutted synagogue on Oranienburger Strasse, now covered in
scaffolding - it is being restored and converted into a museum - testifies to
the fury of the great pogrom of Crystal Night, Nov. 9, 1938.

The legacy of the Prussian empire and the Berlin of old is also on view in the
East - in the grand palaces, statues and bridges along the Unter den Linden
boulevard, in the lovely Nikolai Quarter with its restored cobblestones,
wrought-iron signs and cafes, in the row of rebuilt town houses along the
Markisches Canal, in the newly accessible Brandenburg Gate.

Touches of old Berlin and the scars of war are indelible, too, in West Berlin.
The wrought-iron arches of the elevated S-Bahn, the tree-lined streets off the
Ku'damm - most notably the charming Fasanen Strasse with its galleries and
boutiques - the restored Charlottenburg Palace with its formal gardens, all add
antique grace notes to a brash and modern town, while the occasional ruin or
pock-marked facade gives it a quality all its own. PETER SCHNEIDER, who
described in his novel ''The Wall Jumper'' what it was that bound him to this
strange city, is among the veterans of the rebellious young Germans who invaded
West Berlin in the 1960's and transformed the city from a half-dead Western
occupation zone into the most vibrant scene in either Germany.

With the raising of the Wall in 1961 and the rise of social rebellion throughout
the West, the old West Berlin of Cold War tensions and airlifts gave way to a
scene of defiance and experimentation. The crowds that deliriously cheered
President John F. Kennedy's ''Ich bin ein Berliner'' speech now took to the
streets against the Vietnam War and the Establishment. A new West Berlin was
born.

The writer Peter Gang was another pioneer. Back when American hippies were
heading for the hills, he said, he moved from Bavaria to West Berlin.

The way he said it, West Germany was a foreign land, a stifling hinterland from
which freer spirits and dreamers had to flee. He found his haven in this
walled-in, half-occupied half-city where young men were exempt from the draft,
where insularity, economic dependence and lack of prospects somehow combined
into a fertile breeding-ground of counterculture.

Successive movements and rebellions followed - the hippies, punks, students,
environmentalists, squatters, skinheads, musicians, artists, draft-dodgers,
Turkish ''guest workers,'' gays, junkies and rebels of every hue.

For most of them, the first stop has been Kreuzberg, a seedy old blue-collar
district wedged between the Wall and a canal, whose sooty, vacant tenements and
lofts proved a natural magnet. It is an area where gentrified cafes and
''schicki-micki'' boutiques rub crumbling shoulders with Turkish fast-food
shops, bare-bones art galleries, avant-garde bookstores, tiny art-moviehouses,
rough bars and funky discos like the Trash.

Posters paper the pock-marked walls along Oranien Strasse at the heart of
Kreuzberg, announcing performances by the innumerable small theater companies
tucked into the courtyards or gigs by bands like the Mighty Meats. Wall art
abounds, ranging from graffiti urging America to ''get out of Panama'' to the
dramatic mural across the side of the four-story Tommy Weissbecker House, a
commune named for a radical killed in a clash with police.

Adding spice to the mix is the biggest concentration of foreigners and illegal
workers of any West German city. About 120,000 Turks live in Berlin, and in
recent months tens of thousands of Poles and East Germans have flooded the black
market with cheap goods and services. The Polish Market on the Landwehr Canal,
adjacent to the established flea market, has become a common stop for Berliners
in search of bargain cigarettes, vodka or appliances.

Not surprisingly, Kreuzberg is rich in colorful pubs. Henne's, at the Berlin
Wall at Waldemar Strasse, once served its celebrated chicken and dark beer to
President Kennedy. Rote Harfe on Oranien Platz is good for a plate of pasta and
a rich sampling of the scene, while the Yorck Schlosschen on Yorck Strasse
offers live jazz on Thursday evenings and with Sunday brunch.

Trendy night life, however, is still on and off the Ku'damm. An array of pubs,
cafes and restaurants continue the rich late-night scene that has been Berlin's
trademark from the Roaring Twenties. The style is studied-casual, the decor is
yellowing paint, brass beer taps and modern art, the food ranges from good to
excellent, and the atmosphere gets riper as the night gets longer. Fofi's
Estiatorio on Fasanen Strasse or the Paris Bar on Kant Strasse are among the
more celebrated haunts. For excellent food there's the Alt Luxemburg on
Pestalozzi Strasse, an artsy air there's Florian, on Grolman Strasse. EAST
BERLIN may not quite match the glitter of the West, but its nightspots are
becoming increasingly popular now that Westies can freely cross over. The
Berliner Balhaus on Chaussee Strasse is a nightclub with a twist - each table
has a phone from which guests can dial any other table, to banter or to flirt.
The Clarchen Ballhaus on August Strasse is a dance hall in the old tradition,
while the Yucca on Neumann Strasse is as hot as any disco across the Wall.

Several restaurants are worth trying, especially while they're still a bargain,
among them the Ganymed on the Schiffbauerdamm, the Ermeler Haus on the
Markisches Ufer, or the Offenbach Stuben on Stubbenkammer Strasse. The new
state-owned Grand Hotel on the Unter den Linden maintains it is the best in
either Berlin. That's a claim the venerable Kempinski in West Berlin, among
other hotels, would contest, but the lobby of the Grand is stunning and the
restaurants are fine, albeit expensive. For a good light lunch, the trout at the
Forelle restaurant is fresh.

If the Berlin Wall had any saving grace, it was the competition it fostered on
the culture front. East Germany, eager to bolster its prestige and its claim to
be the true heir to German culture, spent lavishly on its opera, orchestras and
museums, foremost among them the Pergamon Museum, the best known museum on
Museum Insel (island), with its great collection of international art and
antiquities, including the Pergamon Altar, the masterwork of Hellenic
architecture.

West Berlin spent as lavishly, albeit for a somewhat different reason - to
survive. The strategy, mapped out in the 1960's and 1970's, called for the city
to become a major magnet for art and culture.

West Berlin is probably the most propped-up city in the world, with more than 12
billion marks (about $7.3 billion) in direct subsidies from the West German
Government, plus billions more in indirect aid like tax breaks for businesses or
special grants. That's not to mention some 9,500 American, British and French
soldiers still based in what remains - though probably not for long -- a city
still under Allied military occupation.

The city earmarks about $325 million a year for the arts, and untold millions
more come from West Germany in subsidies. Most of the money goes to institutions
like the Berlin Opera and the Berlin Philharmonic, and the five major cultural
festivals the city hosts each year.

But about $9 million filters down to the counterculture to help experimental
theaters, fledgling painters and young musicians. West Berlin even has a
Commissioner for Rock Music.

Among its museums, West Berlin has a famous museum of classical art, the Dahlem
on Arnim Allee (Flemish, Dutch, German, Italian and German Renaissance, old
Spaniards) and a museum of modern art, the National Gallery on Potsdamer
Strasse. Designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, the National Gallery was opened
in 1968 and has impressive collections of 19th- and 20th-century works,
including German romanticists, German and French Impressionists, German
Expressionism and surrealism.

There are usually first-rate exhibitions, often of contemporary art, at the
Academy of Arts and the Martin-Gropius-Bau, the city's finest exhibition center.

West Berlin is surprisingly rich in forests and lakes. Of the total 185 square
miles, 21 square miles are actually used for farming, 30 square miles are
forests, 12 are public waters and 17 are public parks.

The city has a few interesting modern buildings. Besides the National Gallery,
the State Library and the Philharmonic were both built by Hans Scharoun in the
1960's. The Bauhaus Archive, Museum of Design, was built from 1976 to 1979
according to designs of Walter Gropius. Several post-modern apartment blocks
were built in the boroughs of Kreuzberg and Tegel for the International Building
Exhibition of 1987.

Back in 1855, in ''Berlin and Its Surroundings,'' Ludwig Rellstab wrote:
''Berlin has, to a degree seldom seen in other cities, the advantage of not
preferring or imposing any one way of life, but rather unfolds in all imaginable
directions with the same freedom.'' More than a century later, despite
devastation and division, each Berlin is the biggest and most lively city in its
respective state, and together their three million inhabitants stand to make a
reunited Berlin once more the largest city of central Europe.

It is fascinating to conjecture how the two halves will grow together, how the
disparate cultures will blend. It is difficult to imagine that Kreuzberg will
quickly lose its funkiness, the Ku'damm its glitter or the Unter den Linden its
grandeur.

It will be long before the scars of war are healed or covered, and the memories
of the Nazi terror should never fade.

But if Mr. Rellstab was right, it is the natural state of Berlin to unfold in
all directions. There is no reason, then, why Kreuzberg, the Ku'damm and the
Karl-Marx-Allee cannot continue to coexist and grow and to make room for the
capital of Germany.

Visitor's guide to the East and West

Because of Berlin's sudden popularity, hotels are often booked solid and
restaurants are crowded. Reservations are a necessity, and tickets for many
events are harder than ever to come by. In the better Berlin hotels, the
concierge can often help guests with reservations and tickets, but these
visitors should be prepared to pay top prices.

The hotel problem is best dealt with through the Tourist Information Office. It
will not accept phone reservations, but it will take fax or telex requests and,
if all else fails (and you appear in person before 10 P.M.), promises to find a
bed for the night in a private home if nothing else is available. The Tourist
Offices are at the Tegel Airport, north of the downtown area, the main rail
station, Bahnhof Zoo, and in the Europa Center, and they are open daily from 8
A.M. until 10:30 P.M. Fax number: 21 23 25 20; telex: 183356.

Hotels (West)

Bristol-Hotel Kempinski, 27 Kurfurstendamm (884340) is the city's most
prestigious luxury hotel. Double rooms cost from about $224 (based on the mark
being worth 59 American cents) plus $15 a person for the breakfast buffet. Grand
Hotel Esplanade (no connection with the Grand Hotel in East Berlin), 15
Lutzowufer (185986), is one of the newest hotels in the top class and has large
airy rooms and its own gallery for exhibitions of modern art. Double rooms from
$189 plus breakfast at $12 a person. Hotel Am Zoo, 25 Kurfurstendamm (884370) is
small but exceedingly comfortable and convenient, a favorite of the journalist
hordes who have been camped in Berlin since last November. A double room is
$118, including breakfast. Hotel Kurfurstendamm am Adenauerplatz, 68
Kurfurstendamm (882841) , is not far from the center of things and a good buy.
Double room: $93, including breakfast.

Hotels (East)

Hotel Grand, Unter den Linden (20920), is in the best Western capitalistic style
with matching prices - doubles from $206 plus $15 a person for breakfast.
American Express and Visa cards are accepted.

Restaurants (West)

In West Berlin reservations are essential. Fofi's Estiatorio, 70 Fasanen Strasse
(8818785), open daily from 6:30 P.M. until 1 A.M., is an eclectic blend of
nouvelle cuisine with a Greek accent and some common Greek dishes. Three courses
with wine will cost $30 to $40 a person. Paris Bar, 152 Kant Strasse (3138052),
offers a bohemian flavor encouraged by the art-loving owners, and an
international bistro cuisine at about $50 a person. Florian's, 52 Grolman
Strasse (3139184), an intimate, cozy place with publike atmosphere. Good food
and talk. Open from 7 P.M. till 1 A.M. for food, until 3 for drinks. A meal
costs about $30. Alt Luxemburg, 70 Pestalozzi Strasse (3238730), rates one star
in the Michelin Guide for its cuisine. Open Tuesday to Saturday from 6:30 P.M.
to 11 P.M., about $90 a person. No credit cards.

Restaurants (East)

Reservations are not necessary. Restaurants are open from 12:30 to 3 P.M. and
from 6 until 10 P.M. Ermeler Haus, 12 Markisches Ufer offers international
cuisine with flair, about $20 a person. Ganymed, 5 Schiffbauerdamm, good
international cuisine; about $15 each. Offenbach-Stuben, 8 Stubenkammer Strasse.
Good German cuisine, about $20.

Landmarks (West)

Martin-Gropius-Bau, 110 Stresemann Strasse. A museum of modern art and a special
section on Jewish culture. Open Tuesday to Sunday from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
National Gallery, 50 Potsdamer Strasse, displays the largest modern art
collection in the city. Tuesday to Friday from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., Saturday and
Sunday 10 to 5. Schloss Charlottenburg, Luisenplatz, the gallery of the German
Romantics and a wonderful collection of Biedemeier antiques. Tuesday to Sunday
10 to 5.  Dahlem Museum, 23 Arnim Allee, 13th- to 18th-century paintings;
Tuesday to Friday 9 to 5; Saturday and Sunday 10 to 5. The Zoo (main entrance is
on Budapester Strasse) is open daily from 9 to 5. Ka De We, or the Kaufhaus des
Westens, is Berlin's answer to Bloomingdale's and Bloomies could learn a bit
from its sixth-floor gourmet foods shop, filled with small tasting bars to
sample everything imaginable. Store hours the same all over Berlin: Monday to
Friday from 9 to 6:30 and Saturday from 9 to 2; first Saturday of the month
until 4:30. Berlin Philharmonic, 1 Matthaikirchstrasse, 1000 Berlin 30 (254880).
Tickets may be purchased by mail or in person at the box office, open Monday to
Friday from 3:30 to 6:30 P.M., and Saturday and Sunday and holidays from 11 A.M.
to 2 P.M. On March 9 and 10, Pinchas Zukerman is conductor and soloist in a
Beethoven program; May 19 and 20: Daniel Barenboim conducting, Wolfgang
Boettcher soloist on the cello, will present a world premiere of a work by
Giselher Klebe, and Bruckner's Symphony No. 7 in E minor. Deutsche Oper Berlin,
10 Richard-Wagner Strasse, 1000 Berlin 10 (34381). Tickets can be ordered by
phone from one week before the performance, or by writing to the box office,
open Monday to Friday, 2 to 8 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 10 to 2. March 17:
Ballet Evening Premiere, Stravinsky's ''Les Noces''; April 4: premiere of
Offenbach's ''Tales of Hoffmann''; Gestapo Headquarters on Prinz-Albert Strasse
is now a mound of rubble, but the cellars have been partly excavated to show
some of the rooms used for torture and a permanent exhibit is housed there
called the Topography of Terror, open Tuesday to Sunday from 10 to 6.

Landmarks (East)

Pergamon Museum, Museum Insel: antiquities, the Pergamon Altar from 180-160
B.C., and the most interesting display of antique architecture. Open Wednesday
to Sunday from 10 to 6. Museum of German History, 2 Unter den Linden: German
history as interpreted by East Germany. Monday to Thursday, 9 to 6; Saturday and
Sunday from 10 to 5. The Jewish Cemeteries: Weissensee, Herbert-Baum Strasse,
open Monday to Thursday from 8 to 4:30, and Friday from 8:30 to 1; head covering
is requested. Senefelder Platz at Schonhauser Allee, same opening times.

Currency

Since the opening of the Berlin Wall, the East German Government has abolished
the requirement that foreigners convert the equivalent of $15 to East German
marks for each day spent in the country. But importing and exporting East German
marks remains illegal, and it is unclear whether visitors can convert unused
marks back to hard currency. The laws may allow it, but in practice it is
proving difficult if not impossible. Travelers still have the option of
depositing their extra money in special bank accounts, good for one year, for
use the next time they visit East Germany. They are advised to change money in
small amounts and only at official exchange offices.

State Department officials expect the confusion to persist until sometime after
a permanent government, scheduled to be elected March 18, takes office. In the
meantime, travelers may consult the East German Embassy in Washington
(202-232-3134) between 1 and 3 P.M. or the Koch Overseas Company, a travel
agency in New York (212-369-3800), about recent policy changes.    ADELE RIEPE

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Berlin, West Germany (Karin Hill)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              276 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

RECORDINGS;
'Closer Than Ever' Is One From the Heart

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1030 words


''Overeducated, understimulated, overoptimistic, underprepared,
overcomplicating, noncooperating, hyperventilating, scared'' goes the opening
line of Richard Maltby Jr.'s lyric for ''The March of Time,'' from the Off
Broadway revue ''Closer Than Ever.''

A cheery parade strut with music by Mr. Maltby's longtime collaborator, David
Shire, the song, sung by two men and two women, goes on to compile an amusing
list of some of the more exasperating discoveries that middle age brings, from
cellulite to ''adolescent kids who never heard of Vietnam.''

Seen at the Cherry Lane Theater in Greenwich Village, where ''Closer Than Ever''
has been running for more than three months, ''The March of Time'' might pass as
a lighthearted ironic spoof. On the show's original cast album (RCA Victor
60399; compact disk and cassette), however, the stage production's simple piano
and bass arrangements have been beefed up by the Broadway orchestrator Michael
Starobin with woodwinds, horns and synthesizer to turn the song into a miniature
Sousa march. Enhanced on compact disk, it becomes more than just devilishly
clever. One feels the edge of forced, desperate merriment in a lyric that at
bottom is about rationalizing one's fears of mortality at an age when life has
begun to feel uncomfortably finite.

When performed on the stage by Brent Barrett, Sally Mayes, Richard Muenz and
Lynne Wintersteller, four good-looking 30ish actors with superb singing voices,
''Closer Than Ever'' fizzes with youthful exuberance. Portraying assorted
angst-ridden urbanites between 35 to 55 reflecting on their lives, they imbue
everything with a spirited playfulness.

On the recording, the deeper, bittersweet qualities of this chipper
early-1960's-style revue seep to the surface. Without the performers' faces,
their voices seem more mature. And enlarged by Mr. Starobin's exquisite chamber
orchestrations, the show's 25 songs mesh into an often wrenching conceptual
album about the satisfactions, regrets and anxieties felt by people who have
reached an age when it is too late to start over.

Even though most of its songs were written for unrelated projects (some were cut
from the Maltby-Shire 1983 musical ''Baby'' and others were created for the 1988
Manhattan Theater Club revue, ''Urban Blight''), the score coheres beautifully.
It also seems like the natural companion piece to the team's 1977 revue,
''Starting Here, Starting Now.''

The difference between the older show and its sequel is one of heart. Before
''Baby,'' Mr. Maltby and Mr. Shire's theater songs valued wit over sentiment.
The songs in ''Closer Than Ever'' are awash with emotion as they reflect on
marriage, parents and children and lasting friendships. The most insistent
thread of emotion that runs through the score is the realization that although
middle age may be a time of fulfillment in career and family, the yearnings of
youth still nag. Or as the happily married 44-year-old narrator of ''One of the
Good Guys'' puts it, ''the longing is a given.''

''If I Sing,'' the score's most dramatic number, describes the bond between a
middle-aged composer and his ailing musician father at a moment when the older
man's powers are slipping away and both recognize the legacy in genes and love
and art that one has passed on to the other. Mr. Muenz's tender performance
imbues the song with a luminous warmth and solidity.

Though the lyrics for songs like ''If I Sing'' have a distinctly personal ring
(both songwriters' fathers are musicians), most of ''Closer Than Ever'' doesn't
feel pointedly autobiographical, since so many narrators, many of them women,
offer so many different stories. The most vivid female character is the feminist
freelance writer and divorced single parent who narrates ''Life Story.''

In some ways Mr. Maltby and Mr. Shire, both now in their early 50's, are late
bloomers. It wasn't until ''Baby'' that their particular collaborative voice
began to emerge, and in ''Closer Than Ever'' it has become more distinct. Its
essence lies in the creative pull between Mr. Maltby's inclinations toward
high-wire verbal gamesmanship and Mr. Shire's impulse toward pop sentiment.

''Life Story'' combines an amiable Billy Joel-style tunefulness with a lyric
that suggests a colloquialized echo of one of Stephen Sondheim's monologues. In
the song Mr. Shire builds an elaborate musical structure that transcends cliches
while still keeping a fluent, easygoing tone. Throughout, Mr. Maltby and Mr.
Shire succeed in combining some of the best of two worlds - the elegant
craftsmanship of a theater tradition that runs from Gilbert and Sullivan to
Sondheim and the openhearted spirit of contemporary folk-pop.

If ''Closer Than Ever'' has its melancholy moments, it is far from dour. The
team's keen, playful sense of humor comes from several directions. It can arise
directly from a character like the secretly gloating ''Miss Byrd,'' who, between
showing apartments to clients, is enjoying heated trysts with the building
superintendent. Ms. Mayes, who oozes comedy and sensuality at the same time,
turns the song into a bravura pop-jazz showpiece.

In ''The Bear, the Tiger, the Hamster and the Mole,'' the humor comes out of the
accumulated exotic lore of different animal mating habits. ''There,'' which
revolves around a Gertrude Stein quote, wittily analyzes a destructive
relationship by compiling as many puns and multiple uses of a single word as can
be comfortably carried by a melody that subtly parodies generic torch songs.

As urbane as it is, ''Closer Than Ever'' keeps a genteel distance from today's
urban horrors. Its social terrain is upper middle class and white. There is only
a passing mention of safe sex and a fleeting reference to drugs as a 60's
countercultural phenomenon. And the show's characters express no concern for the
homeless, the environment or race relations.

Yet staying strictly within the realm of the personal, ''Closer Than Ever''
evokes a vivid microcosm of its ''overeducated understimulated'' milieu. Any
show whose characters are this interestingly alive feels like home. It is one of
the half-dozen finest American theater scores of the last decade.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The revue's cast, from left: Richard Muenz, Brent Barrett, Sally Mayes
and Lynne Wintersteller, recording the album (Nick Sangiamo)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              277 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Lifestyle;
A Country Club With Guns Instead of Golf Clubs

BYLINE: By LENA WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 46, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1126 words


Imagine this. A date takes you to a posh private club in the Wall Street area.
The atmosphere's cozy: forest green leather love seats, beige carpeting, white
oak-paneled walls that discreetly hide private lockers, cable television, and
soothing contemporary music piped in from a compact disc player. Seems ideal for
two people wanting to get to know each other.

But wait. What's this? Bulletproof glass; a display case with firearms and
ammunition in the middle of the lounge. Where's that sound of rapid gunfire
coming from? Are those men and women in those little booths back there really
firing weapons?

Welcome to the Downtown Rifle and Pistol Club. As shooting ranges go, it's
definitely state of the art.

'A Social Club'

''The thinking behind this was to have a social club for people who enjoy
shooting,'' said Michael Zirmo, the 33-year-old owner of the club. ''The concept
is nice people shooting in a nice environment.''

Indeed, the National Rifle Association, the nation's leading gun lobby, is
hoping that ranges like this one, at 24 Murray Street, near Church Street in
lower Manhattan, can do for guns what country clubs have done for golf and
tennis.

Public and private shooting ranges designed to attract families and the young
professional crowd are increasing in popularity throughout the United States,
especially in metropolitan areas, said Richard Whiting, manager of the range
department of the N.R.A.

''It was one of the things that was never emphasized in the past: attracting the
family unit and bringing them into a clean comfortable environment to
target-shoot or learn firearm safety,'' Mr. Whiting said. ''When people come out
to these indoor ranges, their concept changes. They find it's like going to a
bowling alley.''

There are 224 shooting ranges in New York State, 161 of which are indoors, 112
in New Jersey (42 indoors) and 86 (44 indoors) in Connecticut, said Richard
D'Alauro, the N.R.A.'s field representative in New York. The association said
itdid not have figures on the number of ranges in the New York area 10 years
ago.

A Women's Movement

''The old-time ranges were places you went to shoot,'' said Mr. D'Alauro, a
retired Long Island police officer. ''The new commercial ranges are very plush.
They're definitely looking to attract family participation.''

Many say the shift is due, in part, to the growing number of women who now own
guns. While women still are only a small fraction of the N.R.A.'s 3 million
membership, their ranks grew to 80,000 in 1989, from 65,000 in 1988. Paxton
Quigley, a former anti-gun political activist who now suports gun ownership and
wrote ''Armed and Female'' (E. P. Dutton, 1989), estimates that 12 million women
owned guns in 1987, up from 10 million in 1982.

Another factor, experts say, is that some people who grew up during the Vietnam
War viewing guns as ''war tools'' have changed their outlook because they have
seen an increase in violent crimes. Moreover, those who may have purchased guns
for safety reasons are discovering the joys of recreational target shooting.
(Some members of the Downtown Rifle and Pistol Club have been known to use
photographs of their bosses for target practice instead of the standard
bull's-eye).

Nevertheless, in some circles there persists an image of gun and rifle owners as
mostly conservative politically, hunters who make a sport of killing ducks and
deer, or men who play ''macho games.'' That has made many gun owners reluctant
to identify themselves publicly.

''It is frowned upon in New York City to tell people you own a firearm, so the
guns that get all the publicity are those in the hands of criminals,'' Mr. Zirmo
said. ''What I'm hoping to do with the club is to bring legitimate gun owners
out of the closet.''

Remaining Anonymous

But many still are not ready to admit their fondness for guns or even that they
own them.

Two young club members who are Wall Street stockbrokers strolled in one morning
last week, tossed aside the jackets to their light gray business suits and
proceeded to try one of the Sig/Sauer 9-millimeter pistols - described by
firearms experts as ''the BMW of handguns.'' Although they were friendly and
cordial, taking particular pride in showing a visitor how frequently they had
hit the bull's-eyes on their paper targets, they did not want to divulge their
names.

''I've been shooting for sport since I was a kid,'' one said. ''But it's not
something I tell a lot of people, especially people in the office. I just don't
know how they may take it.''

Mr. Zirmo, whose family has operated a firearms store - the Zirmo Company, at 8
Warren Street, near Broadway in lower Manhattan - since 1933, said he got the
idea for the club from his customers.

''People would come in and spend hundreds and thousands of dollars on firearms
and have nowhere decent to go to practice or to learn about firearms safety,''
he explained. ''I figured people would be willing to pay for membership in a
club that offered training in firearms, while providing other club-type
amenities. So far, I'm being proved correct.''

Help Getting Permits

Since opening last December, the club has signed 200 members, among them judges,
doctors, lawyers and stockbrokers. Forty-five of the members are women.
Memberships cost from $500 to $1,500 a year, which buys from 30 half-hour range
sessions to unlimited use of the nine ranges at the 3,200-square-foot club.
Weapons and other equipment can be rented and ammunition is sold.

The club also has certified instructors who teach members about firearms and
safety and will help members through the process of applying for gun permits.

A catering service is planned later this year, but no alcoholic beverages are
available at the club.

While the Downtown club may represent the future in shooting ranges, one of the
oldest ranges in the city, the West Side Rifle and Pistol Range, is also
experiencing an increase in membership. The range, at 20 West 20th Street,
opened in 1965. Although it doesn't offer the amenities of the Downtown club,
Morty Michaels, one of the range's co-owners, said he welcomes the competition.

''It's good for business,'' Mr. Michaels said. ''We need places like Downtown
and we need places like West Side. We charge $400 a year for membership and $175
for renewals. A lot of our members are retired law-enforcement officers, older
people who enjoy shooting as a sport. They can't afford to pay a lot just to
come in and target-shoot.'' Those in the business acknowledge that future growth
rests, to some degree, on public opinion.

''But we're seeing gradual change,'' Mr. Michaels said. ''More and more people
are realizing that guns are only dangerous when in the hands of the wrong
people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Michael Zirmo, owner of Downtown Rifle and Pistol Club,
practicing; Mr. Zirmo in the reception area of his new club in lower Manhattan,
which has signed up 200 members. (The New York Times/Don Hogan Charles)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              278 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 26, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Plan Is Offered to Stabilize the World Birth Rate

BYLINE: By PHILIP J. HILTS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 918 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 25


In a country-by-country report made public today, the Population Crisis
Committee estimates that the world population can be stabilized in the 21st
century only if countries make birth control universally available by 2000 at a
cost of about $10.5 billion a year.

The world's population is now estimated by the United Nations to be 5.3 billion
people. The report by the population committee, a nonprofit research group based
in Washington, estimates that the population will reach 14 billion if birth
control is not used much more widely.

''Action taken over the critical decade of the 1990's will largely determine
whether the world's population will merely double before stabilizing, or will at
least triple,'' said the report, ''1990 Report on Progress Towards Population
Stabilization.''

'A Preventable Disaster'

A doubling or tripling of the population over the next century ''is a
preventable disaster,'' said Dr. Sharon L. Camp, vice president of the
Population Crisis Committee, a senior writer who worked on the report.

''We have what it would take, the financial resources and the know-how, to solve
the problem, and to do so in our children's lifetime,'' Dr. Camp said.

Population experts have said it would be difficult to sustain the world economy
and political order with twice as many people, and impossible to sustain it at
three times the current world population.

Dr. Malcolm Potts, president of Family Health International, a nonprofit
organization in Research Triangle Park, N.C., which deals with family planning
and health, said that wars and disease, which could result from growth, would
still not slow the population rise.

''We may kill as many as died in Hiroshima every day, day in and day out over
the century, and you would not slow population growth,'' Dr. Potts said.

Report 'Lays Out a Choice'

He said the report is important ''because it lays out a choice we really face in
the 1990's.''

''This is the last decade we will have freedom of choice on this matter; after
that, the state will just tell us what to do, as has happened in China,'' he
said. In China, it is generally illegal to have more than one child per famly.

Despite the gloomy predictions, Dr. Potts said the problem is soluble. ''This
report gives people a businesslike plan to work on, instead of just throwing up
our hands and saying this is too hard a problem,'' he said. ''People will take
the reasonable course if given the choices.''

For instance, the report noted that three-quarters of all birth control pills
sold in Latin American are bought at full price, as opposed to some countries in
which contraceptives are supplied largely from donors. In addition, the report
said that $2.5 billion of the $3.2 billion being spent each year on family
planning worldwide is spent by developing countries.

Still, other experts were skeptical of the report.

''The goals in the report are not impossible, but they are highly optimistic,''
said Dr. John Bongaarts, chief of research at the Population Council, a
nonprofit group based in New York that does population research. ''You can't
just throw money at the problem. It will take political will and desire of
families in developing countries to have fewer children.''

Report Sets a Goal

The report sets a goal of making birth control universally available by the year
2000, and achieving a world rate of contraceptive use at 75 percent, in which 75
percent of couples use birth control in their fertile years.

Contraceptive use currently ranges from an average of 68 percent in developing
countries like Thailand to less than 6 percent in Cameroon. Twenty-nine
countries already have contraceptive use at 75 percent with an average of no
more than two children a family, the rate at which population growth stops.

The report calls for increased spending by developing and industrialized nations
to a maximum of $10.5 billion by the year 2000, after which spending levels
would remain fairly constant for some years, and then start declining.

Dr. Potts said the money needed is ''trivial - if we had a penny a day from each
taxpayer in industrialized countries, that would be more than enough.''

Dr. Kenneth Hill, a professor of population dynamics at Johns Hopkins
University, said the report was largely ''hypothetical, and unlikely to
happen.''

Dr. Hill said that based on estimates by him as well as the World Bank, a lesser
effort might produce the same effect, stabilization of the world population at
11 billion people in 2100.

Experience Bodes Well

The report said that recent experience has reinforced the organization's belief
that 75 percent contraceptive use can be attained. For instance, contraceptive
use in Zimbabwe has risen steadily, to 43 percent in 1987 from 5 percent in
1976, and the upward trend is continuing. That is in sharp contrast to other
African nations in similar economic difficulties, where contraceptive use is
below 15 percent and has remained unchanged for some time.

In Mexico, contraceptive use rose from 13 percent in 1973 to 53 percent in 1987;
in Indonesia, from 19 percent in 1976 to 48 percent in 1987.

Other developing nations that are making rapid progress in the use of
contraceptives include Malaysia, North Korea, Peru, the Philippines, Vietnam,
and Botswana, the report said.

The report also cited surveys in Asia and Latin America that showed that 75
percent of the women in those regions want modern contraceptives, though they
are not always available.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: chart of percent of families using birth control in countries around
the world (Source: Population Crisis Committee)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              279 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 26, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Guerrilla Warfare Over Nuclear Waste

BYLINE: By ALLAN R. GOLD

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1437 words

DATELINE: TAYLOR, N.Y., Feb. 24


State officials who want to inspect the site of a proposed nuclear-waste storage
area here must first sneak by Margie Schlegel.

Mrs. Schlegel, a soldier in this community's war against bureaucracy, sits from
dawn to dusk in a cramped, 22-foot camper, parked amid the tranquil dairy farms
of rural Cortland County. When an occasional car drives by, she puts down the
paper flowers she makes to pass the time and peers through binoculars at an
adjacent country road.

If state officials appear to inspect the proposed nuclear waste site, Mrs.
Schlegel, a 46-year-old mother of eight children, sounds the tocsin. She calls
Citizens Against Radioactive Dumping, and their members block the way.

Protesters in this Cortland County town of about 500 have had their resolve
fortified by some unusual support from the county's officials, who have spent
more than $100,000 in legal fees and consultants to aid the protesters. In
addition, the District Attorney dropped charges against 20 people who were
arrested in a protest in December.

In December, and again in January, dozens of local residents have used their
bodies and vehicles to keep officials off two sites in Taylor. The sites, which
are close to each other, are made up of farmland and forest about 40 miles south
of Syracuse.

Under a Federal mandate, all states are seeking sites to dispose of their
low-level radioactive waste. Opposition has sprung up, but in few places has it
reached the level that it has in New York's Cortland and Allegany Counties.

In Allegany, in southwestern New York, where three waste sites are being
reviewed, dozens of arrests were made during protests in May 1989 and last month
when officials tried to inspect the land.

Feelings Run High in Taylor

About a dozen low-level waste disposal sites are under consideration nationwide.
In 1988, 1.4 million cubic feet of commercially generated low-level radioactive
waste was shipped for disposal, an amount that would fill 390 tractor-trailers,
according to a report by the Office of Technology Assessment.

Residents of Taylor say the fight against their two waste sites has aroused this
usually sedate county of 50,000, uniting teen-agers and grandmothers, college
professors and farmers.

''I haven't felt this way about an issue since Vietnam,'' said Eileen Malay, a
member of the citizen protest group in the city of Cortland, the county seat
about 11 miles west of the two proposed sites.

The state commission responsible for siting New York's waste center has turned
to the courts to battle the protesters. On Thursday a State Supreme Court
justice in Buffalo enjoined protesters in Allegany County from interfering with
siting work. The commission said it would seek a similar injunction against the
demonstrators in Cortland County.

But the protesters say the threat of legal action will not stop them.

''I will be arrested if I have to be,'' vowed Mrs. Schlegel, who wore a T-shirt
saying ''Be Active, Not Radioactive.'' She said she had left Long Island four
years ago partly because of concern about the Shoreham nuclear power plant.

'We Have No Choice'

''If you had to choose between violating an injunction and having a radioactive
waste dump in your backyard, which would you do?'' asked Sally Campbell, a
resident of Alfred and a member of the Allegany County Nonviolent Action Group.
''For us, we have no choice.''

Low-level radioactive waste is generated commercially primarily by nuclear power
plants, in the form of contaminated equipment, and also by diagnostic medical
services. In terms of volume and radioactivity, the nuclear plants contribute by
far the most to the waste stream.

Federal law defines low-level waste by describing what it is not: it is not
high-level radioactive waste generated by such things as spent fuel rods from
nuclear power plants. High-level waste must be kept at the place of origin until
the United States can find an acceptable central disposal site.

Waste Decays After Decades

About 97 percent of the radiation in low-level waste decays within 100 years to
levels that do not pose an unacceptable risk to public health, says the Office
of Technology Assessment, a Congressional research arm. The remaining 3 percent
can remain harmful for several hundred years.

Since 1978 all low-level radioactive waste has been buried in three states:
Washington, South Carolina and Nevada. Three other sites, including one at West
Valley, N.Y., closed because waste leached from containers.

At the suggestion of the three states handling the waste, Congress passed a law
in 1980 requiring the 47 other states to become responsible for disposing of the
waste generated within their borders. An amendment to the law in 1986 gave the
states until Jan. 1, 1993, to develop disposal centers.

As the deadline approaches, states are slowly moving to find solutions. Many
have formed multistate compacts in which one state will be the repository for
the partners' waste. New Jersey and Connecticut formed such a compact, but each
is currently planning to have its own site.

New York chose to go it alone because, as a big waste producer, it would
probably have been the regional host anyway. A law passed by the Legislature in
1985 created the New York State Low-Level Radioactive Waste Siting Commission
and charged it with identifying a suitable disposal site and a safe disposal
method.

The commission has won few friends. Opposition began to percolate after it
announced 10 potential sites in December 1988. The field was narrowed in
September 1989 to five sites - three in Allegany County and two in Cortland
County. Residents' fury has grown steadily since, and civil disobedience has
emerged as an important tactic in the fight.

Security of Site Doubted

Opponents in Cortland County say no site can be made secure enough to contain
radioactive waste for the 30 to 60 years that engineers envision. Big
waste-hauling trucks, they say, cannot safely traverse the steep, winding back
roads that lead to the sites, particularly in the harsh winters in this area.

In addition the protesters accuse the siting commission of everything from lying
about soil conditions and being tools of the nuclear industry to trying to take
advantage of a thinly populated, politically weak area.

''They have the perception that the county is backwards, rural, unsophisticated
and uneducated,'' said Paul Yaman, co-chairman of Citizens Against Radioactive
Dumping. Mr. Yaman, a resident of the city of Cortland, said the one-year-old
protest group had 500 members.

''The fact of the matter is the dump is never going to happen here,'' Mr. Yaman
said.

The chairman of the five-member commission, Angelo F. Orazio, a former
Assemblyman from Long Island, said he was not surprised by the opposition. He
dismissed the commission's critics as ill-informed and had sharp words for the
protesters' brand of civil disobedience.

In December, he said, his staff members were ''held hostage in 10-degree
temperatures for four and a half hours.''

''It was no tea and crumpet party,'' he added.

Other committee members attacked local politicians who have joined the
protesters, terming their positions an abdication of responsibility.

''The concept that this is a risk to the community is absurd,'' said Dr. Stanley
J. Goldsmith, a commission member who specializes in nuclear medicine.

Evidence of an angry citizenry is everywhere. An effigy of Governor Cuomo hangs
from one home not far from the sites in Cortland County, along with the sign
''No Death Penalty, but a Nuke Dump Would Be Our Death Sentence.'' A wooden
''Dump the Dump'' wall outside the county courthouse has attracted hundreds of
signatures and anti-nuclear waste inscriptions.

Governmental Support Given

Cortland's protesters have obtained the support of the county government. It has
spent at least $122,000 on lawyers, consultants and an office staffed with three
people to block the siting, said Cindy Monaco, the county radioactive waste
coordinator.

The protesters have also received a hand from a sympathetic County District
Attorney, Richard J. Shay, who dropped the disorderly conduct charges against
the 20 people arrested in December. In a letter to Governor Cuomo explaining his
action, Mr. Shay described the commission's actions as ''simply ludicrous'' and
''inflammatory.''

The protesters, not entirely pleased with Mr. Cuomo's response to their
opposition, were encouraged by his recent announcement that New York would
challenge in Federal court the law that forces states to assume responsibility
for low-level radioactive waste.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos: Margie Schlegel uses binoculars to keep watch on sites in
Taylor, N.Y., that state officials are considering for a low-level radioactive
waste disposal dump. She telephones fellow dump opponents if state officials try
to inspect the sites. (pg. B1); A wooden ''Dump the Dump'' wall, with signatures
and inscriptions against nuclear waste, is a manifestation of the opposition in
Taylor, N.Y., to a proposed nuclear-waste storage area. ''The fact of the matter
is the dump is never going to happen here,'' said Paul Yaman, who helped
construct the wall outside the Cortland County courthouse. (The New York
Times/Bob Mahoney) (pg. B5)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              280 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Peace Talks on Cambodia Break Down

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 721 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Thursday, March 1


The latest peace talks on Cambodia broke down early this morning, with the rival
Cambodian factions unable to agree on even a carefully worded communique that
elided the central issue: a role for the United Nations in the administration of
the country before new elections.

Ending the three days of discussions, the Indonesian Foreign Minister, Ali
Alatas, spoke rather despondently of having ''lost some momentum again,'' with
the sides squabbling over familiar emotional issues, like the use of the word
''genocide,'' that have blocked progress in the past.

The Australian Foreign Minister, Gareth Evans, called the result ''very
disappointing,'' and he chided the participants for concentrating on
''essentially peripheral issues'' while Cambodians continued to die.

The Khmer Rouge and its non-Communist allies, the followers of Prince Norodom
Sihanouk and of a former prime minister, Son Sann, want a dismantling of Prime
Minister Hun Sen's administration in Phnom Penh. They want the United Nations to
run Cambodia ''from top to bottom,'' as Prince Sihanouk's son, Prince Norodom
Ranariddh, said today, but to be responsible to a Supreme National Council made
up of the three allied factions and the Cambodian Government.

Disagreements Are Strong

Mr. Hun Sen wants his administration to remain intact, but is willing to have
the United Nations monitor its work, with veto power over any act that might
affect the impartiality of elections to be organized by the United Nations. The
Supreme National Council, in his view, should be made up of representatives of
the two rival governments.

The disagreements at the talks were so strong that even a last-minute effort to
issue the text with asterisks next to disputed phrases and issues, indicating
that they were not agreed to, was vetoed by the Khmer Rouge on the ground that
the conference rules called for unanimity.

But Asian diplomats said the Khmer Rouge on the one hand and the Vietnamese and
the Phnom Penh Government on the other were wide apart on the crucial issue of
how Cambodia will be governed until new elections.

''Both sides made difficulties over nonessential aspects of the text in order to
avoid having to openly disagree on the essential point - U.N. involvement in
civil administration,'' a senior Asian diplomat said.

U.N. 'Presence' Called Essential

The draft communique did say a United Nations ''presence'' in Cambodia before
elections was ''essential,'' but left the issue of United Nations involvement in
civil administration for ''further discussion and negotiation.''

At the end of the last closed session, Mr. Alatas criticized the Khmer Rouge and
the Vietnamese for ''fighting over words,'' and harping on ''the arguments of
the past,'' diplomats said, reading from their notes.

Some of the textual objections were semantic, but some were more substantive,
and they represented familiar arguments in the long and wrenching tragedy of
Cambodia.

Word 'Genocide' Opposed

The Khmer Rouge objected to the inclusion of the word ''genocide'' to describe
the activities of its former Government, under which more than a million
Cambodians died from 1975 to 1979, while the Vietnamese and Mr. Hun Sen insisted
upon it.

Mr. Hun Sen and the Vietnamese objected to a clause naming Prince Sihanouk as
the head of any Supreme National Council, saying it contradicted the next
paragraph, which said the membership of the council would be decided later by
the parties concerned.

Mr. Hun Sen also rejected a reference to a ''just solution to the question'' of
Vietnamese settlers in Cambodia, whom the Cambodian opposition regard as
colonizers.

''On the face of it,'' as Senator Evans said, these were the issues on which the
talks broke down. ''On the face of it,'' he repeated, and then said: ''We need
to take the parties at their word.''

The cochairman of the conference, Claude Martin, of the French Foreign Ministry,
said the permanent members of the Security Council - France, Britain, China, the
Soviet Union and the United States - would continue separate meetings on
Cambodia next week.

This meeting included the four Cambodian factions, Vietnam and Laos, the
countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Brunei, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and the Philippines), France and Australia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              281 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 2, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

I.M.F. Is Asked To Sell Gold

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 6, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 133 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1


The United States asked the International Monetary Fund today to sell $1.2
billion worth of its gold to give 11 of the world's poorest countries a chance
to pay debts.

David C. Mulford, head of international affairs at the Treasury Department, told
a House panel that the sales would not affect the gold market since they would
be made directly by the fund to central banks.

The 11 countries are Vietnam, Cambodia, Guyana, Honduras, Liberia, Panama, Peru,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan and Zambia. They have fallen behind by nearly
$4 billion in loan repayments to the fund.

Mr. Mulford proposed that the money be made available to help the 11 countries
catch up on their payments to the fund, so that they could again ask it for
loans. They are now ineligible because of the arrears.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              282 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 4, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 863 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     2   STAR, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.95.) The crossed paths
           of a man and a woman, both destined for stardom, one in
           Washington, the other in Hollywood.

 2     5   WEB OF DREAMS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           origin of a curse that has haunted a family of orphans in
           five previous novels.

 3    99   THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.)
           A submarine driver brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the
           United States.

 4     1   THE EDGE, by Dick Francis, (Fawcett, $5.95.) Murder and
           mayhem on a luxury trans-Canadian train trip.

 5     5   THE FORTUNE, by Michael Korda. (Warner, $5.95.) A young
           woman's ill-fated romance with the head of America's
           richest family.

 6     5   BILLY BATHGATE, by E. L. Doctorow (Harper Paperbacks,
           $5.95.) The life of a 1930's gangster.

 7     6   MUTATION, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $4.95.) A physician's
           attempt to create a superior child results in a prodigy
           that turns into a terror.

 8     1   PLAYMATES, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $4.95.) The
           private eye Spenser on the trail of scandals in the world
           of college basketball.

 9     4   BLACK SAND, by William J. Caunitz. (Bantam, $5.95.) A New
           York cop joins a Greek policeman in a deadly pursuit of a
           stolen ancient artifact.

10     2   POWER PLAY, by Penny Jordan. (Harlequin, $5.95.) A woman's
           passionate, sometimes violent relationship with four men
           over a dozen years.

11*    1   STORMING INTREPID, by Payne Harrison. (Ivy, $5.95.) Warfare
           waged in outer space between the United States and the
           Soviet Union.

12     1   THE HALFLING'S GEM, by R. A. Salvatore. (TSR, $4.95.) The
           final volume in the "Icewind Dale" fantasy trilogy.

13    19   THE DRAWING OF THE THREE, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL,
           $5.95.) Continuing the horror story begun in "The
           Gunslinger."

14    55   THE SHELL SEEKERS, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dell, $4.95.) A
           woman and a painting tie together three generations of an
           English family.

15*   11   A THIEF OF TIME, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks,
           $4.95) Tracking down a missing archeologist, missing
           artifacts and a murderer.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    15   ALL I REALLY NEEDED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by
           Robert Fulghum (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.

 2    23   BLIND FAITH, by Joe McGinness. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.) The
           family tragedy that came to light after the 1984 murder of
           a Toms River, N.J. woman.

 3    12   NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK, by Grace Catalano (Bantam, $3.50.)
           The lives and predilections of the five members of a
           teen-age singing group.

 4     3   MURDER IN LITTLE EGYPT, by Darcy O'Brien. (Onyx, $4.95.)
           The Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde life of a physician in an
           Illinois community.

 5     6   BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, by Ron Kovic. (Pocket, $4.50.)
           The autobiography of a former Marine, gravely wounded
           physically in Vietnam, spiritually on his return home.

 6     5   IN BROAD DAYLIGHT, by Harry N. MacLean. (Dell, $4.95.) The
           1981 killing of a man on Main Street in Skidmore, Mo.,
           witnessed by 45 people, a case that was never brought to
           court.

 7    332  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck (Touchstone/S & S,
           $10.95.) Spiritual inspiration.

 8    72   THE POWER OF MYTH, by Joseph Campbell with Bill Moyers.
           (Doubleday, $19.95.) The ways in which mythology
           illuminates the stages of life.

 9    92   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel.
           (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The importance of a
           patient's mind and emotions.

10    42   CHAOS, by James Gleick. (Penguin, $5.95.) A science that
           sees order in what appears to be erratic.

11*   15   THE BLOODING, by Joseph Varnbaugh. (Bantam, $5.95.) The
           murder of two girls in an English village is solved through
           genetic clues.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     4   50 SIMPLE THINGS YOU CAN DO TO SAVE THE EARTH, by The
           Earthworks Group. (Earthworks Press/Publishers Group West,
           $4.95.) Ways to combat environmental problems.

 2    79   CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie. (Hazelden/Harper &
           Row, $8.95.) Solving your own problems while caring for
           other people's afflictions.

 3     1   WALT DISNEY'S WORLD, edited by Stephen Birnbaum. (Avon,
           $9.95.) A guide to the three Florida theme parks.

 4    12   RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $6.95.) The 1990
           edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.

 5     1   GOING WITHIN, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $5.95.) A
           "guide for innertransformation" through meditation.

 6*   11   THE WORLD ALMANAC BOOK OF FACTS 1990 (World Almanac,
           $6.95.) The latest edition.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              283 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New Jersey Blast Kills a Woman; Police Find a Weapons Stockpile

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 29, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 407 words


An explosion in the basement of a house in Cresskill, N.J., where the
authorities found weapons and ammunition, killed an 83-year-old woman yesterday
and injured her grandson and another family member.

The acting Bergen County Prosecutor, John G. Holl, said the cause of the blast
in the house at 179 Broadway, on the Tenafly border, was not known.

He said the victim, Mary E. Ryan, was asleep in a second-floor bedroom when the
blast rocked the neighborhood, leveling the house, damaging houses on either
side of it and raining debris a block away. Mrs. Ryan was pronounced dead at 5
A.M., four hours after the blast and the three-alarm fire that followed it.

Mr. Holl said Mrs. Ryan's grandson, Richard Taylor, 40, was awake and in the
basement when the explosion ripped through the house at 1:20 A.M.

Door Blown Off Its Hinges

But Mr. Holl refused to say whether Mr. Taylor had been doing anything that
might have led to the explosion, which blew the heavy basement door off its
hinges and sent it flying 200 feet. Investigators found the door on Linwood
Street, a block from the house, Mr. Holl said.

Mr. Taylor suffered third-degree burns on his hands and a burn on the left side
of his face. He was taken to Englewood Hospital, where he was in guarded
condition last night, officials there said.

Mr. Taylor's mother, whom Mr. Holl identified as Wilhmena, 62, was sleeping in a
bedroom down the hall from Mrs. Ryan, but escaped with minor injuries.

A next-door neighbor, Robert Bogert, said that the windows in his house were
blown out and that the outside walls were scorched by the explosion.

'The House Was Gone'

''Everything shook,'' said Mr. Bogert, who said he was in his kitchen at the
time. ''I thought my daughter had run into the house with the car.''

''I looked out the window and the house was gone,'' he said, referring to Mr.
Taylor's house.

Mr. Holl said there was no evidence that the explosion had been caused by a
bomb, but investigators were checking reports that neighbors had smelled
gunpowder at the time of the blast. Mr. Holl said investigators were also
checking reports that Mr. Taylor was a Vietnam veteran who had worked as a
demolition specialist.

Mr. Holl said investigators found two 20-pound tanks of propane gas in the
basement, along with a shotgun, a .50-caliber rifle, several handguns, a
nonworking hand grenade and ''hundreds of rounds of different kinds of
ammunition.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              284 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Soviet Banker In Korean Visit

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 147 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea, March 5


The chairman of the Soviet bloc's central bank has arrived here to discuss
improved financial relations, South Korean bank officials said today.

Officials of Hanil Bank said

Vitaly Khokhlo, of the International Bank for Economic Cooperation, the central
bank for members of Comecon, arrived in Seoul on Sunday for a three-day visit.
Comecon, the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, consists of the East bloc,
Cuba, Mongolia and Vietnam.

Mr. Khokhlov was invited to visit Seoul by Hanil officials.

He will meet officials of various domestic and foreign banks.

''The chairman is not here for specific business reasons,'' a Hanil official
said. ''The visit is more like a fact-finding mission.''

South Korea has established diplomatic ties with Hungary, Yugoslavia and Poland
since the beginning of 1989 and exchanged consular offices with Moscow earlier
this year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              285 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Our Towns;
Man Trespasses To Stay Alive: Is He Justified?

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 781 words

DATELINE: LONG BEACH, L.I.


It was a bitter cold night not long after Christmas last year and 44-year-old
Benjamin Franklin Pierce decided to spend the night in his hidey-hole.

Most of the experienced homeless have one, a hidey-hole or a bolt hole, a sort
of room in reserve for emergencies. You don't go there every night, for any one
of a number of reasons. Someone else who is homeless might notice, and you could
show up some freezing or snowy night to find you have an uninvited guest in your
makeshift bed with a Do-Not-Disturb look on his face. Or you don't want to
attract attention and get rousted out of the place altogether by the owner or
the police.

That's what happened to Benjamin Franklin Pierce in December. He was arrested
for trespassing. At first he planned to just plead guilty and take his chances,
up to 90 days in jail.

But Vic Scutari, who runs a soup kitchen in Long Beach, was outraged when Mr.
Pierce told him what happened, and suggested he fight. As a result, Mr. Pierce's
case may become a test of the rights of the homeless.

''What was he supposed to do, freeze to death?'' says Mr. Scutari, who feeds
between 40 and 70 people a day in Long Beach and says the number is growing.
There is no shelter for the homeless in the town, public or private. Mr. Scutari
ran into Ben Pierce in court, where he was appearing on behalf of another
homeless man who was arrested for disorderly conduct when he questioned police
officers about the arrest of a companion in the Long Island Rail Road station in
Long Beach. That case was dismissed; Mr. Pierce is still scheduled for trial.

Mr. Pierce recounts the incident as if he is giving evidence - something with
which he is painfully familiar after nearly seven years on the street and a
number of brushes with the law in the normal course of scavenging food and a
place to sleep.

''On the night of

Dec. 27,'' he says, ''it was very, very cold, and I had been all sorts of
places, searching, and I was cut off.

''There was this building and I just went in and went to bed and the next
morning the police officer came in and I was arrested.

''They said, 'Ben, you're going to freeze to death in here.' They know me. There
was no hostility, no bad words.''

Mr. Pierce had slept in the building before, an abandoned apartment house with a
side door that is usually unlocked. Other homeless also sleep there
occasionally, Mr. Pierce said, but that morning he was the only one there. The
temperature was 7 degrees, and the wind chill drove it to 24 below.

Mr. Pierce's lawyers, law professors at Hofstra University who provide legal aid
to the indigent, base their defense on the legal concept of justification.

''There is no question he committed the misdemeanor of trespass, said Alan
Levine, one of his lawyers. Mr. Levine is a small man with gentle blue eyes who
at middle age still wears his graying curly hair at shoulder length, a sort of
sartorial sword and shield against the establishment.

''But the law allows for a violator to be considered justified where the threat
of harm to a person is greater than the harm involved in the violation.''

Under New York law, such a violation is regarded as ''justifiable and not
criminal'' when it is ''necessary as an emergency measure to avoid an imminent
public or private injury.''

In this case, said Douglas Colbert of Hofstra, who is Mr. Pierce's lead lawyer,
since there are no homeless shelters in Long Beach, Mr. Pierce could either
trespass in the abandoned building or risk freezing.

''Any sane person would have done the same thing,'' he said.

Mr. Colbert said his research indicates that it is ''the first time a homeless
person will try to justify entering a building without permission'' and the
outcome could have national implications. ''It's compelling for Ben and all
others similarly situated,'' he said.

But whatever the outcome, says Mr. Scutari, who said he opened the soup kitchen
on his own seven years ago after he saw people eating out of garbage cans, it
will illuminate the fact that Long Beach has no shelter for the homeless.

Although it is less xenophobic than many other Long Island towns, where a kind
of drawbridge mentality often prevails - Long Beach allows general public access
to its beaches, for example, while most others admit only residents - town
officials say there is no significant homeless problem. Building a shelter would
simply draw people from elsewhere.

Nonsense, says Mr. Scutari, who says he personally knows - and regularly feeds -
15 to 18 homeless people.

Mr. Pierce, a Vietnam veteran from North Carolina, admits he is not a Long Beach
native. He has only been on the streets there for the last seven years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              286 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Kep Journal;
Listen! A Ghostly Riviera Tells Cambodia's Story

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 782 words

DATELINE: KEP, Cambodia


This seafront resort, where Cambodia's elite bathed, yachted and gambled in the
days before Pol Pot's battalions spun the entire society through all the circles
of Khmer Rouge hell, is now a Riviera for cows.

They gambol freely along the white beaches and pitted streets, past the mossy
electrical and telephone poles shorn of any wiring, through the elegant seaside
villas of stone and concrete that were clearly all the rage then for Frenchified
Cambodians.

Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who ruled the country as monarch and then Prime
Minister until he was overthrown in 1970, had his villa, too, on a rise, higher
than the others, with a large balcony looking out to sea, and toward the islands
of Vietnam beyond.

Today, amid the unpruned magnolias and creeping thorns, the house is an eerie
wreck of past pretensions. The patterned French floor tiles, the furniture, the
fixtures, the windows, wiring and plumbing - all have been ripped or shot away.


Cow Dung and Missing Statues

The villa of one of Prince Sihanouk's uncles, closer to the sea, is a much
grander pleasure dome of curving staircases and cool, yawning rooms. Its ruin is
equally complete. Amid the cow dung on the cement floor denuded of all but a few
stubborn tiles, there are the remains of cooking fires and the stinking shells
of long-dead crabs.

Outside, near the empty plinth of a statue of a naked Diana preparing to plunge
into the sea - she was dumped there by the Khmer Rouge - a long wooden jetty
extends from the beach far out into the aqua water. This is where the yachts
used to come, and the yachtsmen embark.

Now, a few people play in the ocean - ordinary Cambodians, who live in the
thatch and bamboo houses that have sprung up among the villas, with the
Cambodian kramar, or scarf, wrapped around their middles as a bathing costume.

Nearby is the empty casino, set back from the road, fronted by what once must
have been an ornamental fishpond. Now it shelters cattle. On one of the inside
walls is a drawing of a beast, snarling. It is captioned: ''Pol Pot.''

Wanted: A Rich Investor

Khuy Sien, a secretary of the Kampot Provincial Committee, acts as a guide. He
wants to see Kep restored to something of its former magnificence, the litter
and the dung cleared away and the now-stripped hotels an attraction for rich
tourists in a Cambodia finally at peace.

The provincial committee is about to appropriate $8,000 to start the clearing
up, he said, but the real need is for a rich Thai or Singaporean to invest in a
joint venture.

Some of the ruined villas have been snapped up by Kampot party officials. But
Prince Sihanouk's house has been left unsold, for the day he might choose to
return.

Sok Hay, 35 years old and the head of propaganda and education for the Kampot
People's Committee, took one of the nicest villas, a two-story affair with a
good view of the sea, for which he paid about $60. Today, even in desperate
Cambodia, it is worth over $1,000, and he employs a fisherman's family to watch
over the ruins.

A Wife Who Never Returned

Such a sum is beyond the means of Mr. Khuy Sien, who makes about $3 a month from
his provincial job (7 to 11 A.M. and 2 to 5 P.M.), and another $30 a month from
teaching two private classes of English, from 5 to 7 P.M. His second wife keeps
him and the six children going by selling timber and lumber in the market.

Mr. Khuy Sien's moods go up and down, he admits.

He was born in the province and became a schoolteacher in Phnom Penh. When the
Khmer Rouge came, in 1975, he was sent to his native village, 25 miles from
Kampot town, and became separated from his family.

The Khmer Rouge took his first wife away ''to study for three months,'' he said.
She never returned, like more than a million other Cambodians. ''It was very
dangerous to be an enemy of Pol Pot,'' he said, and then turned away to stare at
the sea.

Bones in the Tall Grass

Near the turnoff back to Kampot, there is an empty Shell station, the outline of
its yellow trademark still visible against broken red tiling.

''Pol Pot killed many people here,'' Mr. Khuy Sien said, bending in the long
grass to reveal some yellowing bones.

The underground gasoline tank was used as a mass grave. Most of the bones were
taken to an ossuary, he said, so that they might be honored.

Suddenly one notices bones everywhere, thigh bones and tibias, a forearm, some
knuckles.

Mr. Khuy Sien, upset, turns and walks quickly away. ''When I finally came home,
after Pol Pot,'' he said, ''my children did not come to meet me. They ran away
from me.''

He stares at the sea. ''My youngest son,'' he said, ''he kept asking me. 'Where
is Mommy? Where is Mommy?' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: The Cambodian seaside resort of Kep is now a ghost of its former
self, with its once-ornate villas lying in ruin. Local officials plan to clean
up the resort in hopes of attracting tourists and investment. (The New York
Times/Steven Erlanger); map of Cambodia

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              287 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1298 words



International    A3-14

Soviet insurgent groups celebrated because Sunday's elections appeared to give
major gains to pro-democracy groups in Russia, the Ukraine and Byelorussia. But
most contests will be decided by a runoff.    Page A1



American hostages in Lebanon are not near to being released, Marlin Fitzwater,
the White House spokesman, said, although ''there is a lot happening'' behind
the scenes.    A1



Palestinians are losing pivotal allies as the reforms in Eastern Europe have
begun to reverse 25 years of assistance by the Eastern bloc for Arab nations and
the P.L.O.    A1



Likud leaders set terms for talks with Palestinians    A5



Poland's border with East Germany divides old German cities in half. Yet East
Germans, who no longer have to love their once-Communist neighbors, say they
have no claims on the land lost after World War II.    A12



Two days' labor fells Bucharest's statue of Lenin    A12



Contra leaders are trying to disband, but they have not yet devised a proposal
for returning home that can be presented at their first meeting with
President-elect Chamorro.    A10



Top Sandinistas are making threats that either the military or the secret police
must remain in their hands for the safety of the country.    A10



Aides to President-elect Chamorro met with Secretary of State Baker to lay out
an economic recovery plan, plead for U.S. aid and discuss a timetable for
demobilizing the Nicaraguan guerrillas.    A8



Pretoria sent troops to a homeland where a military coup against an unpopular
leader has resulted in rioting. South Africa's Foreign Minister said the
successful coup leader in Ciskei asked for the assistance.    A3



Cape Town inquiry of secret death-squad begins    A3


Ethiopian leader wants to end Marxist economy    A13



Citizenship for Hong Kong residents is being pursued by Prime Minister Margaret
Thatcher, not in Britain, but in other Western nations once the colony reverts
to China in 1997.    A6



China releases a prominent dissident from prison    A6



NATIONAL    A16-21

The Tax Reform Act of 1986 has generated $20 billion to $30 billion a year less
in corporate taxes than was predicted. Thus far, the shortfall has been made up
by individual tax payments, which have exceeded expectations.    A1



News analysis: Interest rates do not necessarily follow an international
pattern, many economists say. Rates in the U.S. will not rise only because they
have in West Germany and Japan.    D1



State inmates' appeals were limited by the Supreme Court in two death-penalty
cases. The Court curtailed prisoners from basing appeals in Federal court on
favorable rulings made since their convictions became final.    A1



Court voids provision in Carolina death law    A20


Second Federal judge rejects law against flag-burning    A20


Jury selection begins in Poindexter trial    A16



Campaign finance reform is pitting Democrat against Democrat, national leader
against local leader, as lawmakers in both parties push a measure to change the
way campaign money is raised and spent.    A18



Criticism mounts for compromise clear air bill    A21



Channel One, the school news show, began broadcasting to mixed responses from
teachers and educational experts, who question the merit of television in the
classroom, especially since it has commercials.    A18



The Gallup Organization will take fewer public opinion polls, a concept they
helped discover 50 years ago, in order to conduct market research, say its
employees, some of whom are troubled by the switch.    A16



Earthquake relief in San Francisco by the Red Cross and Federal agencies is now
being used to find long-term solutions to the homelessness caused by the quake,
in a sharp departure from past practice.    A16



Kennedy bill seeks $500 Million in AIDS disaster funds    A21



REGIONAL    B1-8

A Covenant House trust fund, worth $1 million and established by the Rev. Bruce
Ritter to help runaways, was used to make loans to two board members, officials
there said.    A1



A New York State police officer was killed and two city detectives were wounded
in a shootout with two suspects who tried to rob an undercover officer on
Manhattan's Lower East Side.    B1



A missing witness in the Bensonhurst case reappears    B1



Cardinal O'Connor's Sunday sermon, which included a brief discussion of two
exorcisms performed in the New York archdiocese, is focusing attention on
theologians who have been asked to explain church teachings about Satan.    B1



The Transit Authority can be sued by a woman who was raped when she was trapped
in a subway station, a judge ruled. He said that the authority's normal immunity
did not apply because its negligence in this case was so egregious.    B3



Laid-off New Jersey auto workers who used to be employed at a Linden General
Motors plant must decide whether they should wait to be rehired or leave the
high-paying industry for more stable jobs.    B1



A new Correction Commisioner was named by Mayor Dinkins. He is a Cleveland court
administrator who supports inmate work programs and has run the prison systems
of four states.    B3



New York Assembly again approves a death penalty bill    B6


Prison panel approves double-bunking in New York jails    B3


Prego testifies that she is feeling better    B3


New York-area children have lead poisoning, group says    B3


Chicagoan's genetics work is top Westinghouse winner    B6



BUSINESS DIGEST    D1

SCIENCE TIMES

As a therapist, Freud fell short, scholars find    C1


Research on noise disappears in the din    C1


Measuring workplace impairment    C1


MSG sensitivity still at issue, but labeling rules tighten    C3


Study raises question on vasectomy-cancer link    C3


Resurgent American eagle may be taken off endangered list    C4



ARTS/ENTERTAINMENT

The Whitney Museum's director was dismissed by the museum's trustees after
holding the post at the museum of American art for 15 years. Among the issues in
the dismissal, trustees say, were plans to expand the museum.    A1



Lincoln Center's theater team    C17


Broadway tribute to a drama critic    C16


Kennedy Center budget talks    C19


Theater: ''Woyzeck''    C17


Dance: By black women    C16


Word and Image: Tales of the Vietnam War    C21



FASHION    B11



SPORTS

Baseball: Opening day in peril    B17


Basketball: Autopsy on Gathers won't be released soon    B13


Nets top Kings    B15


Spurs sign on Reggie Williams    B15


Gathers an all-out player all of his life    B16


Valvano negotiates with N.C.

State    B16


La Salle Wins M.A.A.C. Tourney    B17


On Horse Racing    B15


Hockey: Rangers edge Red Wings    B13



OBITUARIES    B10

Dr. Marver H. Bernstein, former Brandeis University president
Dr. Harold G. Scheie, pioneer in ophthalmology

EDITORIALS/LETTERS/OP-ED

Editorials    A22



Clean air, common sense
Breaking ice with Japan again
Dinkins delays; the poor pay

Letters    A22



Anthony Lewis: Straining at a gnat    A23


Flora Lewis: The windy Mideast    A23


Edward W. Said: Again, Palestinians suffer    A23


George Felton: Can't tell the players without a ledger    A23


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              288 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Gary Merrill, Actor, Dies at 74; Worked in More Than 40 Films

BYLINE: By ANDREW L. YARROW

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 627 words


Gary Merrill, a ruggedly handsome actor who appeared in more than 40 films as
well as many plays and television shows, died of lung cancer on Monday at his
home in Falmouth, Me. He was 74 years old.

Mr. Merrill was born in Hartford in 1915 and attended Bowdoin and Trinity
Colleges. He began his acting career in the late 1930's at several regional
theaters and played in a 1939 Broadway comedy, ''See My Lawyer.'' During his
four years in the Army in World War II, Mr. Merrill appeared in Irving Berlin's
''This Is the Army'' and in the stage and screen versions of Moss Hart's
''Winged Victory'' (1944). He was also assigned to an Army Air Forces Radio
unit, which led to roles in many radio dramas after the war.

Through a recommendation from Hart, Mr. Merrill was cast as a young, liberal
reporter in Garson Kanin's 1945 comedy ''Born Yesterday.'' After playing the
lead in another Broadway hit, ''At War With the Army,'' he was signed by 20th
Century Fox in 1949. His film career quickly took off, and he played leading
roles in two 1950 movies, ''Twelve O'Clock High'' and - opposite Bette Davis -
''All About Eve.''

Mr. Merrill and Miss Davis married that year, shortly after he divorced his
first wife, Barbara Leeds. During their frequently stormy 10-year marriage, they
adopted two children, Margot and Michael, and appeared together in films
including ''Another Man's Poison'' (1952) and ''Phone Call From a Stranger''
(1952), and a 1959 stage show called ''An Evening With Carl Sandburg.''

''When I think of my marriage to Bette, I think we were playing at it the way we
played roles in the movies,'' Mr. Merrill recalled in a 1989 interview. ''We
fell in love in the movies. Subconsciously, we just went on after the movie was
finished. As the demands of real life set in, we realized the premise was
wrong.''

Autobiography Was Published

After their divorce, Mr. Merrill had a long, much-publicized relationship with
Rita Hayworth that he chronicled in a 1989 autobiography called ''Bette, Rita
and the Rest of My Life.''

Between the 1950's and 1970's, Mr. Merrill appeared in many films, including
''Decision Before Dawn'' (1952), ''The Wonderful Country'' (1959), ''The Savage
Eye'' (1960), ''Around the World Under the Sea'' (1966) and ''Huckleberry Finn''
(1974) - as well as a number of television dramas and the ''Young Dr. Kildare''
series. His deep voice was heard in many commercials, and he narrated television
documentaries like ''The Making of Liberty,'' a 1986 study of the restoration of
the Statue of Liberty, and documentaries for institutions like the Museum of the
City of New York and the Boscobel mansion in Garrison, N.Y. Among his stage
credits were ''Step on a Crack'' (1962), ''The Hemingway Hero'' (1967),
''Rosebloom'' (1971) and ''Morning's at Seven'' (1980).

Mr. Merrill frequently insisted that he had been only an adequate actor and
never worked at acting. ''I had no drive, really,'' he told an interviewer. ''I
just like to get by and have fun.'' Mr. Merrill had lived in Maine since the
1950's, and in 1971 he bought a historic lighthouse at Cape Elizabeth. Long
active in liberal causes, he helped rejuvenate Maine's Democratic Party by
actively supporting Edmund S. Muskie's successful 1953 bid for governor, and
participated in the 1965 civil-rights march from Selma to Montgomery, Ala. But
because of his disillusionment with the Johnson Administration's policies in
Vietnam, he switched parties. In 1968, he ran an unsuccessful primary campaign
as an antiwar, environmental candidate for one of Maine's Congressional seats.

Mr. Merrill is survived by his son, Michael, of Brookline, Mass.; his daughter,
Margot, of Geneva, N.Y.; a brother, Jerry, of Cape Elizabeth, Me., and two
grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Gary Merrill

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              289 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Liberals Starting a Journal As a Forum for New Ideas

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1474 words


Nobody will accuse liberals of having led the political debate during the past
decade or so. Indeed, many liberals themselves acknowledge, a bit ruefully, that
the ideas that made a difference in the 1970's and 80's came more often than not
from conservatives. But a small group of liberal writers and professors, many
with national reputations, are starting a new journal, hoping it will become the
focal point of a renewal.

The magazine, whose first quarterly issue will be published next month in
Princeton, N.J., is called The American Prospect. It was created, its founders
say, with the aim of bringing liberal ideas back to the top of the national
agenda.

''This magazine will enable us to find out if it's true or false that liberals
don't have any new ideas,'' said Hendrick Hertzberg, the editor of The New
Republic and a friend of some of the new magazine's founders. ''I think it's
false and I think when you get into one church these independent voices that
have been singing in different places, they'll make a mighty chorus.''

The creation of the new magazine is an occasion for some reflection, by liberals
and others, over the recent, rather poor history of a major trend in American
life. There have been numerous discussions over the reasons for the relative
decline of liberalism in recent years and what liberals must do to adapt to new
circumstances.

Summoning the Zeitgeist

The writers and analysts who raised $500,000 to start the magazine - many of
them concentrated in Ivy League academic centers - argue that The American
Prospect is being started at a propitious moment, that is, they say, when there
is a national swing in the zeitgeist, a cyclical move back to the bedrock
liberalism abandoned and neglected in the Reagan years.

The conservatives have now had their chance, many liberals argue, and their
program of reliance on the unrestricted market has failed to solve the nation's
most pressing problems. The idea that the public may be ready for a liberal
resurgence is not just a hopeful liberal idea. Kevin Phillips, a conservative
political analyst, says much the same thing in ''The Politics of Rich and
Poor,'' a book about to be published by Random House, and the editors of The
American Prospect agree with him.

They believe, in addition, that the end of the cold war has removed a major
source of contention among them, one that divided the liberal camp into those
who supported conservative demands for more military spending and those who
wanted to give priority to domestic programs.

''A lot of the antagonisms that arose in the 1960's have died out,'' said Paul
Starr, a Princeton sociologist who will be one of the magazine's two editors.
''Now, with the end of the cold war, a lot of antagonisms on foreign policy are
dying out as well.''

Robert Reich, a Harvard economist who is chairman of the magazine's editorial
board, said that by this reasoning, ''we're on the cusp of a new era.''

''My simplistic vision,'' he went on, ''is of a great emerging army of liberal
people who don't have anything to attach themselves to, no clear policy
directions, no distinct public philosophy, certainly no leaders. So it's the
perfect time to start the process of redefinition.''

Learning From the Opposition

Robert Kuttner, a writer on economic affairs who will edit the magazine with Mr.
Starr, said that some of the inspiration for the new magazine had been provided
by the model followed by conservatives when they seized the intellectual
initiative during the past two decades.

''The long and the short of it is that no existing journal was doing what, say,
Commentary or The Public Interest was doing in creating excitement on the
conservative side,'' he said. ''Liberals have been defensive and have been
trying to figure out what went wrong.''

The magazine's founders are aiming at a circulation of about 15,000 to 20,000;
about 2,500 subscriptions have been received so far. Subscriptions can be bought
by writing to P.O. Box 7645, Princeton, N.J., 08543-7645. Small sums were raised
by sales of advertising, mostly to publishing companies, in the first issue.

Mr. Starr said most of the initial funds came from private donations. The
largest single contribution, $50,000, was made by the Joyce Foundation in
Chicago, an organization that has given money to a large array of causes, from
hospitals and schools to theaters. Another large contributor, he said, is Max
Palevsky, a California computer executive who, in years past, contributed
heavily to the Presidential campaign of George McGovern and helped finance
Rolling Stone magazine.

Any new magazine, but particularly one devoted to scholarly articles, is a
financially risky venture, and many of them fail. Tikkun, a liberal Jewish
monthly, has experienced financial difficulties throughout its short history.
Recently, the American Jewish Committee announced that it was closing its
liberal publication, Present Tense.

Scholarly, and Not Irreverent

The first issue of The American Prospect is scholarly in tone and devoid of any
of the partisan irreverence and sauciness characteristic of such other magazines
of opinion as The New Republic on the moderate left or National Review on the
right.

The first issue also suggests a certain recourse to names and arguments already
familiar to many readers. Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., the historian, outlines
what he regards as the emerging new liberal opportunities of the 1990's. John
Kenneth Galbraith, the economist, publishes an essay deploring the habit of
liberal candidates, as he puts it, ''to desert their constituency and appear as
poor imitations of the opposition.''

There are also articles by writers like Mr. Kuttner, Mr. Starr and Mr. Reich, a
group of writers in their 40's, each of them already the author of several books
on social trends or public policy whose articles have commonly appeared until
now in The New Republic.

The three represent a particular strain in American intellectual life -those who
came of age in the turbulent 1960's, opposed the Vietnam War, but did not adopt
the radical, pro-revolutionary and often anti-American stances of other members
of that generation. At the same time, they did not veer toward the
neo-conservative right, as did many other one-time opponents of the war.

''The irony,'' Mr. Starr said, ''is that back in the 1960's, I was under assault
from the left. Now, the attacks come from the right. Obviously, the world has
changed, but we still think that liberalism is the best name for the tradition
that we want to carry on.'' What Is Liberalism? Several of the feature articles
in the first issue of The American Prospect suggest an answer to what might be
the central question about the new magazine: What, in this last decade of the
20th century, is liberalism? How does it differ from conservatism? Do the
liberals really have any new ideas or are they merely dusting off the notions of
earlier times?

The founders of the new magazine answer those questions in part by exploring
what happened to the old liberalism, or, put another way, how the liberal
''malaise'' of the 1970's and 80's came about. A major element, they say, was an
overemphasis on the concept of redistribution of wealth. Another element was the
common association of classic liberals with the radicals of the 1960's, a group
associated in the public mind with a tendency to see the United States, not just
as flawed, but as deeply villainous in its international behavior.

''This is not a radical publication,'' Mr. Starr said of The American Prospect.

The leading feature article in the new magazine is ''The Real Welfare Problem,''
by Christopher Jencks and Dathryn Edin. Based on new research and surveys, the
article argues that welfare recipients generally work at unreported jobs to make
ends meet. The authors' recommendation is for government to supplement low-wage
jobs with publicly financed fringe benefits to increase incentives to work.

Back to Original Notions

Asked whether recommendations like this one did not amount to a more
''conservative'' form of liberalism, the editors of ''The New Prospect'' defined
certain basic liberal notions, which they contrasted with conservatism.

Put most broadly, these principles amount to a distrust of the free market and a
belief in enlightened government as the best - indeed, the only - mechanism
available to address social problems and gross economic inequities.

Mr. Kuttner said: ''I believe that economies are not self-regulating, that the
degree of inequality in our society is too great, and that we need a balance
between market and nonmarket institutions to make society work.''

Mr. Starr said: ''We have a very positive view of the possibilities of
government. We don't share the pessimism, the sense of futility, of the
conservatives.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos: Paul Starr, left, a Princeton University sociologist, and
Robert Kuttner, a writer on economic affairs, are to edit The American Prospect,
a new liberal magazine that is to begin publication next month. (The New York
Times/Ira Wyman & William E. Sauro)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              290 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Style Setters, Take a Number

BYLINE: By SUZANNE SLESIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 2451 words


IT'S called the Design 100. It's the World According to Metropolitan Home. The
home furnishings magazine has awarded self-styled Oscars to fashion, interior
and furniture designers; architects, business executives and no less than world
leaders for design products and ideas.

The 100 winners will be on view tomorrow through March 29 in the atrium of the
Citicorp Center, Lexington Avenue and 53d Street. The Design 100 show is
thoughtful but not too cerebral, and catchy enough to be entertaining. One just
may not be able to take it all too seriously.

Many viewers will no doubt be puzzled at some of the choices. The interior
decorator Mario Buatta is in; Mark Hampton is not. Philippe Starck, the French
design superstar, pops up in more than one category, but Philip Johnson,
America's eminence grise, is nowhere in sight.

The list is an emphatically personal compendium of the trend-setting people,
places and things - as well as some friends and advertisers - with which
Metropolitan Home is in tune. Liquor stores receive kudos for their diversity in
''The Global Wineglass'' (No. 15), but then so does ''The Names Project'' (No.
2), the 22-acre quilt that remembers AIDS victims. This is the mix of the
moment, and one so giddy that it asks even a design fanatic to take a leap of
faith.

''As the decade was changing, it was a chance to look at the objects, ideas and
people who were really the Oscar winners of the decade,'' explained Dorothy
Kalins, editor in chief of the magazine. ''Not only are they good now, but they
are also the shapers of the next decade.''

That just begins to explain the presence of former President Jimmy Carter (No.
11) for ''Activism: Housing the Homeless,'' and Francois Mitterrand (No. 25),
''design's friend in high places'' and the French President who invited Philippe
Starck into Elysee Palace to design furniture for some of the private rooms.

The Barcelona designer and artist Mariscal (No. 14) gets a nod for ''putting
post-Franco Spain on the design map,'' and catalogues (No. 31) for ''changing
the way we shop.''

The exhibition, in which down-home patriotism vies with international
savoir-faire, ranges from the banal to the beatific, with the magazine's
selections in no particular order. Sponsored by Conran's Habitat, Mitsubishi
Consumer Electronics and GE Monogram, the ambitious installation was designed by
Ben Lloyd, the magazine's editorial marketing director.

''This show is about design as being a more significant part of society than
just being great stuff,'' said Mr. Lloyd, who planned a series of 30-foot-high
medieval-style towers in which some of the objects are suspended.

''It's about clothes looking like furniture, furniture looking like clothes,
everything - clothes, sofas, glassware - floating around and in movement, just
like life,'' he said.

Carol Helms, the creative director at the magazine, added that ''we're
celebrating the real movers and shakers, the ones who made it.''

Ms. Kalins added: ''Even as it stands, it's more than a hundred. We sneakily put
all of food under one number.

''Design has become such breaking news, it not only affects so much of our
ideological and political positioning but literally shapes our environment.

''Social and environmental issues are part of our concern,'' Ms. Kalins said.
''Then there's the accessibility to all the things we want to buy in the 90's.
We've tried to hit all the important issues.''

''Activism: Saving the Environment'' (No. 21) includes the explanation:
''Deodorants went roll-on, developers began talking mass transit, McDonald's is
testing biodegradable containers, hospitals are putting newborns in cloth
diapers again and recycling's gone mainstream.''

Ms. Kalins explained, ''Basically, it's making a home and a life, not
worshipping the things or the people for the sake of it.''

The list, which juxtaposes individuals with entire stylistic developments,
includes ''The Elements of Style House'' (No. 77), a builder's special in which
many of the Design 100 wares are displayed.

''It's a real house that everyone would like to live in,'' Ms. Helms said.
''It's filled with all the things that are right, right now.''

David Byrne, leader of the rock group Talking Heads, is No. 58. ''You might ask
what he's doing there,'' said Steven Wagner, editorial director of the magazine.
''To us he's a bridge; he's part of the community of design. We're at a time of
major reaching out and crossing over.''

Also included are the hot new chefs, as well as the world of fashion, with Donna
Karan (No. 94) listed for ''clothes designed for the way we want to live'' and
Giorgio Armani (No. 95) for teaching that ''the masculine can learn from the
feminine.''

The idea for Design 100 started a few months ago, when Ms. Kalins and her staff
started planning the April issue, which traditionally pinpoints stylistic
directions in design.

The magazine asked 50 staff and contributing editors to come up with their top
100 suggestions, Ms. Kalins explained. ''That's how we started out with the
Design 5,000,'' she said. ''That's not a magazine; that's an encyclopedia.''

Meetings and more meetings narrowed down the selection. ''People are not in
there because they designed a cute chair, but because they stand for something
important,'' she said.

Rather than a retrospective, the Design 100 attempted to look to the future. As
Ms. Helms noted, ''You have to show signs that you are moving on.''

Arlene Hirst, the magazine's senior design reporter, said ''Andree Putman is not
in for what she's done, but what she's doing.'' The explanation for Ms. Putman
(No. 19), who is described as ''France's style savant,'' says that ''her
Technicolor dinnerware for Sasaki is a far cry from the black and white palette
she's known for. This pioneering Parisian won't be typecast.''

The magazine also applauded the Ford Taurus and the Mazda Miata (No. 29). ''It's
nice to have a well-designed car for under $20,000,'' Ms. Helms said.  Along the
way, the Design 100 touches on such catchy categories as ''Design Deregulators''
(No. 78), which Ms. Kalins described as ''the people who have the guts to do
things the hard way and manage to bring controversial design to the public.''
Manifesto in Chicago and Diva in Los Angeles are two stores included in this
entry.

''Do-It-All Designers'' (No. 79) recognizes a trio of furniture designers: Roy
McMakin (Los Angeles), Jerry Van Deelen (New York) and Mario Villa (New Orleans
and Chicago). ''They make and sell the product by themselves,'' Ms. Helms said.

There were many exceptions to the mass groupings. ''Michael Graves has his own
number,'' Mr. Wagner said. ''And so does Peter Eisenman. You know how architects
are.'' The Chicago architects Stanley Tigerman and Margaret McCurry (No. 56) are
included as the ''conscience of architecture.''

Leslie Wexner (No. 82), the founder of the Limited and a patron of modern
architecture, was not left out. And crafts (No. 84) also got a number because,
Ms. Helms explained, the American crafts movement is ''so far from macrame and
dirty feet.''

The editors also lauded furniture makers in several categories, including
''International Moderne'' (No. 87) for ''shaking up Deco,'' ''Classics
Revisited'' (No. 89) and ''The Big Easy'' (No. 90), a series of overstuffed
chairs. ''That represents our nesting place: the chair that nurtures us
physically and emotionally,'' Ms. Helms said.

One category (No. 91) is called ''Six Grandes Dames.'' ''We're saluting six
women for shaking up the French decorative arts,'' Ms. Hirst said.

Even Lenox China, a company that is usually considered too traditional to stand
out in an avant-garde entourage, was recognized for its new mix-and-match dishes
as part of ''Tablescaping: Tasty Compositions'' (No. 92). ''A small millenium
has arrived,'' Ms. Hirst said.

Then there is Maya Lin (No. 41). ''She's a winner because of her Civil Rights
memorial,'' Ms. Kalins said of the architect. ''Important moments in the Civil
Rights movement are engraved on a granite table over which water falls. You put
your hand on the words through water. It's a healing gesture and incredibly
moving.'' Yet with its far-reaching inclusions, the exhibit seems to still show
off only the tip of the design iceberg.

''There were a lot of things that were left out,'' Ms. Kalins admitted. ''Art is
not represented as we would have liked, and there could have been a lot more
products and people.''

They may get another chance. ''We'd die if we had to go back and do it next
year,'' Ms. Kalins said. ''But who knows about the year after next?''

1. Alberto Alessi Housewares manufacturer.

2. The Names Project AIDS memory quilt.

3. DIFFA Design Industries Foundation for AIDS.

4. Jay Spectre Interior and furniture designer.

5. Mario Buatta Interior and fabrics designer.

6. John Saladino Interior and furniture designer.

7. Michele De Lucchi Furniture and accessories designer.

8. Aldo Rossi Architect.

9. Richard Sapper Architect and designer.

10. Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown Architects.

11. Activism: Housing the Homeless Jimmy Carter and James Rouse.

12. John Hutton Furniture designer.

13. Robert Davis Developer of the Seaside resort in Florida.

14. Mariscal Designer and illustrator.

15. The Global Wineglass The well-stocked American wine and spirits shops.

16. Robert A. M. Stern Architect.

17. Michael Eisner Walt Disney chairman.

18. David Ireland Artist and conservator of old buildings.

19. Andree Putman Interior designer.

20. Ron Rezek Lighting designer.

21. Activism: Saving the Environment Roll-on deodorants, biodegradable
containers, cloth diapers.

22. Frank Gehry Architect.

23. Rolf Fehlbaum Creator of modern-chair museum near Basil, Switzerland.

24. Robert Currie American interior designer.

25. Francois Mitterrand President of France.

26. Philippe Starck Interior designer.

27. Personal Tech Hand-held electronic machines.

28. Hartmut Esslinger Computer designer.

29. Car Design From the Ford Taurus to the Mazda Miata.

30. Dianne Pilgrim Director of the Cooper-Hewitt Museum.

31. Style by Mail Catalogues.

32. Places of Arrival United Airlines terminal in Chicago and Union Station in
Washington.

33. Next Wave: Borek Sipek Architect and designer.

34. Maguire Thomas Partners Real-estate developers.

35. Ralph Lauren Home furnishings designer.

36. Restaurant Design Interiors by Sam Lopata and Adam Tihany.

37. Museums as Patron The museum as generator of artworks.

38. Richard Meier Architect.

39. Katherine and Michael McCoy Heads of design department at the Cranbrook
Academy in Michigan.

40. Sir Terence Conran Retailer and designer.

41. Maya Lin Architect of the Vietnam Veterans' Memorial in Washington and the
Civil Rights Monument in Montgomery, Ala.

42. Michael Vanderbyl Furniture designer.

43. Alex and Anne Bernhardt Furniture manufacturers.

44. Ettore Sottsass Designer and founder of Memphis.

45. Activism: Feeding the Hungry Share Our Strength's efforts in channeling
restaurant leftovers to food banks.

46. Next Wave: Morphosis Architecture firm in Santa Monica, Calif.

47. Nan Swid and Addie Powell Principals of Swid-Powell.

48. Charles Pfister Interior and furniture designer.

49. Gallery of Functional Art Los Angeles gallery for art furniture.

50. Bonetti and Garouste The designers Mattia Bonetti and Elizabeth Garouste.

51. Coop Himmelblau Deconstructivist architecture firm.

52. Ingo Maurer Lighting designer.

53. Andres Duany and Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk Planners for Seaside in Florida.

54. Collecting the 20th Century Including new folk-art collectibles and
commercial black and white photography.

55. Sanford L. Smith Producer of antiques shows.

56. Stanley Tigerman and Margaret McCurry Architects.

57. Vorwerk Manufacturer of carpeting by artists.

58. David Byrne Musician.

59. Robert Blaich Product designer.

60. Art in Architecture Artists and architects working together.

61. Architectural League Nonprofit New York organization.

62. Robert Leathers Playground designer.

63. Fendi The Fendi sisters as furniture designers.

64. Next Wave: Eric Owen Moss Architect.

65. Judy Niedermaier Retailer of furniture and display props.

66. The Global Table New food ideas and star chefs.

67. Design Shrines Design shops and other stores.

68. The Gap Stylish and affordable fashion chain.

69. Cookbooks: New Home Truths Celebrating home-style food.

70. Mass With Class National chains with high style and affordable prices.

71. Bennett Bean Potter and alchemist.

72. Production Design The people who design the scene beyond the screen.

73. Barrier-Free Design Accessibility for people with disabilities.

74. Style in Store Stylish furniture chains.

75. Artists as Activists Robert Rauschenberg's charitable work and Keith
Haring's efforts for AIDS.

76. Next Wave: Massimo Iosa-Ghini Italian furniture designer.

77. The Elements of Style House Design 100 products furnish a house.

78. Design Deregulators Avant-garde furniture marketers.

79. Do-It-All Designers Furniture designers who create and sell their own wares.


80. Michael Graves Architect.

81. Peter Eisenman Architect.

82. Leslie Wexner Founder of the Limited and design patron.

83. Lake/Flato Architectural firm in San Antonio.

84. The Triumph of Craft The American crafts movement.

85. New Fabrics Lyrical patterns with soft lines and muted colors.

86. Chuck Winslow Interior designer.

87. International Moderne Style that looks old but is new.

88. Next Wave: Mathieu and Ray The interior designers Paul Mathieu and Michael
Ray.

89. Classics Revisited Furniture revivals.

90. The Big Easy Easy chairs.

91. Six Grandes Dames Six French women who are revitalizing companies in the
decorative arts.

92. Tablescaping Contemporary table settings.

93. Fashion The new individualists.

94. Donna Karan Fashion designer.

95. Giorgio Armani Fashion designer.

96. Rick Kaufmann Founder of Art et Industrie furniture gallery.

97. Simple Gardens The return of the cutting garden.

98. Robert Currey Garden furniture designer.

99. The Woven Chair A new classic.

100. The Kitchen: The New Living Room The gathering place of today's house.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos: 85. New Fabrics: Lyrical patterns with soft lines and muted
colors.; 19. Andree Putman: The designer's colorful dinnerware.; 21. Activism:
Saving the Environment: Return of the cloth diaper.; 11. Activism: Housing the
Homeless: Jimmy Carter helps build homes for the poor.; 29. Car Design: Stylish
and affordable cars, from the Ford Taurus to the Mazda Miata.; 26. Philippe
Starck: His operatically scaled colander has a Wagnerian look.; Citicorp Center:
The Design 100 exhibit will be displayed in its atrium.; 90. The Big Easy: Easy
chairs including an 1880's revival.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              291 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 10, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Turning Food Maxims (and Industry) Inside Out

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 797 words



Appetite for Change
How the Counterculture Took on the Food Industry, 1966-1988
By Warren J. Belasco
311 pages. Pantheon Books. $24.95.

''It's broccoli, dear.''

''I say it's spinach, and I say to hell with it.''

The famous caption by E. B. White for a Carl Rose drawing that appeared in The
New Yorker on Dec. 8, 1928, comes to mind because there's a lot of spinach,
sometimes in the guise of gourmet broccoli, in Prof. Warren J. Belasco's
sociological study, ''Appetite for Change.'' One is tempted to say that
Professor Belasco's theme - that the counterculture was responsible for taking
on and changing the food industry in the last 20 years or so - should be taken
with a grain of salt, except that his book is virtually salt-free.

No matter. ''Appetite for Change'' is right on the mark because the other day
Washington announced plans, to take effect next year, for mandatory nutritional
labeling on virtually all packaged foods. Truth in packaging is one of the
suggestions made by Mr. Belasco, who is professor of American studies at the
University of Maryland in Baltimore County.

Without quite the same moral indignation, ''Appetite for Change'' is in the
tradition of one of the most influential books ever published about food or
anything else: Upton Sinclair's 1906 muckraking novel, ''The Jungle,'' which
exposed abuses in the meat-packing industry. President Theodore Roosevelt read
the book, met the author and that year helped push through the Pure Food and
Drug Act.

Professor Belasco places the changes in our food habits in a social and
political context. In an all-inclusive salad bar of a statement, he writes:
''Diggers, People's Park, the New Left, Vietnam, Earth Day, feminism, the ethnic
revival, Richard Nixon, Gary Snyder - all had a lot to do with what was going on
in the kitchens of Ann Arbor, New Haven, Berkeley and many other hip student
zones. Indeed, I've found that rather than just being silly or perverse - as our
parents and skeptical peers probably thought - we were cooking up something
quite serious, ambitious and, yes, radical: an alternative food system with its
own ideology, staples and supply lines, a countercuisine.''

Undoubtedly, the counterculture did heighten awareness about store-bought foods
and encouraged people to read labels more closely. Their guidelines, the author
notes, included: ''Don't eat anything you can't pronounce (i.e., no propylene
glycol alginate, a stabilizer used in bottled salad dressing) and if worms,
yeast and bacteria grew on it, then it must be natural, for no self-respecting
bug would eat plastic. Inverting established notions of spoilage, the
countercuisine equated preservatives with contamination and microbes with
health.''

Professor Belasco has assembled a good deal of research about the nation's
growing interest in the perils of some packaged foods and the new concern about
the omissions and deceptions of manufacturers in their labeling and advertising.
He has done so with enough dollops of good humor to make his book readable.

Some of the observations about the old and new food habits in ''Appetite for
Change'' serve to recall the late novelist Nelson Algren's amusing advice,
''Never eat in a place called Mom's,'' and his lesser-known aphorism, ''Never
eat in a place with sliding doors unless you're crazy about raw fish.''

Professor Belasco properly credits Ralph Nader, the consumer advocate, with
bringing the fight for cleaner and safer food before the public and government.
Mr. Nader publicized the use of monosodium glutamate in baby food, excessive fat
in hot dogs, calling them ''among the most dangerous missiles this country
produces,'' the perils of DDT and cyclamates, and inadequate meat inspection,
saying, ''We're back in 'The Jungle.' ''

Among the recommendations in ''Appetite for Change'' is a strong alternative
food network in communities to counteract fast food, frozen gourmet meals and
supermarket takeout counters. Professor Belasco advocates more co-ops that sell
health foods and macrobiotic cookbooks. He says it's an uphill fight to
counteract the claims of the big food manufacturers and longtime poor eating
habits.

Of course, vegetarianism, organic food, dietary cautions by physicians,
weight-loss programs and health fads have been around for decades. Classified
advertising by amateur medicine men huckstering magical elixers to cure what
ails you can be found in the columns of many 19th-century newspapers. And in the
kitchens of ethnic America, one can still find traditional foods that are not
influenced by the countercuisine. There must be millions of patriotic Americans
who have never eaten a tofuburger and would take up arms to preserve their
deep-fried eating rights. Advance Publicationsd(Pantheon Books)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Warren J. Belasco

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              292 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 11, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 873 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     3   STAR, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.95.) The crossed paths
           of a man and a woman, both destined for stardom, one in
           Washington, the other in Hollywood.

 2     6   WEB OF DREAMS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           origin of a curse that has haunted a family of orphans in
           five previous novels.

 3     1   MORNING GLORY, by LaVyrie Spencer. (Jove, $4.95.) True love
           answers a young widow's want ad in a small Georgia town.

 4     2   THE EDGE, by Dick Francis, (Fawcett, $5.95.) Murder and
           mayhem on a luxury trans-Canadian train trip.

 5     6   THE FORTUNE, by Michael Korda. (Warner, $5.95.) A young
           woman's ill-fated romance with the head of America's
           richest family.

 6    100  THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.)
           A submarine driver brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the
           United States.

 7     7   MUTATION, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $4.95.) A physician's
           attempt to create a superior child results in a prodigy
           that turns into a terror.

 8     2   PLAYMATES, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $4.95.) The
           private eye Spenser on the trail of scandals in the world
           of college basketball.

 9     6   BILLY BATHGATE, by E. L. Doctorow (Harper Paperbacks,
           $5.95.) The life of a 1930's gangster.

10     2   STORMING INTREPID, by Payne Harrison. (Ivy, $5.95.) Warfare
           waged in outer space between the United States and the
           Soviet Union.

11     1   METAMORPHOSIS, by Jean Lorrah. (Pocket, $4.95.) The 10th
           novel about the "next generation" of "Star Trek" travelers.

12     5   BLACK SAND, by William J. Caunitz. (Bantam, $5.95.) A New
           York cop joins a Greek policeman in a deadly pursuit of a
           stolen ancient artifact.

13     1   WHISPERED KISSES, by Janelle Taylor. (Zebra, $4.95.) The
           stormy romance of a Texas heiress and a mysterious British
           safari guide in 19th-century East Africa.

14*    2   THE HALFLING'S GEM, by R. A. Salvatore. (TSR, $4.95.) The
           final volume in the "Icewind Dale" fantasy trilogy.

15     1   DADDY, by Loup Durand. (Warner, $5.95.) A thriller about
           the operations of a Nazi task force charged with recovering
           a huge fortune secretly deposited abroad.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    16   ALL I REALLY NEEDED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by
           Robert Fulghum (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.

 2    24   BLIND FAITH, by Joe McGinness. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.) The
           family tragedy that came to light after the 1984 murder of
           a Toms River, N.J. woman.

 3    13   NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK, by Grace Catalano (Bantam, $3.50.)
           The lives and predilections of the five members of a
           teen-age singing group.

 4     4   MURDER IN LITTLE EGYPT, by Darcy O'Brien. (Onyx, $4.95.)
           The Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde life of a physician in an
           Illinois community.

 5     1   THE FITZGERALDS AND THE KENNEDYS, by Doris Kearns Goodwin.
           (St. Martin's, $5.95.) The story of a political dynasty.

 6    333  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck (Touchstone/S & S,
           $10.95.) Spiritual inspiration.

 7     7   BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, by Ron Kovic. (Pocket, $4.50.)
           The autobiography of a former Marine, gravely wounded
           physically in Vietnam, spiritually on his return home.

 8    93   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel.
           (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The importance of a
           patient's mind and emotions.

 9     6   IN BROAD DAYLIGHT, by Harry N. MacLean. (Dell, $4.95.) The
           1981 killing of a man on Main Street in Skidmore, Mo.,
           witnessed by 45 people, a case that was never brought to
           court.

10     1   TRANSFORMATIONS OF MYTH THROUGH TIME, by Joseph Campbell.
           (Perennial/Harper & Row, $14.95.) Thirteen previously
           unpublished lectures.

11*   73   THE POWER OF MYTH, by Joseph Campbell with Bill Moyers.
           (Doubleday, $19.95.) The ways in which mythology
           illuminates the stages of life.

12*    3   "WHAT DO YOU CARE WHAT OTHER PEOPLE THINK?" by Richard P.
           Feynman with Ralph Leighton. (Bantam, $9.95.) A physicist's
           memoirs.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     5   50 SIMPLE THINGS YOU CAN DO TO SAVE THE EARTH, by The
           Earthworks Group. (Earthworks Press/Publishers Group West,
           $4.95.) Ways to combat environmental problems.

 2    80   CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie. (Hazelden/Harper &
           Row, $8.95.) Solving your own problems while caring for
           other people's afflictions.

 3     3   J. K. LASSER'S YOUR INCOME TAX 1990. (Lasser Institute,
           $11.95.) Tax advice.

 4     2   WALT DISNEY'S WORLD, edited by Stephen Birnbaum. (Avon,
           $9.95.) A guide to the three Florida theme parks.

 5    13   RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $6.95.) The 1990
           edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              293 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 12, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Directors Honor Stone

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 407 words

DATELINE: BEVERLY HILLS, Calif., March 11


Oliver Stone, the director of ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' won top honors
from his peers on Saturday as the Directors Guild of America celebrated its own.

Mr. Stone was voted the best director of a 1989 feature film as awards were
announced at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York, with simultaneous ceremonies
in Beverly Hills at the Beverly Hilton Hotel.

In addition to Mr. Stone, those nominated for best director of a feature film
were Woody Allen for ''Crimes and Misdemeanors,'' Rob Reiner for ''When Harry
Met Sally . . .,'' Phil Alden Robinson for ''Field of Dreams'' and Peter Weir
for ''Dead Poets Society.''

The movie business pays special attention to the Directors Guild trophy, since
the winner almost always repeats as best director in the Academy Awards. The
guild's best-directed film also usually receives the Oscar for best picture.

Mr. Stone's film is Ron Kovic's account of his transformation from an unthinking
patriot to an unselfish protester after a Vietnam injury that left him a
paraplegic. The guild awards are chosen by a vote of the group's 9,000 members.

In the 42 years the guild has been handing out the awards, only three of its
picks failed to win the Oscar.

Steven Spielberg won the 1986 guild award for ''The Color Purple,'' but Sydney
Pollack got the director's Oscar that year for ''Out of Africa.'' The guild's
1973 trophy went to Francis Ford Coppola for ''The Godfather,'' but Bob Fosse
won the Academy Award for ''Cabaret.'' And in 1969, the guild selected Anthony
Harvey for ''The Lion in Winter,'' while the Academy chose Carol Reed for
''Oliver.''

These were among the television directors honored:

Barnet Kellman, comedy, for the episode ''Brown Like Me,'' on CBS's ''Murphy
Brown.''
Dan Curtis, dramatic special, for ABC's ''War and Remembrance.''
Eric Laneuville, dramatic nighttime series, for the ''I'm in the Nude'' episode
on NBC's ''L.A. Law.''
Victoria Hochberg, dramatic daytime series, for the ''Jacob Have I Loved''
episode on PBS's ''Wonderworks.''
Don Mischer, musical variety show, for ''Gregory Hines: Tap Dance in America,''
on PBS's ''Great Performances.
Peter Rosen, television documentary, for ''The Eighth Van Cliburn International
Piano Competition,'' on PBS.
Bob Fishman, sports event show, for the 1989 United States Open Tennis
Tournament, on CBS.
David Cornell, television commercial, for the A.T.&T. commercial called ''Small
Town.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              294 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 12, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

No Advantage for Disadvantaged Found in a 60's Military Program

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 530 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 11


A Vietnam-era program intended to give poor youths and those with low aptitudes
a ''leg up'' on life by lowering standards for entry into the military was a
failure, a new study says.

Allowing those people to enter military service did not improve their lot later
in civilian life, said the study, conducted for the Defense Department by the
Human Resources Research Organization of Alexandria, Va.

''In fact,'' it added, ''in terms of employment status, educational achievement
and income, those who never served were better off than those who had been in
the military.''

''These data provide no evidence to support the hypothesis that military service
offers a 'leg up' to low-aptitude and disadvantaged youth as they seek to
overcome their cognitive and skill deficits and compete successfully in the
civilian world,'' the study said.

About 300,000 entered the service under the program from 1966 to 1971, with
nearly two-thirds entering the Army. Fifty-four percent were volunteers, and 46
percent were draftees.

Named by McNamara

Janice H. Laurence, a social scientist with Human Resources Research, told the
House Veterans Affairs Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations last month
that the project's ''social promises were not kept.''

Under the program, advanced by Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara, the
military was viewed as a steppingstone for social advancement.

The study raises questions about current proposals to encourage the use of the
military to some help youths overcome social and educational disadvantages.

Under the program, ''low-aptitude recruits'' - those scoring below a normal
cutoff on the Armed Forces Qualification Test - entered the service with
promises of traditional and remedial skill training.

Half the those who entered the program came from the South. More than 40 percent
were from minority groups, and the average reading ability was at the
sixth-grade level.

Most went to combat or to jobs like food service, supply, wire communications,
motor transport and automotive repair.

Flaws in the enlistment test allowed another group of about 300,000 people -
also lacking the traditional qualifications - to enter the military from 1976 to
1980, the study said.

Lagging Behind in Life

According to the study, veterans of the project wound up earning $5,000 to
$7,000 less per year than their nonveteran counterparts. Veterans were more
likely to be unemployed, less likely to be married and more likely to have been
divorced.

The low-aptitude veterans who served from 1976 to 1980 were not found to be
better off economically, educationally or socially than their non-veteran
counterparts. There were no significant differences regarding employment status,
occupational category or average income, the report said.

But the veterans had less formal education, had higher divorce rates and were
more likely to be dissatisfied with their jobs.

Ms. Laurence offered no reasons, but gave some theories: employers may be biased
against veterans; time away from ''mainstream civilian activities and pursuits''
may be damaging, and the transition to civilian life is particularly hard for
those of low aptitude.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              295 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 12, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A School in the Bronx That Is Somehow Making It

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2237 words


Last spring, the rain began leaking into the small room on the fourth floor of
the northern Bronx elementary school where Louise Warren teaches reading and
writing to students who have fallen behind.

Then, last fall, about an hour before parents' night began at Public School 94,
huge pieces of the ceiling fell down, covering the floor, the desks and the
books Mrs. Warren had bought with her own money. Mrs. Warren secretly rejoiced.
''I said, 'Good, now the parents will see it and they'll complain and maybe
something will get done.' ''

But the parents did not even seem surprised. ''They said things like, 'Oh,
that's just like what happened in my living room, or my bathroom,' '' Mrs.
Warren said. ''They accepted it.''

After 10 years in the school system, Mrs. Warren accepts nothing. ''If society
gave a damn about these children, they wouldn't let this happen,'' she said.
''It demoralized me. But I kept telling myself, 'Louise, you have to rise above
it.' ''

Poetry and Hugs

And Mrs. Warren, who uses modeling clay, poetry, picture books, hugs -whatever
it takes - to get her students to read and write, turned her patchwork ceiling
into a teaching tool. ''I had the students look at it and use their imaginations
to pick out shapes and then we talked about it and wrote about it,'' she said.
''One child said, 'Oh, it looks like a dragon.' ''

The damage to Mrs. Warren's room is only the most superficial failure of the
nation's largest school system. The 1,300 children of P.S. 94, and the one
million others throughout the city, face daunting odds and obstacles.

The New York City schools, and schools all over urban America, barely have the
resources to teach reading, writing and math. But now, in neighborhoods scarred
by poverty and drugs, they must also try to make up for all that is wrong or
missing in their students' lives - parents who cannot find jobs, parents who are
not together or who simply are not around, parents who keep moving in their
search for an affordable apartment, parents who are broke and overwhelmed.

The schools' job is made even harder by the byzantine bureaucracy of the central
Board of Education. And thousands of students are giving up: 40 percent of those
who begin high school will graduate on time, and only 54 percent will ever
graduate.

This is the catalogue of failure that the new Schools Chancellor, Joseph A.
Fernandez, has pledged to address with his program for change. He has begun to
take on the bureaucracy, but it is too soon to expect life to be much different
at P.S. 94.

Mrs. Warren, the 80 other teachers at P.S. 94 and their students must get on
with the job of education in spite of conditions that seem to conspire against
them. And while P.S. 94 is in many ways a typical urban school, somehow,
teachers, parents and Board of Education officials agree, it is better than
average.

P.S. 94 is a four-story yellow-brick building on Kings College Place, a
residential side street near two local landmarks, Woodlawn Cemetery and
Montefiore Medical Center. Once, immigrants from Italy, Ireland and Eastern
Europe lived in the six-story brick apartments on the surrounding streets.
Today, the neighborhood is overflowing with immigrants from the Dominican
Republic, Puerto Rico, Vietnam and China, as well as newcomers from Harlem and
the South Bronx. P.S. 94 is the neighborhood school: About 56 percent of its
students are of Hispanic heritage; 26 percent are black, 11 percent are Asian
and 7 percent are white.

Though English is not the first language of many students, about half of them
read at or above grade level -which corresponds to the citywide average - and
those scores have improved dramatically over the last five years.

Clean Rooms and Active Parents

But a school is more than its statistics. By other, more informal, measures,
P.S. 94 also works very well. Parents said they moved to the neighborhood just
so their children could attend P.S. 94, and many join the active parents'
association. Despite severe overcrowding, the corridors and classrooms are
clean, the building all but graffiti-free.

Maria Lopez has two daughters who have gone from top classes at P.S. 94 to
accelerated programs in high school. This year her son, Jose, is in the top
sixth-grade class.

''Ninety-four is like home,'' said Mrs. Lopez, who teaches at an intermediate
school in Washington Heights. ''You know your children are safe there.''

Teachers maneuver to get assigned to P.S. 94, and they rarely leave. After
teaching at four other city schools, Anita Cashman finally made it to P.S. 94
last fall.

''I'd do anything to stay at 94,'' said Ms. Cashman, who teaches sixth grade.
''I'd sub every day.''

Speech in a Stairwell, Music in a Locker Room

No one in the small town that is P.S. 94 blamed the custodian, Jim Burke, or the
principal, Sheldon Salzberg, for the falling ceiling. They had been trying for
years to get the Board of Education to fix the roof of their 60-year-old
building. And the roof, which was eventually repaired, was not anywhere near the
worst problem.

Overcrowding is. Every day, 1,300 students pour into a building designed for
half that number. Overcrowding plagues schools all over the city but especially
those in Community District 10 in the north Bronx, which is the second most
crowded district in the city, after District 6 in Washington Heights. P.S. 94 is
fortunate: A mini-school annex, with nine classrooms, was added four years ago.

Still, to make more room, the school has had to give up its gymnasium and, like
most of the district's elementary schools, its library. With a cafeteria that
holds only 300 students, lunch is a logistical nightmare that begins at 10:50
and ends at 1:40.

There are English classes in the hallway, speech in a stairwell, music and
science in what is supposed to be a locker room. Many classes are considered
large at 30 or more students.

Pupils in four first-grade classes are somehow learning to read in the
gymnasium. Rows of filing cabinets serve as makeshift dividers, but they do not
work as sound barriers. One of the teachers, Lynn Hiller, often has trouble
hearing what her students are trying to tell her.

''On good days I take an Excedrin in the afternoon,'' she said. ''On bad days I
take one before lunch.''

Melissa Contreras began her academic career in the gym two years ago. ''There
was just so much racket and noise we couldn't concentrate too well,'' she said.
But Melissa went on to become an outstanding student, a third grader who
eloquently states her opinions on everything from the injustice of apartheid to
the appalling lack of soap in the school bathrooms.

Bill Janell is a gym teacher without a gym. He improvises by using the
auditorium and the undersized cafeteria -when they are available. But though
state regulations require gym for all students, P.S. 94 is considered to be in
an emergency, and most children have to do without formal recreation.

Karima Raimundi, a sixth grader and the president of the student council, says
she wishes her school had a gym.

''When I go on school trips, I mingle with other kids, and they tell me they
have a basketball team and cheerleading and gym,'' Karima said. ''Most first
graders here don't even have gym. They need to get rid of all that energy.''

'God Bless Them For Getting This Far'

The students of P.S. 94 are the children of postal clerks, token sellers, truck
drivers, doormen, store owners, secretaries and nurse's aides - and a handful of
accountants, teachers and doctors. Many are from families receiving public
assistance.

The children worry aloud in their classes about drugs and AIDS and homelessness.
In an essay for his sixth-grade class, Dimitrios Tyler wrote, ''I hope, just
hope, for a better world.''

Dimitrios and his classmates are like children in more affluent schools: They
want to grow up to be doctors, lawyers, firefighters, astronauts, dancers,
business executives and baseball players.

Latoya Hunter, a sixth grader, recently completed a vividly detailed, four-page
account of the life that has so far taken her from a village in Jamaica to P.S.
94. ''That's when I decided,'' she wrote, describing fifth grade, ''I wanted to
become a writer.''

A good principal has to be as much a cheerleader as an educator, and Mr.
Salzberg never misses an opportunity to praise his students. But he says he also
wonders about the unfulfilled possibilities: ''What could they do if we had 22
in a class?'' he said. ''They come to school with so many things working against
them and we say, 'God bless them for getting this far.' But then we want them to
get that much farther.''

Mr. Salzberg, who is 54 and in his 16th year as principal at P.S. 94, has a life
story similar in some ways to those of many of his students. He was raised in
the South Bronx by his mother, who was divorced and worked her way up from
seamstress to buyer in a Manhattan lingerie factory.

His prowess at baseball won him a tryout at Yankee Stadium after high school.
But the right-handed first baseman chose a more certain future - as a sociology
major at City College.

''Kids today are different, and yet they're the same,'' Mr. Salzberg said.
''They come to school with a lot of problems. But they still have to learn.''

A 'Good Morning' From the Principal

It is 8:15 A.M., 20 minutes before the official start of school, and Mr.
Salzberg is at his usual sentry post, on the sidewalk in front of the school.
Wearing his tweed coat over his customary business suit and silk tie, the
principal greets his students by name as they arrive on foot, with their
backpacks and brightly colored down coats.

He spots Karol Acosta, a sixth grader and student council member. Karol and her
brother Tyrone, a fourth grader, arrived last year from Ecuador. Their father,
Mauro Acosta, said he left his $5-a-week job at a metal factory to take his
chances in New York so his children could get a better education. Their teachers
marvel at how quickly Karol and Tyrone learned English. Like many of their
classmates, they now translate for their parents.

Twelve-year-old Jessica Aponte is thrilled to be back at 94. Her family has
moved so often - from Puerto Rico to Miami to the Bronx to Brooklyn to Boston
and now back - that Jessica keeps having to start over in a new school. ''It's
scary and confusing,'' said Jessica, who lives with her grandmother. ''When I go
to a new school, I just take a deep breath.'' Now, she is in the fifth grade, a
year behind and determined to catch up.

Inside the main building and the mini-school, the 54 classrooms are decorated
with homemade paper snowmen, valentines and crayoned portraits of the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. Robert Pelka, rated an excellent teacher by his
colleagues and his sixth graders, is in his room on the fourth floor, listening
to Cole Porter's ''Anything Goes'' for inspiration.

''I can't wait to come into this classroom,'' said Mr. Pelka, who renounced his
career in corporate public relations 10 years ago to become a teacher. ''It's a
happy place to be.''

In her cramped office on the second floor, Judy Markowitz, one of three guidance
counselors, worries about too many children with too many problems. She thinks
she knows why one boy has been fighting with his classmates: His mother, who is
on public assistance, is nearly homeless. She moved in with relatives in another
part of the Bronx recently after losing her apartment. Her son has been making
the long trip back to school by subway.

''I give him a lot of credit for getting here every day,'' Mrs. Markowitz said.

Mrs. Markowitz, who is the guidance counselor for the second to sixth grades, is
trying to counsel the boy -and help his mother find a place to live.

Across the hall in the main office, Beth Schultz, a secretary and unofficial
historian for P.S. 94, is doing the voluminous paperwork. Her records show that
attendance was high, at 90 percent, during February. From Feb. 20 to 28 alone,
11 new students enrolled, 7 of them from foreign countries - the Dominican
Republic, Guyana and Antigua.

Before School, a Talk About Glasnost

Jose Lopez is in the auditorium, helping out as a monitor. Two hours earlier, in
an apartment where even the closets are crammed with books, his mother had
cooked french toast for him and his sisters, Melissa and Lourdes, discussed
glasnost with them and reviewed Jose's spelling homework - the list ranged from
cathedral to ludicrous to hydroelectricity.

In the family discussion, Jose had quoted his teacher: ''Mr. Pelka says
Gorbachev might lose his job.''

Mrs. Lopez says Jose has to be strong. His father, Jose Lopez Sr. -Mrs. Lopez's
childhood sweetheart from the small Puerto Rican town of Humacao - died of a
heart attack in August at age 45.

Jose Jr. pulled on his Yankees' cap, said goodbye to his dog, Charlie, and his
hamster, Teddy, and headed for school.

Moments before the 8:30 buzzer, Mr. Salzberg takes a last look up and down Kings
College Place and turns back toward his school. His door will remain open all
day for anyone - teacher, secretary, student, parent or custodian -who needs to
talk.

Any stragglers naive enough to hang around the vicinity of the local Top Tomato,
seven blocks away, or the bodega on the corner, will soon learn just how
sophisticated Mr. Salzberg's intelligence network is.

And at 8:35 A.M., another day begins.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: P.S. 94: Education Against the Odds
A periodic visit to one New York City elementary school.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Teachers, parents and Board of Education officials agree that
Public School 94 in the northern Bronx is above average despite overcrowding
that caused the third-grade class, above, to spill over into a hall (The New
York Times/Sara Krulwich) (pg. 1); Public School 94, an elementary school on
Kings College Place in the northern part of the Bronx, is plagued by
overcrowding. The school has had to give up its gymnasium, above, and its
library to accommodate 1,300 students in a building designed for half that
number (The New York Times/Sara Krulwich); Sheldon Salzberg, principal of Public
School 94, said, ''They come to school with so many things working against them
and we say, 'God bless them for getting this far.' But then we want them to get
that much farther.'' Mr. Salzberg t

TYPE: SERIES

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              296 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 13, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Mongolian Chiefs Bow To Call for Democracy

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 66 words


Responding to a growing democracy movement, Mongolia's Communist leaders
proposed giving up their monopoly on power and held out the prospect of free
elections.

The announcement marked the unambiguous arrival in Asia of the tide of change
that swept through Eastern Europe last year. The move is likely to stir
apprehension in North Korea, Vietnam and especially China.

Article, page A18.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              297 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 13, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

MILITARY LEADER AGREES TO LEAVE HAITI FOR THE U.S.

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1057 words

DATELINE: PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti, March 12


After what the American Ambassador called a heart-to-heart talk here before dawn
today, Lieut. Gen. Prosper Avril left Haiti aboard a United States Air Force
jet, and the only woman who sits as a judge in the country was nominated to be
provisional president.

General Avril resigned on Saturday as head of a military government, but then
agitated the country by refusing to leave Haiti. His departure and the
subsequent agreement of a Supreme Court justice, Ertha Pascal-Trouillot, to head
a new government appeared to ease the crisis.

''If Avril hadn't left, everybody was ready to go to the extreme,'' said
Jean-Claude Bajeux, a leader of 1 of 12 political groups that helped persuade
General Avril to resign.

The Search for a President

The new government will be the fifth in Haiti since the collapse of the Duvalier
family dictatorship four years ago and the flight of President Jean-Claude
Duvalier into exile on a United States Air Force plane like the one that carried
away General Avril today. But it will be the first government that civilian
political leaders have played a dominant role in forming.

The leaders had been stymied in their search for a new president because of a
dispute with the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, Gilbert Austin. They had
rejected him as a presidential selection because of his closeness to General
Avril, despite a Constitutional provision that seemed to put him first in line
to succeed.

''Now we have a new situation,'' Mr. Bajeux said. ''Everyone should be saying,
'Happy New Year,' because a new year is beginning for us.''

Some Are Skeptical

But many other Haitians in the capital were skeptical that Gen. Herard Abraham,
who became Haiti's caretaker leader after the resignation of General Avril,
would actually give way to civilian authority, as he promised.

For the sixth day, schools and almost all stores and offices downtown were
closed. Crowds gathered on sidewalks. No deaths were reported today, in contrast
to Saturday, when at least 20 people were killed, mainly by the security forces.
But there was little celebration.

On Sunday the political leaders said they were not sure of General Avril's
whereabouts and said they were afraid his continued presence might inspire the
1,200-member Presidential Guard or remnants of Mr. Duvalier's brutal civilian
security force, the Tontons Macoutes, to try to return him to power or to
prevent a civilian from moving into the presidency. General Abraham has confined
most of the Presidential Guard, Haiti's only remaining effective battalion, to a
barracks behind the palace and dispersed the others to diminish the threat of
their intervention.

At midday, General Abraham accepted the nomination of Mrs. Pascal-Trouillot, a
legal scholar in her mid-40's with no political experience. Later the 12
political groups announced that she would be sworn in Tuesday morning, with the
primary task of presiding over early elections.

Dispersing the Power

The political leaders say the President will govern with a 19-member Council of
State, appointed by them and endowed with veto power over her decisions. Critics
say this could lead to endless debate and little accomplishment and, in the
worst case, might encourage the army to reassert itself.

Gerard Philippe-Auguste, another leader of the 12 political groups, said this
form of government was ''necessary so as to avoid any dictatorship.''

When General Avril resigned on Saturday he made no farewell statement, but
simply left the Presidential Palace and dropped out of sight. He had indicated
on Friday to Alvin P. Adams, the United States Ambassador here, that he planned
to leave the country.

American officials as recently as last month have praised General Avril for his
efforts against cocaine smugglers.

Several Haitians tried on Sunday to persuade General Avril, who had come to
power in a coup 18 months earlier, to leave. Mr. Adams, who served four years as
a diplomat in South Vietnam in the late 1960's and early 1970's, had been in
close touch with General Avril since late January, when he inexplicably declared
a brief state of siege, and all day Sunday Haitians appealed to him to
intercede.

Mr. Adams, who is 47 years old, asked for authorization from Washington and
received it at about 1:30 A.M. Monday. An Early-Morning Talk The Ambassador
telephoned General Avril, who was asleep at home. The General told the
Ambassador to come to his home at 2 A.M.

''We talked heart to heart, person to person, for about an hour,'' Mr. Adams
recalled this morning.

The Ambassador said he made no demands but explained to General Avril that ''one
way or another he had become a major issue in the movement toward an interim
government and that whether he wished it or not he was the source, we thought,
of some of the violence that had occurred and of almost certainly heavier
violence in the days to come.''

The Ambassador said he spoke of patriotism and loyalty to institutions and
ideals. Finally, Mr. Adams said, General Avril, a career soldier with a law
degree who had been an important figure in the Duvalier dictatorship, ''excused
himself and said he wished to talk with his wife.''

''Long minutes passed,'' Mr. Adams said. ''He returned and said, yes, it was
time for him to go.''

The two men went separately to the airport. They shook hands on the runway and
at 6:22 A.M. the Air Force plane lifted off with the general, his wife, two
children and a housekeeper, bound for Florida.

The Choice of a President

In nominating a civilian president, the political leaders said they wanted to
follow Haiti's Constitution. However, the leaders agreed that they could not
adhere to the clauses that called for the Chief Justice to succeed to the
presidency. They turned their attention to other members of the high court.
Meanwhile, Mr. Austin, the Chief Justice, had extracted a pledge from the 11
other court members that they would not accept the nomination over him.

Three of those justices rejected the leaders' offer before Mrs.
Pascal-Trouillot, who had been on the court four years and was its most junior
member, accepted, despite the commitment she had made to Mr. Austin.

Concerned about Mrs. Pascal-Trouillot's safety, the leaders took her to a secret
hideaway and decided not to announce her nomination until today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: They held a copy of the accord that nominated Justice Ertha
Pascal-Trouillot as provisional president.
Photo: Gen. Herard Abraham, center, Haiti's caretaker leader since the
resignation of Lieut. Gen. Prosper Avril, appeared on a balcony with civilian
leaders.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              298 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

G.O.P.'s Favorite Finds Weicker Complicates the Race

BYLINE: By NICK RAVO, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1198 words

DATELINE: WATERBURY, Conn.


It was an ordinary Saturday morning here at the hilltop home of Representative
John G. Rowland. Upstairs, Julianne, 9 months old and named for Bruce
Springsteen's ex-wife, screamed for a bottle. Downstairs, R.J., 3 years old and
named for his granddad, wiggled under his father's arm and cried at the mention
of putting on his ''p-a-n-t-s.''

''Now R.J., remember what mommy told you about daddy running for governor,''
said Mr. Rowland's wife, Deborah. ''You have to look nice when you go out.''

This youthful and familial picture, complete with toys left in the front yard
and a Siberian husky dozing on the porch, is one of several Connecticut will see
this year as Mr. Rowland, 32, wages what many Republicans hope will be his
party's strongest campaign for the governorship since Thomas J. Meskill of New
Britain was elected in 1970.

Of 'Average Background'

''I don't think I'm a stereotype Republican from Fairfield County and have a lot
of wealth and classical blue blood,'' Mr. Rowland said on his way to St.
Patrick's Day parades held a week early in Waterbury and Meriden, two
working-class cities in central Connecticut. ''I'm more of a traditional
Irish-Catholic, despite the Waspy last name, of kind of average means and
average background.''

Implicit in that self-characterization is a swipe at former Senator Lowell P.
Weicker Jr. of Greenwich, the maverick liberal Republican whose announcement
this month that he will run for governor as an independent opened a long-running
fissure within the party. He now poses a serious threat to Mr. Rowland's
once-bright prospects.

Mr. Weicker's candidacy continues to confound politicians in both parties. But
most Republican leaders believe Mr. Weicker's decision to leave the party and
avoid a primary improves Mr. Rowland's chances for the nomination against three
lesser-known candidates: Senate Minority Leader Reginald J. Smith of New
Hartford; Joel Schiavone, a New Haven businessman, and Joseph McGee, a Fairfield
banker.

Most also predict that Mr. Weicker's candidacy would help Mr. Rowland in a
general election by siphoning liberal and moderate voters from Gov. William A.
O'Neill, who is seeking a third full term, or Representative Bruce A. Morrison
of New Haven, who is challenging Mr. O'Neill for the Democratic nomination.

''We just won the election,'' the State Republican chairman, Richard Foley, said
minutes after Mr. Weicker's March 2 announcement.

The Weicker candidacy, however, has intensified the feud between liberals and
conservatives in the party and forced many Republicans to agonize over whether
they should leave the party to support the former Senator.

Some are angry with Mr. Foley for rebuffing Mr. Weicker's desire to run for
governor as a Republican. Others are critical of the chairman for tacitly
supporting Mr. Rowland, though he has vowed to remain neutral.

''We have very serious problems,'' said Mr. Smith, a liberal Republican and
Weicker ally. ''This may even draw some organizational Republicans away, which I
find very alarming.''

Last week, Mr. Smith and Mr. McGee asked Mr. Foley to invite the former Senator
back into the party as a candidate. In exchange, they offered to withdraw. Mr.
Foley rejected the request.

He also dismissed two statewide polls conducted by the University of Connecticut
and Quinnipiac College. The results, released last week, gave Mr. Weicker large
leads over candidates in both parties.

Mr. Rowland said the polls reflected the former Senator's high name recogition,
the publicity generated by his announcement and a large number of undecided
respondents.

Among liberal Republicans, the foremost complaint about Mr. Rowland is his
ideology. ''He has extremely conservative views, and I am not sure they
represent Republicans in this state,'' Mr. Smith said. They also fear that his
failure to mend fences with the party's liberals may presage problems in
reaching the broad constituency needed to win the governorship of this largely
Democratic state.

P.O.W.'s and the Pledge

''The lesson Weicker tried to teach, by example if nothing else, is that a
Republican needs to take more moderate stands to get elected to statewide office
in Connecticut,'' said Peter W. Gold of Avon, a former executive director of the
party who is now a co-chairman of Mr. Weicker's campaign.

Mr. Rowland is perhaps best known for his work in Congress in trying to find
prisoners of war still held in Vietnam. He also led the fight to have members of
the House of Representatives say the Pledge of Allegiance each day.

On the fiscal crisis gripping Connecticut, Mr. Rowland opposes a state income
tax and would consolidate 27 of the state's agencies into 14, dismiss 1,500 to
2,000 state workers and renegotiate all health benefits.

Last summer, though, Mr. Rowland tempered his conservative image by switching
from an anti-abortion stand to a position that supports a woman's right to
choose abortion. He now also supports Medicaid payments for them.

''I support Roe v. Wade,'' he said. ''I pull from the basic philosophy and
principle of our party, and I contend that the government should not be involved
in the decision. It's a personal decision.''

Mr. Rowland denies that his switch was born of political opportunism, coming as
it did shortly after the United States Supreme Court curtailed abortion rights
last summer in Webster v. Reproductive Health Services.

Has Raised $700,000

Mr. Rowland, who has raised more than $700,000 and expects to raise $3 million,
has some former Weicker backers in his camp. He has also obtained the
endorsements of 54 of the 63 Republicans in the state House of Representatives
and 78 of the 120 Republican town chairmen and state committeemen who responded
to an Associated Press survey earlier this year. There are 169 town chairmen in
the state.

Mr. Rowland, who was elected to the state House at 23 and to Congress at 27, has
been called too young for the job. If elected, he would be the youngest governor
in the nation by two years. Indiana Gov. Evan Bayh is 34.

His supporters, though, say this is an attribute, particularly as a counterpoint
to Mr. O'Neill, who at 59 is suffering from the lowest popularity ratings in his
nine years in office.

''The times have changed; we need someone young and energetic,'' said Lillie
Head, a teacher, Democrat and former O'Neill supporter.

Backers of Mr. Rowland say he is an articulate and occasionally glib candidate,
whereas Mr. O'Neill, a former bar owner who was lieutenant governor in 1980 when
Gov. Ella T. Grasso resigned in failing health, is a lackluster campaigner, they
say.

They also believe that Mr. Rowland naturally appeals to thousands of other
young-to-middle-aged and middle-class residents who are struggling to pay a
mortgage and educate young children.

Mr. Rowland, who calls reform his main theme, said he expects to attract
conservative Democrats who have supported both Mr. O'Neill and Republican
presidential candidates.

''Bill O'Neill is more of the old Democratic political machine, the political
boss, patronage, all that,'' Mr. Rowland said. ''I'm the new guard, but we
probably have the same traditional bases.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Representative John G. Rowland held his 3-year-old son, R. J., at a
campaign appearance at a St. Patrick's Day parade in Waterbury, Conn.
Republicans are hoping that Mr. Rowland will wage the party's strongest campaign
for governor since 1970. (NYT/Steve Miller)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              299 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1345 words



International    A3-19



A strengthened Soviet presidency, to eventually be filled in popular elections,
was created by the Soviet Parliament, ending the Communists' monopoly on power.
Mikhail Gorbachev is expected to be named to the new post this week.    Page A1



Lithuania's call for independence was rejected by President Mikhail Gorbachev.
He called the declaration ''illegitimate and invalid'' and ruled out talks with
the three Baltic republics on sovereignty.    A1



NATO can defend Western Europe without resorting to nuclear weapons, according
to a new military assessment prepared by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.    A18



East Germany's election campaign has become a neck-and-neck race between the
conservative alliance led by the Christian Democrats and the Social Democrats,
who were once considered the strongest party.    A19



Economic border urged even after German unification

    A19



Democracy in Hungary has its price. The new political parties are scrambling to
pay for the trappings of campaigns in a country where American-style
fund-raising is still an undeveloped art.    A19



India is rethinking its foreign policy after the fall of Communism and the
changes in the Soviet Union. Nonalignment, a movement in which India has taken a
leading role, must now be redefined.    A17



China's tranquility is seen as merely superficial

    A9



U.N. official urges aid for Vietnam to help boat people

    A7



Unesco chief causes uproar with plan for overhaul

    A13



The Israeli Government collapsed. Prime Minister Shamir dismissed the Labor
Party leader, Shimon Peres, and Labor's other Cabinet ministers resigned,
shattering the 15-month coalition with the Likud party.    A1



The hostages should not be released by pro-Iranian militias in Lebanon and Iran
should refrain from talks with the U.S. on the issue, two Iranian hardliners
said.    A10



Tougher sanctions against Pretoria were urged by Nelson Mandela. He also called
on foreign governments to break diplomatic ties with South Africa because the
''pillars of apartheid are still in place.''    A5



New York's pension plan on verge of total divestment

    B3



The U.S. embargo against Nicaragua, imposed by President Reagan five years ago,
was lifted by President Bush. He urged Congress to act quickly to aid the new
democracies in Nicaragua and Panama.    A14



Nicaraguans on both sides praise end of embargo

    A15



The provisional President of Haiti, Ertha Pascal-Trouillot, the only woman on
the nation's Supreme Court, has received the support of the chief of the army.
    A3



Guerrilla leaders in El Salvador said they would stop attacking most nonmilitary
targets to pave the way for new peace talks.    A3



Brazil returns ten tons of arms sent by Cuba for Castro's visit

    A8



National    A20-27, B7



Mayor Barry resumed his duties after a seven-week absence for treatment of
alchohol and drug abuse. He said he would fight the perjury and cocaine charges
he faces.    A1



Rep. Dan Rostenkowski's tax plan was opposed by President Bush. While saying it
lays the basis for negotiations, Mr. Bush took issue with its proposals to raise
taxes and lower Social Security benefits.    D1



Washington Talk: Richard Gephardt has emerged as the Democrats' main
Bush-basher. It's not a popular job, but Mr. Gephardt is consumed with that rare
commodity among Democrats - a message.    A22



A plan to send George Bush to Iran as an emissary in the Iran-contra affair was
disclosed by Oliver North during his testimony in the trial of John Poindexter.
    A24



All Haitians should not give blood, according to an F.D.A. recommendation
expanding existing exclusions of only some Haitians. The policy, a safeguard
against the spread of AIDS, has angered Haitian groups.    A20



A memo on safety at weapons plants was inadvertently faxed to governors'
offices. The paper listed problems with radiation contamination and reactor
safety at nuclear weapon plants around the nation.    B7



Uranium miners tell panel that radiation causes illness

    A20



Disabled protest on Capitol Hill; 100 are arrested

    B7



After quake, applications to California colleges decline sharply

    B7



Is Honda as American as Ford? The Honda Motor is blurring the distinction
between foreign- and American-made by assembling Japanese-designed cars using
mainly Japanese parts in American plants.    A1



Beverly Hills journal: A murder most real    A20



Regional    B1-6



Record warmth in New York City lifted New Yorkers from their winter gloom. The
temperature reached 85 degrees, 15 degrees higher than the all-time record set
in 1929.    B1



Unneeded workers are being hired by New York City school boards, two Brooklyn
school superintendents told an investigative panel. The panel's chairman said
schools have become ''patronage troughs.''    B1



A program to renovate apartments for the homeless and the working poor in New
York City has fallen behind schedule and is at least $50 million over budget,
officials said.    B1



Dr. J. Emilio Carrillo named as head of hospitals corporation

    B3



Brooklyn judge is admonished by judicial conduct panel    B3



For safety, U.S. calls for speedometers on all subway cars

    B4



Rep. John Rowland of Connecticut is the G.O.P.'s strongest candidate for the
governorship in two decades, but his prospects may have been dimmed by Lowell
Weicker's surprise candidacy as an independent.    B1



The ceiling collapse at a shop in the Ansonia Hotel was caused by the excessive
weight of air-conditioning ducts, pipes and decorations hanging from the ornate
turn-of-the-century plaster ceiling, officials said.    B3



Chance visit to shop ends life of a ''very good soul''

    B3



Mysterious bullet injures doctor in Central Park

    B4



Dental expert testifies on bite mark on murder victim's body

    B6



Business Digest    D1



The Living Section



Food

Rejuvenating the faded flavor of 90's food    C1



Eating Well    C1



Cooks on the Map    C8



Wine Talk    C10



Living

The new vacation: a weekend at a time    C1



A doll for the 90's    C12



Arts/Entertainment



China brings the arts to heel    C13



Theater: Spoofing Americans abroad    C13



Belmondo revels in ''Cyrano''    C13



Word and Image: Goring's life, as fiction    C19



Sports



Baseball: Bush shuns bid to help in labor dispute    D28



Basketball: Bulls beat Knicks    D27



Gathers was determined to help his family    D27



Column: Vecsey on Capriati    D27



Football: N.F.L. to shorten games    D27



Education



Freedom to choose among schools has been promoted by educational and political
leaders, including President Bush, as a cure for ailing public education.
Opponents say ''school choice'' will foster segregation.    A1



Lessons    B8



Obituaries



Bruno Bettelheim has died. Dr. Bettelheim, the child psychoanalyst whose
prominence extended beyond his profession, was 86 years old.    A1



Walter Orr Roberts, expert on climate's effect on life

    D25



Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed



Editorials    A28



Bush presses for peace

Fiscal fire in New York

Topics: Justice mocked

Letters    A28



Russell Baker: Maybe Lunkhead Park?    A29



Lawrence Summers: Gorbachev should pay Lithuania    A29



Burton Yale Pines: Go ahead, slash the military    A29


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              300 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 15, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Seeks to Take Over the Running of Cambodia

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 647 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 14


The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council called on the
four warring Cambodian factions today to agree to transfer ''all necessary
powers'' to United Nations peacekeepers who would help administer the country
and supervise free elections.

Western diplomats said, however, that it would still take time to persuade the
warring factions to end their 20-year conflict and accept a political settlement
in which a United Nations authority would take over many of the powers of the
Phnom Penh Government.

In a statement issued early today after talks on Monday and Tuesday, the United
States, the Soviet Union, China, France and Great Britain described the role
United Nations authorities would play in running Cambodia pending elections,
saying they would guarantee human rights and ''create a neutral environment''
for elections.

The Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen, who is backed by Vietnam and the
Soviet Union, is fighting to keep power against a challenge from a three-part
rebel coalition.One faction in the coalition is the Khmer Rouge, which is armed
by China, and which ruled Cambodia from 1975 to 1978 and carried out a brutal
reorganization of society that caused more than one million deaths.

Two American-supported factions, one headed by Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the
other by former Prime Minister Son Sann, have joined with the Khmer Rouge in
battling to unseat the Hun Sen Government.

Power to Hold Free Elections

In the statement today, the Security Council members urged the four warring
factions to agree to establish a Supreme National Council that would delegate to
the United Nations officials ''all necessary powers including those to conduct
free and fair elections.'' Western diplomats said the United Nations authority
might also run several government ministries.

The declaration proposed that the council would hold Cambodia's United Nations
seat and ''could include representatives of all shades of opinion,'' which
diplomats said would probably include the Khmer Rouge.

Diplomats said progress toward a settlement remained stalled over China's demand
that the Hun Sen Government be totally dismantled to make way for United Nations
administration and the Soviet Union's insistence that as much of the Hun Sen
Government remain as intact as possible during such an administration.

American officials have expressed concern about the cost of the Chinese
proposal. According to one study, having the United Nations run the country from
top to bottom would require 200,000 people and cost $21 billion a year.

Consensus on a U.N. Role

Mr. Hun Sen has insisted that dismantling his Government could pave the way for
the Khmer Rouge to return to power. To help reassure his Government, the
Security Council members said the United Nations Transitional Authority, the
suggested name for the proposed group, would ''exercise all powers necessary
over Cambodian territory'' to guarantee human rights and prevent intimidation,
corruption, and economic and social discrimination.

American officials suggested that the United Nations might run the Ministries of
Interior and Information to insure a neutral political environment and prevent
Mr. Hun Sen from using those ministries as campaign instruments.

In a news conference today, a senior American official said ''substantial
progress'' had been made at the Paris meeting, especially in elaborating the
United Nations's future role and election procedures.

The American official, who asked that his name not be used, said that if the
Security Council proposal were put into effect, it would be the first time that
the United Nations administered a country's government.

The American official said progress had recently been made in that all four
Cambodian factions have accepted that the United Nations should play a larger
role in settling the conflict.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              301 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 16, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Economic Scene;
U.S. Lessons For Soviet Reform

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 885 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


DESPITE Mikhail S. Gorbachev's high standing abroad and his unopposed election
as the Soviet Union's first Executive President, his popularity appears to be
sinking like a stone with his own people as a result of his failure to deliver
on his economic promises.

Marshall D. Shulman, the senior director emeritus of the Harriman Institute of
Columbia University, who hopes Mr. Gorbachev will succeed, has himself been
shocked by the rising public anger with the Soviet leader. Mr. Shulman described
a party with old Moscow friends at which the young man of the family, watching
Mr. Gorbachev addressing the Congress of People's Deputies, hooted, ''Blah blah
blah.''

And a taxi driver, who refused to accept rubles, which he described with a
contemptuous epithet, also called Mr. Gorbachev's words ''blah blah blah.''

Apparently seeking to deflect criticism from himself, Mr. Gorbachev appears
ready to throw Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov to the wolves. Mr. Gorbachev
has permitted a leader of the radical opposition, Anatoly Sobchak, to bring
charges of corruption against the Prime Minister over his purported illegal
exportation of a sophisticated Soviet battle tank, the T-72.

A more critical issue, though, is the economy. In accepting the Executive
Presidency, Mr. Gorbachev vowed to move his nation more rapidly in the direction
of a market economy.

But questions remain whether the leadership has the foggiest idea of how to
convert from an economy overburdened with military expenditures to a more
efficient, less inflationary civilian economy.

Attending an international economic seminar here, Henry S. Rowen, the United
States Assistant Defense Secretary for international security affairs, estimated
that Soviet military spending constitutes 20 to 30 percent of gross national
product - four to five times the American military burden.

But Mr. Rowen and other Americans here with experience in converting military
plants to civilian use after World War II, Korea and Vietnam have concluded that
the Soviets are being naive and essentially wrongheaded about how to make such a
conversion.

Soviet thinking is typified by that of Leonid Vid, deputy chairman of Gosplan,
the state planning committee, who spoke at the seminar here. In an article in
the weekly publication Ogonyok in May, Mr. Vid said the conversion of Soviet
plants was taking place in various ways; he cited as a good example the Votkinsk
plant in the Urals, which previously built the SS-20 medium-range missiles that
were eliminated by a treaty with the United States.

The Votkinsk plant, Mr. Vid said, has started producing heat-resistant storage
containers. He added: ''The trucks which used to carry missiles will now take
tanks of cooled beer, juices and milk to consumers. Each container can hold
24,000 pints of chilled beer, enough to satisfy the thirst of a small town.''

But William J. Perry, chairman and chief executive of Technology Strategies and
Alliances of Menlo Park, Calif., a consulting firm that advises military
producers, told the Russians here that although the most obvious course for a
military company with decreasing orders was to diversify into products for the
commercial market, this could be a terrible mistake. In the United States, Mr.
Perry said, most such attempts had been ''unsuccessful, some spectacularly so.''

He urged Soviet military companies planning to diversify to assess the qualities
that had enabled them to succeed in the military field. In the United States,
military contractors' growth had usually been determined by technology and
ability to sell that technology to a small, select number of customers, and the
profits of these companies had usually been based on costs incurred, not on
ability to meet a market price in the face of competition.

These qualities, when applied to commercial markets, Mr. Perry said, ''generally
led to failure, since the competitive factors in most commercial markets are
quite different.'' Hence he warned that a military systems company should not
try to make the enormous leap into consumer products, where success depends on
meeting the needs of a large and unsophisticated market, unless it had
thoroughly thought through and developed plans for entering the civilian
economy.

The danger of the Soviet approach, described by Mr. Vid and others, is that it
is likely to transfer the high-cost methods - or even the cost-be-damned methods
- of the military into the civilian economy, thereby aggravating inflationary
pressures and worsening marketing problems.

Central state planning cannot solve those problems. The preferred approach, made
simple in the United States by a sensitive market structure, would be for
managers to respond to market signals; as long as the Soviet system remains a
command economy rather than a market economy, Soviet managers will have
difficulty following the American example. Yet there are examples in the
American experience that could be applied here.

Prime Minister Ryzhkov comes out of the planning system, as does Mr. Gorbachev.
The great question is whether the Soviet Executive President can at last change
direction, gather around him advisers who are prepared to cut loose from the
failing system of command and control, and give the people something more than
''blah blah blah.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              302 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 16, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At the Movies

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1539 words



South of the Border

Anyone looking for Volker Schlondorff these days might best be advised to try
Mexico - and specifically the area around Veracruz.

There, the German-born director of the current ''Handmaid's Tale'' -based on
Margaret Atwood's novel about a futuristic United States where women are
subjugated - is embarked on a new project: ''Last Call for Passenger Faber,''
starring Sam Shepard.

''Once again it's one of these European masterpieces I can't stay away from,''
said Mr. Schlondorff, whose 1979 film version of the Gunter Grass novel ''The
Tin Drum'' won an Academy Award for best foreign film. Mr. Schlondorff explained
that ''Last Call for Passenger Faber'' is based on a novel by the Swiss author
Max Frisch titled ''Homo Faber,'' which, he said, ''means man, the maker of his
own fate or own fortune.''

Mr. Schlondorff said he first read the novel probably 20 years ago. ''It's the
kind of thing that comes back to you,'' he observed.

''I've been now living for five years in New York while commuting every other
month to Europe - sort of a trans-Atlantic experience,'' he said. ''The central
character in this novel, Faber, is living exactly between New York and Europe
somehow. He is an American who studied in Zurich. He believes in anything he can
calculate, foresee and put into statistics.

''But then there is another part of him, which is his emotional side, his
intuitive side, which is very attracted to another dimension, sort of the
European dimension. And, well, that somehow gets him into a conflict. He feels
he can control nature at large through technology, but he can't quite control
emotions. But he has the hubris to think he can.

''It's a tragedy. It's almost like Sophocles. It was written in 1957, and it has
very much this Existentialist feeling about the fall of man, as in Camus.''

The 16-week shooting schedule for the film, co-written by Mr. Schlondorff and
Rudy Wurlitzer (''Walker''), takes cast and crew first to Mexico, where Faber,
an engineer, is building a dam in the forest, then to Paris, Greece and Italy.

Mr. Schlondorff said his own move to New York had proved invigorating. ''I never
intended to actually move from Europe to New York,'' said the film maker, noting
that he is turning 50 years old this year. ''I just got curious about the
country, and I felt so good about being in New York. I was all of a sudden an
unknown again, and I had the feeling the future was still ahead of me. And it
made me feel 25 again.

''You start somewhere else from scratch, you feel you must be young again.''

Mr. Schlondorff said he had been ready to film ''Last Call for Passenger Faber''
when the opportunity to direct ''The Handmaid's Tale'' arose. ''I thought it had
been waiting 30 years so it could wait a little longer,'' he said of the Faber
project, ''while 'The Handmaid's Tale' had to be done right away.

''So I had it postponed. I'm glad I did. I have at last one truly American movie
behind me, and I can again do this truly European piece.''

He terms ''Last Call for Passenger Faber'' a ''strictly European production.''

''For me, it's a trans-Atlantic enterprise. I try to bring to it my experience
from both ends.''

Haft's Bronx Project

Lots of good things have been happening to Steven Haft since that day in 1986
when he looked at a script submitted to him as a writing sample and decided he
would like to produce it.

The script was by Tom Schulman, and Mr. Haft said, it ''had been passed on twice
by all of the studios.''

The resulting movie, released by Touchstone Pictures, a subsidiary of the Walt
Disney Studios, was ''Dead Poets Society,'' which has taken in more than $170
million at the box office and has been nominated for Academy Awards in the
categories of best picture, best actor (Robin Williams) and best original
screenplay.

Abroad, it is worth noting, the film has been nominated for six of the British
Academy of Film and Television Arts awards to be conferred Sunday in London -
best film, best achievement in direction (Peter Weir), best original screenplay,
best actor in a leading role, best original score (Maurice Jarre) and best
editing (William Anderson, Lee Smith, Priscilla Nedd).

Mr. Haft said that at the point when he read Mr. Schulman's screenplay about a
teacher who comes into conflict with the leadership of the boys' school where he
was educated, it was considered a dead script. All he was doing was looking for
a writer for a screenplay he had in mind. ''But when I read it, I was crazy
about it,'' he said of Mr. Schulman's script. ''It was far more interesting than
anything I was developing.''

The rest, as they say, is history -and history still in the making.

But that history has already made an impact on the career of Mr. Haft, a New
Yorker who came to the film industry as an independent producer from a
background in public-interest law. ''What happened last summer,'' he said, ''was
that as the film was taking off domestically, I started talking with a couple of
motion-picture studios and ended up making an arrangement last August with 20th
Century Fox.

''Over the next several years they will finance the development of films for me
to produce and provide me with a staff on the West Coast and on the East Coast
to assist with that development.''

Among these projects, Mr. Haft said, is the revival of the company's plans to
make a film version of a novel he said was bought about seven years ago - ''The
Old Neighborhood,'' by Avery Corman, the author of ''Kramer vs. Kramer.''

It the the story, Mr. Haft said, of a married man who leaves his family and
moves back to the Bronx. Explaining his interest in the project, Mr. Haft, who
grew up in Flushing, Queens, said, ''I believe that we all have reinvented
ourselves over time since high school, and as someone who has just turned 40 and
has been doing some looking back lately, I find I - and, I'm sure, many other
people - wonder what happened to that purer self, that person that we once were.

''I like to see 'The Old Neighborhood' as a kind of anthem for those people who
are trying to recover some of who we were as kids and revive those instincts in
our adult lives.''

Mr. Haft said that among his other projects are ''Last Man on the List,'' based
on a forthcoming novel by Bob Randall (author of the play ''6 Rms Riv Vu'' and
the novel ''The Fan''). ''It's about a group of wealthy, bored housewives who
form a pact to turn themselves into a pack of wealthier, less bored widows,''
Mr. Haft said.

There is also a film based on ''Cantor's Dilemma,'' a novel written by the
chemist Dr. Carl Djerassi and based on the pursuit of a Nobel Prize. And there
is ''Lightning Bender,'' a father-son story set in the West after the Civil War,
and a comedy titled ''Ditto'' that Mr. Haft was working on with Graham Chapman
of Monty Python when Mr. Chapman died last year.

''It's a piece that explores what would happen if any of us had a chance to
spend a month living with our own alter ego under the same roof,'' Mr. Haft
said. ''It's about a husband and wife and their alter egos.''

When it comes to a production philosophy, Mr. Haft said: ''I'm looking for
something that's warm, that's written in a literate fashion, that's about
something. And I do tend to respond to material that has at least one character
that is a bit larger than life, a bit more interesting than the sort of people
we have lunch with every day.''

'A Second Look'

Life doesn't offer much in the way of second chances, but the American Museum of
the Moving Image does.

Beginning tomorrow, the museum in Astoria, Queens, will present ''A Second
Look,'' a film program running through March 30 and offering what it regards as
an assortment of provocative films of 1989 that have been underrated or
overlooked.

The series opens at 2 P.M. tomorrow with Jim McBride's ''Great Balls of Fire,''
starring Dennis Quaid as the rock star Jerry Lee Lewis. At 5 P.M., the
attraction is Bob Balaban's ''Parents,'' a very black comedy about family life
in 1950's suburbia, with Mr. Balaban, Randy Quaid and Mary Beth Hurt.

The attractions on Sunday are ''Powwow Highway,'' Jonathan Wacks's road movie
about American Indians, presented at 2 P.M.; and at 5 P.M. there is Patrick
Duncan's ''84 Charlie Mopic,' about a small Army unit on a mission in Vietnam.

Among other films to be presented in the series are Terry Gilliam's ''Adventures
of Baron Munchausen'' and John Milius's ''Farewell to the King.''

The museum is at 35th Avenue and 36th Street. Admission: $5 ($4 for the elderly,
$2.50 for children and the elderly). Program information: (718) 784-0077; travel
directions: (718) 784-4777.

A Sequel to 'F/X'

''F/X 2,'' a sequel to the popular 1986 suspense thriller about a movie
special-effects wizard and a tough New York City police detective, is on the
Orion Pictures schedule for spring production.

If all goes according to plan, Bryan Brown will be back as the wizard, Rollie
Tyler, and Brian Dennehy as the detective, Leo McCarthy, when filming begins on
April 16 under the direction of Richard Franklin (''Psycho II'' and the pilot
episode of the television series ''Beauty and the Beast'').News
Corporationd(20th Century Fox)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Volker Schlondorff (Jon Gardey/Cinecom)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              303 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 17, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Broadcasting Awards Given For Coverage of Disasters

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 50, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 751 words

DATELINE: ATHENS, Ga., March 16


San Francisco and Charleston, S.C., radio and television stations won Peabody
Awards on Thursday for their coverage of two natural disasters: the earthquake
in the San Francisco Bay area last October and the hurricane that swept the
Carolinas and the Caribbean last September.

CBS Radio News and Cable News Network were also honored for their reporting of
the student uprising in China.

The annual awards for distinguished broadcasting were announced by the
University of Georgia College of Journalism and Mass Communication. The 27
recipients will be presented with the awards on April 3 in Atlanta.

The winners were selected from 812 entries submitted by radio and television
stations and networks around the world. A 15-member national advisory board
judged the entries.

The 50-year-old awards are named for George Foster Peabody, a Columbus, Ga.,
native who became a banker and philanthropist in New York.

Here are the winners:

KCBS-AM, San Francisco, for ''Earthquake '89.''

CBS Radio, New York, for ''China in Crisis,'' for coverage of the extraordinary
events in China.

National Public Radio, Washington, for Scott Simon's Radio Essays, presented on
''Weekend Edition Saturday.''

The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, Toronto, for ''Lost Innocence: The
Children of World War II,'' ''a recollection of the horror of war as seen
through the eyes of youth.''

D. Roberts, independent producer, American Public Radio's ''Soundprint'' series,
for ''Mei Mei: A Daughter's Song.''

Texaco Inc. and the Metropolitan Opera Association, honoring a half-century of
continuous Saturday afternoon radio broadcasts, the longest continuing
sponsorship of a national program in broadcasting history.

WCSC-TV, Charleston, S.C., for providing a ''lifeline for viewers deprived of
water, communications and other essential services'' after Hurricane Hugo.

KGO-TV, San Francisco, for public service after the 1989 earthquake, when it
served as an information clearinghouse.

KING-TV, Seattle, for ''Project Home Team,'' an examination of the problems of
the working poor.

KRON-TV, San Francisco, for ''I Want to Go Home,'' an account of the plight of
homeless children in San Francisco.

Cable News Network, Atlanta, for coverage of the China crisis.

Central Independent Television, London, for ''Cambodia Year 10,'' an examination
of ''the plight of the nation from the Pol Pot regime to its tenuous present.''

MTV, New York, for ''Decade,'' a look at the 1980's through the eyes of music
performers and news subjects. .

CBS and Motown-Pangaea Productions, in association with Quintex Entertainment,
for the television mini-series ''Lonesome Dove.''

ABC and the Black-Marlens Company, in association with New World Television, for
''The Wonder Years.''

ABC and Sacret, in association with Warner Brothers Television, for ''China
Beach: Vets,'' an episode that recounted the experience of American nurses in
Vietnam.

ABC, Lou Rudolph Films, Motown Productions and Allarcom and Fries Entertainment
for the mini-series ''Small Sacrifices.''

Beyond International Group, Sydney, Australia, for ''The Great Wall of Iron,'' a
behind-the-scenes examination of the Chinese People's Liberation Army.

HBO, New York, for ''Common Threads: Stories From the Quilt.''

KCNC-TV, Denver, for ''Yellowstone: Four Seasons After Fire.''

Public Affairs Television, New York, for ''The Public Mind,'' Bill Moyers's
critical look at public opinion formation and how the media affects basic social
institutions.

WLOX-TV, Biloxi, Miss., for ''Did They Die in Vain?'' an examination of
Mississippi's progress in race relations during the last 25 years.

Film News Now - the American Documentary, New York, for ''Who Killed Vincent
Chin?,'' an examination of a murder in Detroit.

Children's Television Workshop, New York, for ''Sesame Street'' and for what the
judges described as ''two decades of innovative and effective education through
the medium of television.''

NBC News, New York, for ''NBC News Special: To Be an American,'' and Tom Brokaw.


David Brinkley of ABC-TV, a personal award ''attesting to the exceptional
contributions he has made to broadcasting during his tenure as one of this
country's richest treasures.''

J. Leonard Reinsch, a pioneer in broadcasting, cable and political
communication, ''for a lifetime of outstanding service to his chosen
profession.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              304 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 17, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

In a Confusing Game of 'Musical Teachers,' a Class Still Learns

BYLINE: By Sara Rimer

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1825 words


Elvis Tejada, an 8-year-old student at Public School 94 in the northern Bronx,
discovered in January that his class was about to get a new teacher -again.
Elvis, who hates to lose even a moment when he could be learning something new,
was fed up.

''We've had four teachers already in the third grade,'' he said.

''We get dizzy,'' said one of Elvis's classmates, Domingo Castillo, who was
dizzy enough already from his family's serial moves between the Dominican
Republic and the Bronx.

''They're playing musical teachers with us,'' said another student, Leslie
Hamilton. Asked who he thought ''they'' was, Leslie answered with absolute
certainty: ''The city, the state, the nation.''

The revolving teachers in Room 217 were not the fault of administrators at P.S.
94. They were just trying to follow the rules - and somehow educate 1,300
students in a school built for half that number. Once again, teachers and
students had to adapt as well as they could to the severe overcrowding that
makes the already tough job of a New York City public school even tougher.

Sometimes something happens -like one class having four teachers in five months
- that might seem astonishing to an outsider. But at P.S. 94, it is all part of
the routine.

The teachers caught in the final rotation had to establish discipline and
rapport with a new class in mid-year. It was like asking a director who had been
rehearsing a play for months to suddenly start over with a new cast.

Like their counterparts everywhere, the students tested the new teacher with
guerrilla tactics - incessant talking, prolonged homework strikes, smuggling
candy into class. The skirmishing went on for weeks.

New York City teachers say the secret to gaining respect is to follow this rule:
''Don't Smile Till Christmas.'' So, on her second day with the third-grade class
in January, Teacher No. 4, Sheila Herndon, was trying not to smile. ''I feel
like it's the second week of school,'' she said.

Ms. Herndon, who had lost her own fourth-grade class in the shuffling, faced an
extra hurdle. Her new class had already fallen in love - with Teacher No. 3,
Anita Cashman.

''They keep saying they want Mrs. Cashman back,'' Ms. Herndon said. ''I'm used
to relationships ending sooner than expected, but they're not.''

Mrs. Cashman said good-bye to her third graders and then took over a sixth-grade
class that had been wearing out the substitutes who had been filling in for
their ailing teacher. Mrs. Cashman had never taught sixth grade, and it is a
long way from the third grade to the oldest and biggest children.

''Mr. Salzberg said I was going to have to sink or swim,'' Mrs. Cashman said,
referring to a pep talk from the principal, Sheldon Salzberg. ''I told him,
'Well, then, I'm going to drown.' ''

Extra Work, No Extra Pay

Then she got busy studying the curriculum so she could start right in teaching
about the Middle East.

Ms. Herndon had never taught third grade. Both teachers had to put in hours of
extra work - for no extra pay.

Walter Darrigrand, a teacher who helps out with the middle grades, tried to
explain to the third graders a series of events so complicated even a 29-year
veteran of the system like himself had trouble keeping it all straight. ''I told
them there were circumstances beyond our control and that we hoped they would
show us all how grown-up they could be,'' he said.

Wilbert Pabon, a third grader, described the commotion in class that day.
''Omigod, it was like a volcano!'' he said. ''All the girls started crying. The
boys all felt sad, but they didn't cry. Boys don't cry.''

No third grader could possibly comprehend why Wilbert and his classmates have
had four teachers this year. Here is what happened: To accommodate a record
number of third graders, Mr. Salzberg formed an extra class by pulling Wilbert
and 23 other students from several overcrowded classes in September.

'I Like Her Face'

Their new teacher quit after two days because her commute from her new home in
New Haven was too taxing. It was October. Enter Mrs. Cashman, who had been
substituting at P.S. 94 and hoping for a full-time job.

Mrs. Cashman, 26, has a smile that can light up a classroom, a lot of patience -
and a popcorn popper. The third graders were in love.

''I like her face,'' Domingo Castillo said, recalling the days of Mrs. Cashman.
''I like how she writes on the blackboard. She does funny things to make us
laugh. She gives us popcorn.''

Yvette Bullock, who during second grade had been struggling to make the
transition from private school, blossomed.

At home, Wendy Del Valle described her teacher in relentless detail. ''I know so
much about this teacher,'' said Wendy's mother, Minerva Santiago. ''Everything
was, 'Mrs. Cashman this, Mrs. Cashman that. Mrs. Cashman doesn't wear much
make-up. Mrs. Cashman walks to school (actually, she walks from the bus stop to
school). Mrs. Cashman likes this kind of blouse.' ''

But after Christmas vacation, the perfect relationship had to end. More children
had arrived, mostly from Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic. Mr. Salzberg
had to form a new bilingual class for 18 Spanish-speaking fourth and fifth
graders.

That court-mandated action, combined with seniority rules and the overcrowding,
rippled through the building. To free up a room for the new class, Mr. Salzberg
reluctantly dispersed Ms. Herndon's fourth graders to other classes.

Ms. Herndon, a 10-year veteran, needed a new position. The best arrangement Mr.
Salzberg could work out was to give her Mrs. Cashman's class. Mrs. Cashman, with
less seniority, was moved to the sixth grade, whose teacher didn't know when she
would be well enough to return. Mrs. Cashman considered herself lucky to keep a
job at P.S. 94.

'Don't Worry, I'm Not Mean'

Ms. Herndon took over the third grade on Jan. 15. One student, Domingo Castillo,
was missing.

''I thought she was mean because she was a fourth-grade teacher,'' Domingo said.
''I hid next to the door and I told my friends, 'I ain't going in there.' Angel
told the teacher I was there. She came and said, 'Don't worry, I'm not mean.'
I'm glad she wasn't mad. I did my work, and she checked it and said, 'Good work,
Domingo.' I said, 'Thank you.' ''

Ms. Herndon said: ''I have to prove myself to these children.''

She came to the third grade armed with four potted plants, a computer, a globe
tottering on its taped-up broken base (a new globe would cost $82), her own
clock for a room that did not have one - and her popcorn popper.

''Mrs. Cashman always made popcorn,'' she said.

In Room 217, popcorn is a teaching aid. Because of overcrowding, the third grade
doesn't get to eat lunch until 12:40, four hours into the day.

''They're hungry,'' Ms. Herndon said. ''They get distracted.'' Popcorn helps.

Still, there were days when 8 girls and 16 boys persisted in talking out of turn
and careering about the room like pinballs.

''Teacher! Teacher!'' they called out, some unable to remember her name, others
refusing to.

A little exercise in the gym - unavailable because of the overcrowding - might
have helped calm the students. The teacher stuck to her own after-school regimen
of African dance classes and herbal tea. She needed stamina.

Impatient With Nonsense

''Children, I love to teach,'' an exasperated Ms. Herndon said one day. ''But I
feel like I'm a soldier who has to fight to get you to learn.''

Elvis, with his Batman T-shirt showing through his habitual shirt and tie, was
also impatient with all the unnecessary talking.

''C'mon, we want to learn!'' he exhorted his classmates.

June loomed. If Ms. Herndon was not able to seize control, the students might
not learn the basic skills, like suffixes and prefixes, needed to graduate to
the fourth grade. Some were already behind.

''I had my days when I said, 'This is not going to work, these kids have been
tossed around too many times,' '' Ms. Herndon said recently. ''I worried that
they would feel that school was unfair. Then they would have turned off.'' But
she wouldn't let them. For tips on discipline, she consulted two experts,
Rebecca Williams and Dolores Lawson, both veteran second-grade teachers. She
mastered the precise pronounciation of 24 new names, a roster that includes
Besnik Gjevukaj, from Yugoslavia, Nayla Olivencia, from Puerto Rico, and Thien
Truong, from Vietnam.

''If you pronounce their names wrong, they think you care even less,'' she said.

She stayed after school to decorate the walls with pink and blue paper she had
purchased herself. ''One kid asked me, 'Are you going to quit?''' she said. ''I
told him, 'I'm not a quitter.' I owe it to these kids to give it everything I've
got.''

She encouraged the third graders to look out the window of Room 217, at a rare
expanse of Bronx sky, unbroken by buildings. ''See that sky?'' she told them.
''You can go as far and as wide as that sky is.''

After another trying day, Ms. Herndon said: ''Today all I see are small bodies
with large mouths.''

Ms. Herndon, 32, was inspired to become a teacher by her mother, Elsie Roberts,
who had always wanted to be one.

With five children to raise in the South Bronx while her husband, Fred Roberts,
worked as a cook at Montefiore Hospital, Mrs. Roberts was not able to realize
her dream. But she did become a paraprofessional in the city schools.

'It's Fun to Learn With You'

''She used to tell me about teachers reading the newspaper, or filing their
nails in class,'' Ms. Herndon said. ''She told me, 'Sheila, if you ever do
anything like that, you'll disgrace me.' ''

In the last month, the third graders have started to come around. During a
reading lesson on ''The Magic Alligator,'' in which a wise alligator shows a
forlorn crow that he does have friends, Nayla informed the teacher: ''You know,
I like you, It's fun to learn with you.''

''She's nice,'' Domingo said. ''She gives us a lot of homework so we can
learn.''

Mrs. Cashman, meanwhile, has been taming the 32 sixth graders in Room 401. One
threat - ''You can just stay here another year!'' - seems to be particularly
effective.

Speculating that sixth graders might regard popcorn as the ideal missile, Mrs.
Cashman has put her popcorn popper under wraps. Ms. Herndon's popcorn popper
hasn't been getting much use lately, either.

''We don't have time for popcorn anymore,'' Ms. Herndon said the other day,
after an exhilarating lesson on black history. ''They don't even ask for it
anymore. It's my class now. They know my name, I know their names. We can go
someplace now.''

THE SERIES SO FAR

The first article of this series on P.S. 94 appeared on March 12. It described
how the north Bronx elementary school manages to educate its children despite
daunting obstacles shared by so many of New York City's public schools - an
aging, overcrowded building, a painful lack of money, a byzantine school
bureaucracy and the chaos of many of its students' lives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: P.S. 94: Education Against the Odds - A periodic visit to one New York
City elementary school.

GRAPHIC: Overcrowding the public schools has meant four different teachers for a
third-grade class at Public School 94 in the Bronx. Shelia Herndon with her
students, from left, Elvis Tejada, Tasha Vega and Stardyan Jones. (NYT/Sara
Krulwich) (pg. 1); Anita Cashman, teacher No. 3 in the third-grade class at
Public School 94 in the Bronx, was one of the students' favorite teachers. (The
New York Times/Sara Krulwich) (pg. 30); ''C'mon, we want to learn!'' Elvis
Tejada, who wears a shirt and tie everyday, told his classmates when they got a
bit unruly one day; ''We get dizzy,'' said Domingo Castillo after his class got
a new teacher for the fourth time. (NYT) (pg. 30)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              305 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 18, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 832 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     4   STAR, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.95.) The crossed paths
           of a man and a woman, both destined for stardom, one in
           Washington, the other in Hollywood.

 2    101  THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.)
           A submarine driver brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the
           United States.

 3     2   MORNING GLORY, by LaVyrie Spencer. (Jove, $4.95.) True love
           answers a young widow's want ad in a small Georgia town.

 4     3   THE EDGE, by Dick Francis, (Fawcett, $5.95.) Murder and
           mayhem on a luxury trans-Canadian train trip.

 5     3   PLAYMATES, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $4.95.) The
           private eye Spenser on the trail of scandals in the world
           of college basketball.

 6     7   WEB OF DREAMS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           origin of a curse that has haunted a family of orphans in
           five previous novels.

 7*    2   METAMORPHOSIS, by Jean Lorrah. (Pocket, $4.95.) The 10th
           novel about the "next generation" of "Star Trek" travelers.

 8     3   STORMING INTREPID, by Payne Harrison. (Ivy, $5.95.) Warfare
           waged in outer space between the United States and the
           Soviet Union.

 9     7   THE FORTUNE, by Michael Korda. (Warner, $5.95.) A young
           woman's ill-fated romance with the head of America's
           richest family.

10     1   RED ARMY, by Ralph Peters. (Pocket, $5.50.) The fighting of
           World War III in Europe, seen through Russian eyes.

11     2   DADDY, by Loup Durand. (Warner, $5.95.) A thriller about
           the operations of a Nazi task force charged with recovering
           a huge fortune.

12     7   BILLY BATHGATE, by E. L. Doctorow (Harper Paperbacks,
           $5.95.) The life of a 1930's gangster.

13     1   HONOR'S SPLENDOR, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $4.50.) An
           English nobleman's attempt to use his sister as a pawn to
           avenge a crime brings her romance.

14*    2   WHISPERED KISSES, by Janelle Taylor. (Zebra, $4.95.) The
           stormy romance of a Texas heiress and a mysterious British
           safari guide.

15     8   MUTATION, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $4.95.) A physician's
           attempt to create a superior child results in a prodigy
           that turns into a terror.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    17   ALL I REALLY NEEDED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by
           Robert Fulghum (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.

 2    14   NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK, by Grace Catalano (Bantam, $3.50.)
           The lives and predilections of the five members of a
           teen-age singing group.

 3    25   BLIND FAITH, by Joe McGinness. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.) The
           family tragedy that came to light after the 1984 murder of
           a Toms River, N.J. woman.

 4    334  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck (Touchstone/S & S,
           $10.95.) Spiritual inspiration.

 5     5   MURDER IN LITTLE EGYPT, by Darcy O'Brien. (Onyx, $4.95.)
           The Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde life of a physician in an
           Illinois community.

 6     8   BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, by Ron Kovic. (Pocket, $4.50.)
           The autobiography of a former Marine, gravely wounded
           physically in Vietnam, spiritually on his return home.

 7     1   NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK, by Anne M. Raso. (Modern Publishing,
           $2.50.) A new illustrated biography of the singing quintet
           from Boston.

 8    94   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel.
           (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The importance of a
           patient's mind and emotions.

 9     2   THE FITZGERALDS AND THE KENNEDYS, by Doris Kearns Goodwin.
           (St. Martin's, $5.95.) From Boston's North End to the White
           House, the story of a political dynasty.

10     7   IN BROAD DAYLIGHT, by Harry N. MacLean. (Dell, $4.95.) The
           1981 killing of a man on Main Street in Skidmore, Mo.,
           witnessed by 45 people, a case that was never brought to
           court.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     6   50 SIMPLE THINGS YOU CAN DO TO SAVE THE EARTH, by The
           Earthworks Group. (Earthworks Press/Publishers Group West,
           $4.95.) Ways to combat environmental problems.

 2    81   CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie. (Hazelden/Harper &
           Row, $8.95.) Solving your own problems while caring for
           other people's afflictions.

 3     2   GOING WITHIN, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $5.95.) A
           "guide for innertransformation" through meditation.

 4    71   DIANETICS, by L. Ron Hubbard. (Bridge Publications, $5.95.)
           The latest edition of a handbook by the founder of
           Scientology.

 5    14   RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $6.95.) The 1990
           edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              307 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Picking a Banjo Through 50 Years of Protests

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 1, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2185 words

DATELINE: BEACON


TO hear Pete Seeger tell it, the singer and political activist is falling apart.
His voice is ''50 percent gone,'' he says, and he gets by only by ''persuading
the audience to sing along.'' His memory is going, too, and that's not all. ''I
can't remember where I put my hearing aid five minutes ago,'' he says.

But to spend a day with the tall, still slender 71-year-old radical in his home
overlooking the Hudson River is to experience something else: a vibrant man who
leaps up from a discussion of the origins of ''We Shall Overcome'' to check the
maple sap boiling outside under clouds of steam.

The phone rings constantly, interrupting a story about Woody Guthrie or a
discussion of events in Eastern Europe with a call from the Environmental
Protection Agency in Washington or with changes in concert dates that
inextricably fill a full week two months hence.

'It Takes Me Longer to Do Things'

''You're booked for the sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth,'' says Toshi,
his wife. ''You're going to die.'' The singer nods agreeably, telling a visitor
mischievously that ''I'm as busy as I've ever been in my life, partly because it
takes me longer to do things.''

If Pete Seeger is slowing down, few seem to have noticed. And if his voice is
going, fewer care. Hardly a weekend passes that he is not singing somewhere,
alone or in concert, often raising money for an organization or meeting with a
group on behalf of one of the causes he has promoted since he found that he
could ''make a living picking a banjo.''

And if his life is the thread that pulls together the protest movements of the
last 50 years, then his wife, Toshi-Aline Ohta, has done much of the weaving.
For that partnership, which began in 1938 when they met as members of a square
dance group in Manhattan, the Seegers will be honored today by those who know
them best - their friends and neighbors.

The Westchester People's Action Coalition has assembled the Seegers' three
children, Daniel, Mika and Tinya; his sister, Penny; the folk singers Odetta,
Oscar Brand and Guy Davis; Fred Hellerman, who was a member of the singing group
the Weavers; Harold Leventhal, who has managed Mr. Seeger and other singers for
decades; Corliss Lamont, the poet and author; and the Nobel Laureates George
Wald and Linus Pauling.

They will meet at 1 P.M. at the Thomas H. Slater Neighborhood Center in White
Plains for a lunch that has long been sold out. The purpose is to present
Wespac's Peace and Justice Award ''to the Seegers, who live their lives so that
the rainbow race of children can see a new day of peace, green grass, sunshine,
blue sky, clear water and a song,'' and to hear some of the music that has
helped galvanize seekers of change in this nation for decades.

''At first, Toshi said no to being honored, because she really shuns the
limelight,'' Mr. Seeger said. ''This is also about the first time she's
consented to an interview, really, in 45 years. 'Talk to my husband,' she'd say,
'he's in the business.' ''

'10 Hours of Yard Work?'

It is not that Mrs. Seeger is shy, exactly. She will challenge his estimate of
how much he does around the house (''Since when do you do 10 hours of yard
work?'') or how much time he devotes to answering mail. (''If he did 10 hours a
week answering mail, we wouldn't be so far behind. Sometimes he gets six months
behind.'') She will jump in with answers of her own. To a question addressed to
her husband, asking if he had trouble remembering songs learned a long time ago,
Mrs. Seeger says, ''No, but does he have trouble remembering a grocery list! He
can't even remember where he put it.''

She will work with him on a list of performers for a concert or a hootenanny,
gently encouraging the balance of personalities, style and even gender that will
insure a success. And she will step to his side while he is on the phone to
Washington with a statement that can surely be heard in the nation's capital:
''Tell Mr. E.P.A. that you have housework to do.''

She will listen to him discuss the history of folk music in this country -
''prior to the 1930's you could count on the fingers of one hand the people who
tried to sing folk songs on the stage'' - with the observation that ''you're
contradicting yourself, referring to folk songs, because you don't believe in
that terminology.''

Her husband agrees, saying that he was ''a fool to let people call what I did
'folk music' '' when he began singing at college campuses in the 1950's, after
being blacklisted because of his left-wing associations and former membership in
the Communist Party.

''Folk music should have been kept an academic term,'' he said, ''because now
it's like the word 'culture,' which means one thing to an anthropologist and
another to somebody in society news.''

'Singing Songs They Made Up'

To the average person, he said, ''the word 'folk' means somebody with a banjo or
guitar singing songs they made up.''

Mr. Seeger has been arrested, indicted by Congress and blacklisted in the
musical industry for his support of striking workers, civil rights movement
leaders and Vietnam War protesters. But he looks at his life's work in simple
terms:

''I'm an incorrigible jack-of-all-trades. There's lots better banjo pickers than
I am. I guess probably as a song leader I'm the nearest thing to being a pro.
What song's the right song, what's the right tempo, what's the right word or two
- not too many - to get a small group started.

''If they start, others will join in. It's like the leaven in the bread, and it
gets easier and easier for me, because if I face a big audience, I can be fairly
certain there are a few out there who have sung with me before. I know they're
there, and when they start, pretty soon others say, 'Well, they're singing, I
guess I will, too.' ''

From a Classical-Music Family

The singer would seem to have been destined for other things. He came from a
family of classical musicians. His mother, the former Constance de Clyver Edson,
played the violin at parlor concerts; his father, Charles, a musicologist,
conducted the Cologne Opera for a brief period. At the age of 25, Charles Seeger
became the youngest full professor in the history of the University of
California.

It was at Berkeley that Professor Seeger, who scorned politics in general and
Socialists in particular, was challenged by a young economist who took him to
see the migrants in the San Joaquin Valley. Soon the musicologist became
associated with radical groups like the International Workers of the World, and
followed a political path that would also determine his son's future.

''Both of us came from families that had been well off,'' Mrs. Seeger said,
''but whose parents were to know hard times in the 1930's Depression.'' She said
her mother was from ''the old South'' while her father ''was the son of one of
the first students in Japan selected to study in Europe 120 years ago.''

''My grandfather witnessed the short-lived Paris Commune of 1871, came home a
radical and in 1911 was arrested for helping raise money for Sun Yat-sen to
start a revolution in China.'' He was sentenced to banishment, she said, but
under Japanese tradition ''a son could accept his father's banishment, so my
father left Japan and worked on four continents until he landed in this country
and stayed.''

The Best-Known Dropout

Mr. Seeger's education included four years at Avon Old Farms, a Connecticut
boarding school, and less than two years at Harvard University, where he studied
sociology. As a biographer, David King Dunaway, noted, the singer may be the
best-known dropout of the class of 1940, which produced John F. Kennedy.

Mr. Seeger wanted to be a journalist but failed to get a newspaper job, and so
turned to music, forming the Almanac Singers with Woody Guthrie, Lee Hays and
others. They played union halls and migrant farm worker camps until World War II
sent Mr. Seeger overseas. He married Toshi on a furlough, she said, after they
got to know each other when she volunteered to help him catalogue a collection
of labor songs.

''Now we know what volunteering can lead to,'' she added.

Life in a Log Cabin

In the early 1950's they moved to a few acres overlooking the Hudson River in
this hilly community, building a small log cabin on a site that is still
inaccessible on snowy days except in four-wheel-drive vehicles. It was here, in
the drafty cabin, that they raised their children.

A few years ago the Seegers moved into their present home, adjacent to the log
cabin. Better-insulated, it has cathedral ceilings, large windows that scan 20
miles of the river and the frequent presence of two grandchildren: Kitama, a
9-year-old boy, and Moraya, a 2-year-old girl, the children of Tinya.

''Our daughters work as potters just below us,'' Mr. Seeger said, and Mika lives
in Beacon with her 17-year-old son, Tao, while he attends high school. ''Tao
sings with me often,'' he said. ''We both enjoy singing together.

''We'll start on the same note and his voice will hold it out, nice and even and
straight and strong,'' he said, drawing a horizontal line in the air, ''while
mine just vanishes.''

Mr. Seeger's own fame came after 1949, when he and Lee Hays, Fred Hellerman and
Ronnie Gilbert formed the Weavers, recording ''Goodnight Irene'' and other hits.
By 1952 they had sold more than four million records and helped popularize
country and folk music on a national scale.

Before the Committee

''In 1955, Pete was questioned about his political beliefs by the House
Committee on Un-American Activites,'' Mrs. Seeger said. ''He did not use the
Fifth Amendment but simply said, 'I've a right to my opinions; you have a right
to yours.' ''

He was cited for contempt of Congress and, in 1961, was sentenced to a year in
jail. ''I accepted every booking that came in, figuring that most of them would
be canceled,'' his wife said. ''But the Appeals Court acquitted him and nothing
was canceled. It was a horrendously busy year,'' she said, adding: ''Never
again. Next time let him go to jail.''

The singer's neighborhood ties were forged in a violent encounter in 1949, when
they were still living in tents on the site they were clearing for their home.
He was to sing in a concert in Peekskill featuring Paul Robeson, the soloist
with the rich bass voice.

Mr. Robeson, who was ''loudly pro-Russian,'' according to a local paper of the
time, drew hundreds of union supporters and hundreds of rock-throwing
protesters. The Seegers, who took their son and infant daughters to the concert,
recall pulling glass splinters from their hair and skin.

Inspiring the Clearwater

The Seegers' links with their Hudson Valley neighbors have improved over the
years. In 1969, the singer inspired the construction of the Clearwater, a
replica of a 19th-century sailing ship that has championed the effort to clean
up the Hudson River. ''We take 15,000 schoolkids out on the ship every year,''
Mr. Seeger said, ''and invented a way to pay for it. We take the parents out,
and they pay for their sail so the kids can go free.''

Clearwater's ''Great Hudson River Revival,'' a yearly weekend feast of folk
celebrities and ethnic instruments, now command six stages on the campus of
Westchester Community College in Valhalla. It is scheduled this year for June 16
and 17.

Mr. Seeger is now engaged in the struggle to keep the shores of a cleaner Hudson
River ''open to everybody.'' He enlisted Gov. Mario M. Cuomo's support two years
ago, when Mr. Cuomo gave an award to the Hudson River Fishermen's Association,
to help open a beach near here.

He is also trying to organize a family reunion for next summer. The singer said
that his father, who later remarried, had seven children. ''Although scattered
over the globe,'' he said, ''they're all still alive, with 20 grandchildren and
great-grandchildren.''<

TO CELEBRATE, 'SING OUT!'

IN May, Pete Seeger will have a concert in the Beacon Theater to celebrate four
decades of ''Sing Out!'' a topical song magazine that he said ''has been 40
years on the brink of bankruptcy.''

The singer has written a column in the publication for most of its existence. It
takes its name from a chorus of a song by Pete Seeger and Lee Hays that has
stimulated three generations of protesters and demonstrators:

If I had a hammer

I'd hammer in the morning,

I'd hammer in the evening,

All over this land.

I'd hammer out danger,

I'd hammer out a warning,

I'd hammer out love between

My brothers and my sisters

All over this land

If I had a bell

I'd ring it in the morning...


If I had a song

I'd sing it in the morning.

I'd sing it in the evening,

All over this land.

I'd sing out danger,

I'd sing out a warning

I'd sing out love between

My brothers and my sistersM

All over this landM

Well, I got a hammer

And I've got a bell

And I've got a song

All over this land.

It's the hammer of justice,

It's the bell of freedom,

It's the song between

My brothers and my sisters

All over this land.

TRO 1958 and 1962 Ludlow Music.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo; Pete Seeger with his wife, Toshi, residents of Beacon since the
early 1950's, at their home overlooking the Hudson River. (pg. 1); Mr. Seeger
making maple syrup earlier this month at his home overlooking the Hudson River
in Beacon (pg. 24) (NYT/Suzanne DeChillo)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              308 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

UNSETTLING THE OLD WEST

BYLINE: by Richard Bernstein: Richard Bernstein is a national cultural
correspondent of The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3969 words


GHOST TOWNS ARE AMONG HER FIRST EXHIBITS. Patricia Nelson Limerick, who teaches
Western history at the University of Colorado, takes out a bundle of glossy
black-and-white prints that she keeps at her home in Boulder and shows me scenes
of dilapidated cabins, saloons, sagging mining shacks amid empty landscapes.

''If you live in Western America, you know that there are relics all over the
place of things that didn't work out,'' she says, using her exhibits to make a
broader point. Limerick, along with a growing number of scholars, is busily
promoting an entirely unromantic vision of the history of the American West, a
vision where failure thrusts itself rudely into former, more comforting notions
of success. ''The West is the place where everybody was supposed to escape
failure,'' she continues, ''but it didn't happen that way.''

Limerick, who is 38 years old, and other - generally young - historians of the
American West are saying that traditional Western history, the stuff we were
taught in elementary schools and universities alike, the narrative that Limerick
sometimes calls ''the old hat frontier history'' in which ''heroic pioneers
brought civilization to a savage wilderness,'' is distorted, misleading,
exclusive, chauvinistic and, in the words of some more rhetorically radical
historians, even ''racist'' and ''sexist.'' As an example of this objectionable
approach, she offers a key sentence in the standard textbook in the field, the
fifth edition of ''Westward Expansion: A History of the American Frontier,'' by
Ray Allen Billington and Martin Ridge: ''The history of the American West is,
almost by definition, a triumphal narrative for it traces a virtually unbroken
chain of successes in national expansion.'' The myth, say the rebellious,
dissenting historians, assumes an untamed land subdued by ruggedly independent
white male settlers who created democracy, prosperity and the glories of
American life. The myth, they vigorously contend, is wrong.

Indeed, as Limerick shows her pictures and slides, she seems to take a certain
sardonic pleasure in pointing out evidence of how shaky the West really was -
the busts that followed booms in the frontier economy, the sudden abandonment of
newly settled places after brief periods of habitation. There is, for example, a
sagging mine-shaft house in Caribou, Colo. And there is a row of wind-battered
wood buildings lining an empty street in a town surrounded by treeless
mountains; Limerick calls the town ''the ironically named Apex.'' One of her
favorites is Ashcroft, Colo., an abandoned mining town just a few miles from
Aspen, where the beautiful people congregate. Ashcroft, whose buildings are laid
out ''as if a sculptor had placed them,'' is a town of such great natural beauty
that it might inspire the sort of romantic sighs that once emanated from British
romantics as they gazed upon the ruins of Greece and Rome. Limerick entertains
no illusions of past glories. She told an audience in Casper, Wyo., last
January: ''Towns with Ashcroft's natural beauty do not stand a good chance of
making us backslide from the new Western history, back to the vision of pioneers
putting up quaint buildings in lovely open(Continued on Page 56) spaces,
evidently for the pure pleasure of having rooms they could sit in and look out
at the mountains.''

For Limerick, the ghost towns provide undeniable proof that the West has a
complicated, ambiguous history, a history as much of suffering as of
fulfillment. Such skeptical notions no longer seem iconoclastic. Every other
week there seems to be another academic conference in some Western locale. The
pile of journal articles furthering the new historians' ideas grows higher and
the shelf space taken up by their books ever longer - books like ''Many Tender
Ties: Women in Fur-Trade Society,'' by Sylvia Van Kirk; ''Far From Home:
Families of the Westward Journey,'' by Lillian Schlissel, Byrd Gibbens, and
Elizabeth Hampsten; ''Cannery Women, Cannery Wives: Mexican Women, Unionization,
and the California Food Processing Industry,'' by Vicki L. Ruiz; ''Forgotten
Frontier: A History of Wyoming Coal Mining,'' by A. Dudley Gardner and Verla R.
Flores. The regional political establishment has become increasingly receptive
to a vision of the West as a place of pitiless struggle involving not only Gary
Cooper white guys, but just about every human type - Indian chiefs and black
newspaper men, society dames and prostitutes, missionaries and Chinese real
estate investors, fur trappers and squaws. The Western Governors Association is
publishing a collection of essays on new ways of looking at the West; the one by
Limerick - ''The Rendezvous Model of Western American History'' - stresses the
view of the West, dear to the new historians, as the most ethnically diverse
part of the country.

But wait. What is new here? Did Limerick, Van Kirk, Schlissel, and their
colleagues discover ghost towns? Are they the first to penetrate the myth of the
heroic West? One need only think of such famous American historians as Charles
Beard or C. Vann Woodward to get a flavor of a revisionist, iconoclastic history
of America, or of such historians of the West as Gerald Nash, Earl Pomeroy and
Howard Lamar, whose works laid the foundation for today's frontal assault on the
Hollywood version of Western expansion. These historians also described its
costs, its violence, the destruction of both men and nature that the march
across the continent entailed.

One of the main targets of the new historians is the very granddaddy, the great
progenitor of modern Western American history, Frederick Jackson Turner, the
Wisconsin-born scholar against whose turn-of-the-century frontier thesis all
other interpretations of Western history have long been measured. For Turner,
the existence of the frontier, that steadily receding zone of wilderness being
invaded by the forces of civilization, gave America its special character, its
rough-and-ready democracy, its stress on adaptability and innovation. The new
historians charge Turner with being ethnocentric - of excluding everybody but
white males from his account of the West. But earlier schools of thought had
already subjected Turner to merciless, unfavorable scrutiny. He and his
followers, some critics say, exaggerated the role of the frontier, making it not
just an element in the Western story but the story itself.

What then, if anything, is truly different in the new history? Some scholars,
perhaps a bit miffed at the attention Patricia Limerick is getting, whisper
discontentedly that the whole thing is a media event, that there isn't much new
in the new historians' work. But even these skeptics allow that the new
scholarship represents a point of view, an attitude about the country, that in
at least one key and potentially controversial respect marks it off from much of
the revisionist scholarship on America that has appeared in the past. It is
this: Many historians, skeptical of both Turner and Hollywood, took it as
axiomatic that the Westward expansion was violent and often tragic for many -
especially the Indians. Yet they saw it as an inevitable process, a historic
good whose end, a free and powerful country stretching from sea to shining sea,
justified the price. The new historians are not so sure. They are blazing a
pioneer's trail toward an altered view of the moral status of America itself.
The new historians question the very idea of a Western - and thus an American -
success story. They represent a tipping of the moral scales to that unhappy
point where national faults and imperfections seem to balance national virtues.

''My argument in Casper was that this region has had an advanced curriculum in
failure,'' Limerick said during my visit to her home, a bungalow in the shadows
of the Rocky Mountain foothills. Limerick is erudite and witty. She punctuates
her scholarly points with anecdotes about everybody from Silverheels, a
legendary Colorado prostitute, to Coronado, the ill-fated Spanish explorer. She
has a pleasant self-deprecating sense of humor. At the same time, she sees it as
her mission to impart lessons about environmental destruction and the costs of a
boom-and-bust economy before, in her view, it's too late. ''Failure has its
tragic, injurious side,'' she told me. ''It also has its educational side.
Failure is one of the great opportunities to learn.''

But read the works of these scholars and a certain gloom sets in. Things were
not as great as we thought they were. More than half of the people who came out
to strike it rich in gold and silver lost everything and went back, if they went
back at all, nearly destitute. There was suffering and oppression, of women and
of those who were black, Asian or Hispanic - and, of course, most conspicuously
of all, of Indians, who were cheated and massacred wholesale.

In his latest book, ''Rivers of Empire,'' Donald Worster, a leading exponent of
the new history who teaches at the University of Kansas, describes the great
Western irrigation projects, the same projects that made deserts blossom, as an
ecological and political misfortune. Western development brought about a
''hydraulic society,'' he writes, one in which Federal and state bureaucracies
combined with agribusiness to impose what was ''increasingly a coercive,
monolithic and hierarchical system, ruled by a power elite based on the
ownership of capital and expertise.'' The result is ''sharply alienating.'' It
represents the brutality of the thirst for ''total power'' and ''total
possession.'' The original dream of a land of small, independent farmers was
ruined.

Limerick, talking last fall to a group of Government space policy planners,
poked fun at the ''new frontier'' metaphor, particularly as it applied to the
exploration of space. Ronald Reagan, she reminded her audience, once compared
the landing of the space shuttle Columbia - that emblem of ''true grit'' - to
''the driving of the golden spike which completed the first transcontinental
railroad.'' Limerick jumped all over the metaphor. ''To anyone who is serious
about history,'' she told the space planners, the golden spike ''is also a
reference to enterprises done with too much haste and grandstanding, and with
too little care for detail.'' She listed, among the faults in the great
transcontinental railroad venture, ''executive misbehavior, large-scale
corruption, shoddy construction, brutal labor exploitation, financial
inefficiency.'' (It might be noted in this connection that Limerick's next book
is tentatively entitled ''Troubled Land: Failure and Defeat in Western
Expansion.'' It's about ''the working men and women whose dreams evaporated''
and ''the moral failure involved in building profitable enterprises on the basis
of unrestrained, inhumane exploitation of labor.'') So persistently have the new
historians debunked the Western myth that a number of other historians
(including those who agree that some myths need smashing) feel uneasy, sensing
that the pendulum is swinging too far in the other direction. A gentle critic,
but also a mentor, is Howard R. Lamar, Sterling Professor of History at Yale,
who taught Limerick and several other members of the new Western historians'
group. They did their doctoral degrees under his direction. Professor Lamar
distances himself from some of his pupils' ideas, even while praising them for
their enthusiasm and energy. ''I think that what we have here is an image of an
ideal West, and the real West doesn't come up to it,'' he says. ''So they tend
to look at the dark side of things. There, I have to part company, but in a
friendly way. I'm an optimist.'' Less gentle is William H. Goetzmann, a Pulitzer
Prize winner who teaches history and American studies at the University of Texas
- and is also a former student of Lamar's at Yale. His harsher view of Limerick
and company mingles skepticism over the supposed newness of some of the new
historians' discoveries with a strong sense that the scales of judgment have
tipped too far toward the negative. ''They've discovered that there were Indian
atrocities, that there were fights over water, that Mexicans were discriminated
against, that mining stripped some of the land, that life was hard, and so on,''
Goetzmann objects, contending that these ''discoveries'' had already been made
by other scholars, including himself, scholars who put the new elements of the
picture into a more balanced perspective. ''But that doesn't mean that the
American Western experience wasn't important or that it doesn't have its
positive side in American history.''

TO FIND ALL THE practitioners of the new Western history you would have to
travel a great deal, most of it in the West itself, to the great state and
private universities and to tiny community colleges alike. For the most part,
the new historians are Westerners themselves, and, as Professor Lamar remarked,
they have a ''ferocious'' regional pride.

Limerick, born and raised in Banning, Calif., - a place that seemed dull to her
as a child but whose cattle ranchers, Indian reservation, large black and
Hispanic populations make it seem to her now a prototypical Western place - is
clearly the most prominent and most visible of the new historians. This seems in
part due to tremendous energy, to her wry sense of humor and skills as a public
speaker, in part to her book ''The Legacy of Conquest: the Unbroken Past of the
American West,'' which is widely regarded as the most complete and
intellectually compelling summary of the new historians' views. But she herself,
a little uncomfortable with the attention she's gotten, is quick to name others
in the new historians' school whose work she admires.

One of them is Peggy Pascoe, 35 years old, a soft-spoken woman who teaches at
the University of Utah in Salt Lake City and is about to publish an expanded
version of her doctoral thesis as a book. Pascoe was born in Butte, Mont. She
went East to Sarah Lawrence College for a master's degree and then to Stanford
University for her doctorate. She remembers Butte as a ''town in decline. People
lived in the past as much as in the present. Everybody had stories of the
miners' strikes of 70 years before.'' Butte, she recalls, was once dominated by
the Anaconda Copper Mining Company: ''it was a town with a very large immigrant
base.''

There is nothing to suggest a revolutionary about Pascoe. She is trim and
sedate, pensive and deliberate. Yet her chief concern, the history of women in
the West, represents some of the bolder and more intensely revisionist themes of
the new historians. Her forthcoming book, ''Relations of Rescue: The Search for
Female Moral Authority in the American West, 1874-1939,'' is a study of efforts
by four middle-class white women of generally Victorian values to set up
''rescue homes'' for the female victims of ''male abuse'' - Chinese prostitutes
in San Francisco, Mormon wives of polygamous husbands in Salt Lake City, Indian
women on the Omaha Reservation in Nebraska and unmarried mothers in Denver. One
of her underlying themes is that the inclusion of women does not merely enrich
the overall picture; it changes it dramatically. She notes in this regard that
some historians, aware of feminist scholarship, have added paragraphs here and
there on women in an effort to redress the imbalance in favor of men - but in
her view, this is inadequate compensation.

''It's 'add women and stir,' '' says Pascoe. ''It's adding the word 'women'
without changing much of anything else.'' Or, as Limerick put it in her ''Legacy
of Conquest'': ''Exclude women from Western history, and unreality sets in.
Restore them, and the Western drama gains a fully human cast of characters -
males and females whose urges, needs, failings, and conflicts we can recognize
and even share.''

For Pascoe, the study of women also provides a point of departure to yet another
central theme of the new historians: that American life has been unfair, even
tragic to many. ''I'd be inclined to say that the interesting questions about
American history are questions about inequality,'' she says. Does that make her
a radical? An academic revolutionary who would discount the very notion of
American opportunity? ''I'm not saying that inequality is the central factor of
history, but that those are the questions that are most important for us as
Americans to have answers to.'' It is this concern that prompts her to invoke
what has become a common trinity in scholarly research these days: ''Class, race
and gender are the axes of inequality,'' she says, ''and so for a historian
interested in one sort of inequality - that is, gender inequality -
theoretically it makes a great deal of sense to pay attention to other sorts of
inequality, such as class and race.''

Across the hall from Pascoe at the University of Utah is Richard White, whose
specialty is the history of the environment and Indian history. White, 42, whose
shoulder-length hair, mustache and casual dress suggest the 60's culture of
protest, has just completed a textbook on Western history that he hopes will
supplant Billington and Ridge, authors of the standard textbook in the field. He
describes his entry into the historians' ranks as a kind of happy accident
arising out of his 60's political activism.

''In 1968,'' he said, talking in his office at the university, where the windows
frame the stunning Wasatch Mountains on the outskirts of Salt Lake City, ''an
Indian friend and I were going to the Democratic National Convention in
Chicago.'' They were on their way to the anti-war demonstrations there. ''The
bus broke down,'' White recalled. ''Many things happened. After a long
interlude, we ended up in the Pacific Northwest at demonstrations for Indian
fishing rights on the Nisqually River.'' White became interested in the Indians
and then in the environment. He went to graduate school at the University of
Washington where he wrote a doctoral dissertation on the environmental history
of Island County, near Seattle.

That kind of history, studying the landscape the way other historians might read
a document - determining how the land was shaped by human habitation and how it
in turn shaped its habitants - represents a major concern of the new historians,
one that White has developed in his book, It's Your Misfortune and None of Mine:
A History of the American West, soon to be published by the University of
Oklahoma Press.

''My text doesn't mention the frontier,'' White observes, marking himself off
from Turner and such Turnerians as Billington and Ridge. His point is that the
very notion of a frontier is an ethnocentric one, deriving entirely from the
point of view of the European settlers in the East. For the Indians and even for
the early Spanish settlers of the Southwest, the ''frontier'' was, quite simply,
home. The settlers coming from the East saw this vast territory as a
''wilderness,'' but White argues that it was actually a landscape already deeply
shaped and profoundly altered by centuries of Indian habitation. Competition
among different peoples over the land - not its settlement by European pioneers
- is, for White, the crux of Western history, .

''I treat the West as a region,'' he says. ''The whites moving in to the West
represent one of a series of migrations but not the only one. For Western
historians, the great challenge has been that Turner gave such a gratifying
meaning, while the meaning that we get from Western history is not nearly as
clear and not nearly as gratifying.'' What ''we'' are saying, he continued, ''is
that there are people left out, that the continent wasn't empty, that bad things
happened that have to be mentioned. And so it does seem more pessimistic.''

But what of criticisms like those of Professor Goetzmann, who believes that this
stress on the ''bad things'' obscures a larger, happier reality - that many
millions of people, not all of them white, have achieved a free and prosperous
life in the American West? Do the new Western historians really intend to
portray our collective past as a disaster?

''I wouldn't say it's a history of disaster,'' White said. ''What we emphasize
is costs. In the old Western history, the only costs were the obstacles that had
to be overcome. One of the things we emphasize is that it matters where you're
looking. If Indians are looking at American history, it's hard to see a triumph.
Hispanics looking at American history, it's hard to see a triumph. That's not
the whole story, but it's part of the story.''

AS I READ AND talked with the new historians, I began to realize that this
eagerness to tell a different part of the story reflected a broader
transformation in American intellectual life, encompassing more than just our
conception of the territory west of the Mississippi. The work of White, Pascoe,
Worster, Limerick and their colleagues bears a resemblance to efforts taking
place elsewhere. Recently, the Board of Regents of the New York public school
system, eager to compensate for centuries of European ethnocentrism, mandated a
new curriculum that would give recognition to the contributions of nonwhites.
Two years ago, Stanford University provoked a national debate on the scholarly
''canon'' when its faculty voted to revise required courses based on a list of
Western classics, substituting for some traditional works on the syllabus works
whose emphasis is ''women, minorities, and persons of color.'' In the same
spirit, a recent book entitled ''Colorado Profiles'' carefully included an
ethnic cross-section: White tycoons and gunslingers stood cheek by jowl between
its covers with the Cheyenne chief Black Kettle; the New York Jewish Indian
fighter Sigmund Schlesinger; with Chin Lin Sou, a Canton-born railroad foreman
and gold miner, and Lewis Price, a black former slave who won and lost a fortune
as a Denver real estate baron.

The curriculum fights at Stanford and the effort to write a history of the West
that stresses darker themes are symptomatic of a basic change in American
universities that has occurred over the last 20 years. It represents the
migration into tenured positions of men and women with ideas that seemed radical
during the protests of the 1960's. Richard White, sitting in his office in Utah,
recalls that ''many of the people who are grouped together in the new Western
history were in college in the 1960's and for many of them the formative
experience was the anti-war movement.'' Peggy Pascoe concurs. ''At the time I
got to college in Montana,'' she recalls of the 70's, ''the 60's were still
alive and well. I felt like I was growing up in the 60's.''

The new history of the American West incorporates the post-Vietnam mood. It
reflects the willingness of the 60's generation to find the invisible worm
eating away at the once blushing rose of the American self-image. And who is to
say that is a bad thing? Nobody who has read the works of Worster, Limerick,
White and others would disparage the seriousness of their scholarship. And it is
hard to look at those photographs of ghost towns without sharing some of
Patricia Limerick's Gibbonesque gloom. Sentimental illusions are not a good
basis for national creeds, and certainly the creed of the West has been among
the most sentimental of all. But it is useful to bear in mind that, just as
Turner and the Turnerians were products of their time, the most optimistic
period in American history, so too are the new historians. They are products of
a more complicated, more ambivalent epoch, one that has led many of their
generation to look at their country and find it wanting. It's hardly surprising
that the new historians, in searching the West for our national origins, for
clues to our national character, have found it wanting as well.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: books and photographs of western civilization (Bettiman
Archive) (pg. 34); ''The West is the place where everybody was supposed to
escape failure,'' one historian says, ''but it didn't happen that way.''
Opposite page, from top: A late-19th century sod house in the Dakotas; two
19th-century publications that celebrated the West's romantic myth; in Kansas,
collecting buffalo chips for fuel. Above: A child who worked in the coal mines
at the turn of the century. (Utah State Historical Society) (pg. 35)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              309 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
The Disabled Find a Voice, And Make Sure It Is Heard

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 820 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE pictures were striking, just as they were intended to be: Children paralyzed
from the waist down crawling up the steps of the Capitol, and more than 100
protesters, most in wheelchairs, being arrested by police officers in riot gear
after a raucous demonstration in the Rotunda.

The aim of the demonstration was to press for enactment of the Americans with
Disabilities Act, a comprehensive civil rights bill that extends to physically
and mentally disabled individuals the same protections against biased treatment
in employment, transportation and public accommodations now accorded women and
minorities.

''You can view disability rights as one of the latest chapters in the overall
civil rights movement,'' said Wayne Sailor, a professor of special education at
San Francisco State University.

It was not always so. For years, the agenda for the disabled was set by
organizations like the March of Dimes and the Easter Seals Foundation, which
focused on providing services for the disabled and prying money loose from
government and individuals to find cures for such illnesses as cerebral palsy.

In the last two decades, however, the attitude of those with disabilities has
shifted from being passive recipients of institutional largess and paternalism
to demanding a full role in society. ''We're not Tiny Tims, or Jerry's kids,''
said Bob Kafka, a quadrapelegic from Austin, Tex., as he demonstrated outside
the White House last week.

The disability rights movement was shaped by a number of scientific, cultural
and political forces. In many ways, it is a byproduct of the technological
revolution. Breakthroughs in medicine, the development of computers that allow
the hearing and speech impaired to use telephones, and advancements in motorized
wheelchairs have meant more people with severe handicaps live longer, can do
more for themselves and have the potential for enjoying fuller lives.

Technology's Role

''There are people with serious spinal cord injuries who used to die within two
weeks that now live 30 or 40 years,'' said Dr. Frank Bowe, a deaf scholar whose
1978 book ''Handicapping America'' is to the disability rights movement what
Betty Friedan's ''The Feminist Mystique'' was to the women's movement. ''It's
one thing to say we have this marvelous technology, but if nobody's going to
hire you, what's the point?''

As the most efficient means of creating disabled people, wars have always been a
factor in advancing the disability rights movement, and Vietnam was a main
force. The war added a large number of disabled veterans, already angry over
America's indifference to their sacrifice in Southeast Asia, to an army of
people with disabilities demanding fairer treatment. The Library of Congress,
for example, estimates there are 43 million Americans with some form of
disability.

In 1973, after two vetoes by President Richard M. Nixon, Congress passed Section
504 of the Rehabilitation Act, which barred discrimination against the disabled
by any entity receiving Federal funds. But no regulations were written to put it
into effect until 1978, after advocates staged a 28-day sit-in.

But barriers remained entrenched in the private sector, where the bulk of the
new jobs were created in the last decade. ''We had no rights at all there,'' Dr.
Bowe said.

During the 1980's, the disability rights movement struck an alliance with
traditional civil rights and feminist groups. As a result, for the first time,
discrimination against the disabled was barred in the sale or rental of housing.
''Standing alone, we could not have done that,'' said Pat Wright, director of
the Disability Rights Education and Defense Fund, who is legally blind. ''But
wrapped in the arms of the civil rights community we had a lot more power.''

The movement has also gained sympathetic ears both on Capitol Hill and in the
Bush Administration. Officials and lawmakers who have relatives with various
afflictions are more responsive, as are politicians who are increasingly aware
that the votes of the disabled are up for grabs.

That point became clear after the Republican National Convention in 1988, when,
in his acceptance speech, Mr. Bush became the first Presidential candidate to
address the problems of the disabled directly. A poll by Louis Harris and
Associates taken after Mr. Bush's speech showed that the lead Michael S. Dukakis
held over Mr. Bush among disabled voters fell to 10 points, from 33.

But advocates say they have just begun. Just as the Government can pass laws
that end racial discrimination, but not racism, it can outlaw biased treatment
of the disabled but mot mandate acceptance of them.

''You can't legislate attitudes,'' said Ms. Wright. ''But the attitudinal
barriers will drop the more disabled people are employed, the more they can be
seen on the street and when we become not just a silent minority, but full
participating members of society.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rally near the Capitol last week to press for a bill extending
rights for the disabled (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              310 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART AND TYRANNY;
Pieces Missing From the Picture

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 856 words


To the Editor:

John Russell's article ''Tyrants Fall; Art Endures'' [Feb. 18] was learned,
moving - and disconcerting. His account of the toppling of dictators across
Eastern Europe was disturbing in the evident disconnect between what was
happening in the world of art and literature - and politics - there and here
over the last half-century. For, while Vaclav Havel, Mircea Dinescu, Andrzej
Wajda and other dissident writers and artists were bravely standing up to
tyranny, and languishing in jail cells for having done so, many in the West now
celebrating their counterparts' triumphant ascent into freedom were saying and
doing things that almost certainly damaged the dissidents' situation, morale,
and hope.

We know, of course, how geopolitical concerns led successive American
administrations of both parties to acquiesce in the repressions of the East Bloc
regimes imposed by Moscow, how our Government paid lip service to the ''captive
nations'' while keeping its distance from East European emigres with their
unpronounceable names and unassimilated anti-Communism. Now fashionable, then
they were pariahs, these somewhat strange immigrants who, like the Cuban exiles,
made us slightly uncomfortable with their blatant talk of freedom and
liberation.

But what of the intellectual and artistic community in the West for whom
unconventional people and ideas are their very sustenance? Did they rally to the
cause of human rights behind ''the Iron Curtain'' (dreaded right-wing phrase) as
fervently as they did against abuses in countries allied with the United States,
such as Vietnam, the Philippines, South Africa? The question answers itself.
Indeed, the word communism never appears in Mr. Russell's lengthy article, nor
do Marxism-Leninism, totalitarianism, Soviet Bloc, or any of those other
distasteful cold-war phrases.

It is as if all these East European countries whose uprisen peoples are
fervently cutting the hammer and sickle out of their national flags happened
randomly and coincidentally to produce a crop of unrelated individual tyrants -
a Ceausescu here, a Honecker there - bound to each other by no system or
ideology. McCarthyism, it surely can be said, ultimately proved to be Moscow's
greatest ally: it gave anti-Communism such a bad name that in liberal and
intellectual circles in the West that epithet became more feared and despised
than the charge of Communism itself.

What of those many artists and intellectuals over more than seven decades who
were passive in the face of Communist anti-intellectualism and
anti-spiritualism, who, if they did not argue the outright moral superiority of
Communism, retreated into that intellectual cop-out, the ''moral equivalence''
of the superpowers and their systems? In his address to Congress, Mr. Havel
eloquently reminded us of what the cold war was all about - the elemental
struggle between ''two enormous forces, one a defender of freedom, the other a
source of nightmares.'' Nor, unlike Mr. Russell, does the
playwright-turned-president have either intellectual or diplomatic qualms in
identifying the name and fundamental character of the tyrants he knows so well:

''The Communist type of totalitarian system has left both our nations, Czechs
and Slovaks - as it has all the nations of the Soviet Union and the other
countries the Soviet Union has subjugated in its time - a legacy of countless
dead, an infinite spectrum of human suffering, profound economic decline, and
above all enormous human humiliation. It has brought us horrors that fortunately
you have not known.''

When Havel as victim could say, as he did to his Parliament and our Congress,
''I feel - along with my fellow citizens - a sense of culpability for our former
reprehensible passivity,'' it cannot be ill grace to examine our own silence -
and the culpability of those in that special class Mr. Russell celebrates, who
purport to speak for the very soul and values of our society. President Havel
includes in his startling moral denunciation the entire Czechoslovak nation
which ''as someone's meaningless satellite - has refused to face up honestly to
its co-responsibility for the world. It has a lot to make up for.'' What then,
in the interest of truth and moral lessons for the future, must be said of the
rest of us who, unlike the Czech people, did not live under the ''boulder'' of
oppression? How shall we answer our children and grandchildren when they ask,
what did you do in the cold war? We especially need to hear from those in the
arts, those ''honorable men and women'' for whom, Mr. Russell tells us, ''what
matters, in the end, is to bear witness, to tell what no one else can tell to
the best of one's ability.''

By that rigorous but fair standard, it is difficult to apply Mr. Russell's
sweeping congratulatory account of the record of artists, writers, and
intellectuals in the West:

''Looking back on the last 50 years - as tumultuous a time as any in human
history - we see that, over and over again, literature and the arts did not let
us down.''

Not all in that esteemed community deserve an encore.

JOSEPH A. BOSCO
Washington

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              311 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Says Thin Support Imperils Refugee Aid

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 425 words

DATELINE: GENEVA


The number of refugees in the world has doubled in the last decade, but the
international organization charged with caring for them is facing a growing
financial crisis.

Thorvald Stoltenberg, the former Norwegian Foreign Minister who took over as the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees three months ago, estimates that
he will need more than $700 million this year to look after the world's 15
million refugees. But he anticipates no more than $550 million from countries
with financial constraints of their own. ''I can't fulfill my mandate,'' he said
in a recent interview at his headquarters here. ''Levels of care are falling. I
have only half the resources per refugee today that we had in 1980.''

Others share Mr. Stoltenberg's concern. Roger P. Winter, Director of the United
States Committee for Refugees, told the House Committee on Hunger last month
that the number of refugees rose 50 percent in the last five years but that the
United Nations refugee agency's budget increased only 25 percent, while the
United States' share fell to 22 percent from 27 percent. ''As a result critical
services have been cut back in refugee camps throughout the world,'' Mr. Winter
told the House committee.

The number of refugees in the world climbed from about 7 million in 1980 to
about 10 million by 1985 before reaching 15 million today, largely as a result
of continuing civil strife and the exodus of boat people from Vietnam.

As the refugee crisis has grown, the High Commissioner's budget has risen, but
never by enough to meet the new demands. The agency gradually drew on a reserve
of about $85 million.

By 1988 this fund was exhausted. The High Commissioner's budget fell $7 million
short of requirements in 1988; the deficit rose to $38 million the next year,
and it is expected to reach $150 million to $200 million in 1990, said John
Horekens, the head of fund-raising services.

As a result, the level of help and protection offered refugees is being steadily
cut back. An internal memo of the refugee agency dated Nov. 30, 1989, notes that
''150,000 to 225,000 refugee children are suffering from acute malnutrition. All
of these children need nutritional rehabilitation. All are in danger of death.''

The agency's Head of Program Management Services, Gerald Walzer, told the House
Hunger Committee last month that he had to reduce teaching of refugee children,
reduce the quality of water in some camps and restrict ''basic items such as
blankets, tents, shelter material, cooking utensils, heating and cooking fuel.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              312 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

American Politics Loses Way As Polls Supplant Leadership

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3705 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 17


As America's democratic visions and values seem to triumph around the world, an
unhappy consensus has emerged at home that domestic politics has become so
shallow, mean and even meaningless that it is failing to produce the ideas and
leadership needed to guide the United States in a rapidly changing world.

''We've tended to trivialize issues to the point where meaningful debate has
become almost impossible,'' Representative Mickey Edwards of Oklahoma, the
chairman of the House Republican Policy Committee, said in a recent interview.

Former Vice President Walter F. Mondale said, ''We've got a kind of politics of
irrelevance, of obscurantism, that is more prevalent than in any time I can
recall.'' Politicians think the problem has only deepened since his disastrous
effort to talk about tax increases in the 1984 Presidential campaign.

Crippling Superstructure

This unhappiness about modern politics is more than mere nostalgia for some
idyllic past that never was. Politicians in both parties say government is being
crippled by a new superstructure of politics that makes ideas harder to discuss
and exalts public opinion over leadership.

This is a time when the two basic tenets of American government for nearly half
a century -the New Deal and military containment of the Soviet Union - no longer
hold, when the end of the Cold War has left struggling democracies across the
once-Communist world and fundamental questions at home about the need for a
military budget of $300 billion. But the American political system is unable
even to define and debate critical questions, let alone resolve them.

As the United States searches for leadership on problems from stagnant labor
productivity to soaring health care costs, a Congressman is warned by his
political consultant not to make a speech calling for a huge cut in the military
budget because he would be moving ahead of public opinion. As use of foreign oil
rises again, the political system has abandoned even discussion of nuclear power
as an alternative to pollution-producing fossil fuels.

In the past, when a President failed to seize the initiative, Congress often
tried to. But now both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue seem immobilized by a
politics of avoidance, where poll takers and advertising producers are more
influential than economists or engineers.

Four Chief Fears of Politicians

Instead of responding to changes in the world, the officials elected to lead the
nation say they live each day in fear of the four horsemen of modern politics:
televised attacks by their opponents, intense personal scrutiny by the press,
cynicism on the part of the public and the need to raise huge sums to buy
television time to combat the attacks, scrutiny and cynicism.

None of these problems is altogether new. But politicians say their combined
impact, and particularly the force of television on both politics and on the
culture in general, have reinforced each other to derail the wheels of
Government.

Representative David R. Obey, Democrat of Wisconsin, a veteran legislator
respected in both parties as a student of the institutions of government,
described the problem this way: ''When the main question in a member's mind
every time he votes is, 'What kind of a 30-second spot are they going to make
out of this vote?' then truly the ability of the political system to make
complicated and tough decisions in the long-range interest of the United States
is atomized.''

Trivialization. Atomization. Paralysis. These words have become the descriptive
vocabulary on which members of both parties draw to describe the state of
politics and government in America. The Democrats blame President Bush for
crippling budget talks with his campaign-driven ''read my lips'' tax policy. But
John H. Sununu, who helped orchestrate Mr. Bush's 1988 campaign, is equally
unhappy now as he sees from his post as White House chief of staff that ''sound
bite'' politics has made lawmakers, as he put it, less ''willing to take
innovative stands or distinct positions or stand on principle.''

The political fear of tampering with benefits for the elderly, which many
lawmakers feel is where the Government could save money, was revealed in a joke
making the rounds of the Republican cloakroom on Capitol Hill after a proposal
to eliminate the deficit by cutting Social Security cost-of-living increases,
among other things. ''Social Security is the third rail of American politics,''
went the joke. ''Touch it and you die.''

Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the majority leader of the House
and a 1988 Democratic Presidential candidate, tried last week to make a partisan
issue out of what he said was President Bush's failure of leadership in foreign
policy. The President, Mr. Gephardt said, is doing nothing to explain the
changes in the world to the American people, who remain uncertain and confused.

Democrats Face Position Troubles

Many Republicans concede that Mr. Bush has offered what Kevin Phillips, the
Republican analyst, describes as ''a follow-up Presidency,'' evidencing little
creativity on either making foreign policy or solving social problems.

But both Democrats and Republican agree with Mr. Phillips's conclusion that
there has been, in his words, a larger political failure, a general ''cerebral
atrophy'' among opinion leaders and an inability by the Democrats to state their
positions in any way that forces the Republicans to respond.

''Europe is about to establish a truly integrated trading system with major
consequences for our own economy,'' a plaintive Mr. Obey said in a recent
speech. ''Japanese industries are challenging America's for world economic
leadership. Are not these challenges, along with the challenge of homelessness,
rootlessness and second-rate educational performance sufficiently profound to
demand a vigorous, honest and substantive debate between and within both parties
about how they should be met? Is American politics so brain-dead that we are
reduced to having political shysters manipulate symbols?''

There was considerable uneasiness on Capitol Hill when the most eloquent
statement of the nation's role in the post-Cold War world came not from one of
the elected representatives of the American people, but from a playwright and
former Communist political prisoner, Vaclav Havel. Addressing a joint session in
his new job as President of Czechoslovakia, Mr. Havel put it this way:

''As long as people are people, democracy in the full sense of the word will
always be no more than an ideal. One may approach it as one would a horizon, in
ways that may be better or worse, but it can never be fully attained.

''In this sense you, too, are merely approaching democracy. You have thousands
of problems of all kinds, as other countries do. But you have one great
advantage: You have been approaching democracy uninterrupted for more than 200
years.''

How would this thoughtful and subtle man fare in an election here?

''How much money does he have?'' replied Representative Bill Thomas, a
California Republican who is one of his party's most outspoken critics of the
way politics are practiced in the United States. ''Which consultant does he
have? And is he willing to shave his mustache? Issues are not the problem, son.
We're talking image. If you've got $2 million I can guarantee it.''

Cynicism by citizens toward politicians is hardly new. What is striking is the
unanimity among the consumers and practitioners of politics, and how the
practitioners, even as they bemoan the process they foster, are feeding the
cynicism back to the consumers.

One measure of the general concern is that more than a score of institutions,
including groups like the Ford Foundation and the American Bar Association, have
undertaken studies based on the belief that American democracy is not working
the way it should.

Range of Possible Improvements

Across the country, in speeches, symposiums, reports, as well as scores of
interviews, a wide range of possible improvements have been offered, from
lowering the remaining voter registration barriers to giving candidates free
television time.

A group of present and former elected officials, including former Senators Barry
Goldwater, the Arizona Republican, and William Proxmire, the Wisconsin Democrat,
have organized what they call the Center for National Independence in Politics.
Its purpose is to provide voters with impartial information on candidates and
their positions on issues to counteract trivial or negative campaigns.

No doubt some of the state of American politics is simply that the tides of
history are running faster elsewhere. ''We are in a sorting-out period,'' said
Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the Republican whip, ''in which the
Republicans and the conservative movement are trying to figure out what phase
two is'' after President Ronald Reagan. As for the Democrats, he added, they
''are trying to figure out how they create a new start.''

Sense of Alarm and Dismay

There is also a view that the nation will again awake when confronted with some
crisis. But among politicians working in the world of today, a sense of alarm,
dismay and disgust pervades. Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the Illinois
Democrat who is chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, says he was motivated
by sheer frustration at the budget deficit deadlock when he proposed his plan of
tax increases, spending cuts and spending freezes last week.

The Administration hinted it might talk about taxes. But politics are so
poisoned these days that Democrats responded as if invited for a walk on an
ice-crusted lake.

Such suspicions contribute to the sour mood in national politics. There is the
liberal legislator who complains that even other Democrats fear that talking
about deep military spending cuts will lead them to be labeled as weak; there is
the conservative law clerk who says he is afraid to publish law review articles
because they will be used to attack him later.

The Republican Party chairman, Lee Atwater, widely regarded as a popularizer of
slash-and-burn political tactics, says the real problem is a public attitude
that can be summed up in three words: ''Bull permeates everything.''

The System

Bogged Down In Big Business

The American system was not designed for effeciency, with its diffusion of power
and its checks and balances. The question is, Has a new force been added that
has overwhelmed the balancing mechanisms?

Winning elections has become a business, a big business with professional
associations and magazines, where volunteers have been replaced by
computer-assisted polling, the pamphlet by the television spot. This has driven
up the cost of politics sharply. More than half a billion dollars will be spent
on races for the House and Senate this year, nearly a tenfold increase over
1974. The cost of running for governor, state legislature or even city council
has also soared.

A Republican consultant, Don Sipple, warns that Washington is now the seat of a
''political-industrial complex,'' a play on President Dwight D. Eisenhower's
warning about the dangers of a ''military-industrial complex.''

Political dialogue and decisions are made up of the actions, large and small, of
thousands of independent political figures. The intimidating and expensive
quality of modern politics has made each of them a little more cautious,
politicans say. When each small decision to be careful instead of controversial
is added together, they say, the sum total is a major impact on political
debate.

System Called Money-Driven

''It tends to homogenize the process,'' said Mickey Kantor, a lawyer who has
long been active in California and national Democratic Party politics. ''It
tends to make it money-driven. It takes the ideology out of it. It stifles
creativity and strong stands, all of which is not good for the country.''

George J. Mitchell of Maine, the Senate majority leader, says the flow of
campaign money ''tends to keep you locked in to your views.''

On Capitol Hill, stories abound about how the professional techniques of modern
politics discourage government action and even debate, or lead to ill-conceived
action. ''When it comes to dealing with the budget,'' Robert Strauss, the former
Democratic national chairman, said in Senate testimony last month, ''the
political process has become somewhere between timid and irrelevant.''

Representative Les AuCoin, Democrat of Oregon, offered an example of how the new
breed of political professionals discourages debate. He said he drafted a speech
in which he wanted to call for a 50 percent cut in the military budget to
produce money for domestic needs. He sent the speech to a well-known political
consultant with whom he talks frequently. The consultant wrote back that his
reaction to the speech was very negative.

''You should know you are way ahead of public opinion on this,'' the consultant
wrote.

'A Safer Middle Ground'

Mr. AuCoin, who has not yet made the speech, said, ''He was urging me to a safer
middle ground so I wouldn't run the risk of having my chin out too far.''

The science of public opinion measuring is being misused, Mr. AuCoin said, ''to
lock you in where you are today rather than to lead society to where you think
you ought to be.''

Public-opinion measurement has become a tool not only of modern politics but of
government. Proponents of polling say this makes democracy more democratic. But
the public is often not aware of the details of problems, said Senator James A.
McClure, Republican of Idaho, and polls are measuring emotional response, not
thought-out views.

Harry Boyte, director of the Hubert H. Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs at
the University of Minnesota, said: ''We have public opinion now, which is
people's private reflexes. But we don't have public judgment. So everything is
broken down into market segments. You have no public process.''

Senator McClure said this is apparent in efforts to grapple with complex
subjects like clean air legislation. ''If it causes 10 deaths in the next
700,000 years, we have to stop it,'' Mr. McClure said, characterizing the
distorted debate on environmental pollution. ''That's not rational. It's not
intelligent. But it responds to emotion.''

It is becoming increasingly difficult to get Congress ''to make balanced
judgment on good information,'' said Senator McClure, who is retiring after 25
years on Capitol Hill in frustration over what he calls the new breed of
''wet-finger politicians,'' who he said spend more time sampling the political
winds than reading policy papers.

The Public Attitude

Involvement: Why Bother?

One problem with the intense measuring of public opinion is finding out how sour
it is, a disenchantment that can be traced to Vietnam and Watergate. In tracking
the public mood and taking positions and packaging advertising based on that
mood, politicians and their consultants are reinforcing the disenchantment. This
cynicism has become a closed loop.

No one defines this loop better than Mr. Atwater, who as chairman of the
Republican party, is the nation's best-placed political consultant.

He summed up, in an interview in his office at the Republican National
Headquarters here, his view that the negativeness of current politics flows from
a deeper discontent in the public mood this way:

''First and foremost I would say that the public's attitude about politics is
very much in concert with their attitude about all institutions. If you want to
look at a solid trend for the last 15 or 20 years, it is that the American
people are cynical and turned off about all the institutions, and politics is
one. It's only one of them.

''Bull permeates everything. In other words, my theory is that the American
people think politics and politicians are full of baloney. They think the media
and journalists are full of baloney. They think organized religion is full of
baloney. They think big business is full of baloney. They think big labor is
full of baloney. To single out politics is making a grave mistake in terms of
understanding attitudes of Americans.''

Institutions on Decline

Peter Hart, a Democratic poll taker, said that the cynicism of the last 30 years
has deepened into a disconnection of individuals from politics.

The disconnection of the public can be seen as well, over the last three
decades, in sharp declines in the sort of organizations that used to serve as
intermediaries between the public and government - political parties, churches,
labor unions - as well as in voting.

Polls and on-the-street interviews frequently turn up sentiments like those
expressed by Twila Martinez, a 38-year-old San Franciscan. Ms. Martinez, who
says she has evolved into a Republican, summarizes her generation's view of
government and politics this way: ''It seems like another world to me. It goes
on, it functions, but I don't feel like it really directly affects us.''

The TV Influence

Lay It All Out In 30 Seconds

Television was originally viewed as a democratizing force. It did help break
down party machines and let candidates speak directly to the electorate.

Now another result is becoming clear. ''The rise of electronic media has had an
effect on draining content out of campaigns,'' said Arthur Schlesinger Jr., the
historian.

Senator John C. Danforth, a Republican of Missouri, said, ''It has locked
candidates into ridiculous positions because only ridiculous positions can be
compacted into 30-second commercials.''

Mr. Sununu said, ''Both life style and technology has forced politics for the
most part to condense its message and therefore to sharpen its focus and
therefore to lose, if you will, some of the supporting detail that was part of
the system when people were campaigning with pamphlets.''

It Is Harder to Be Heard

To make things worse, it is increasingly hard to be heard over the clatter of
other information and entertainment and this, politicians say, pushes them to
speak more loudly and harshly.

''I tell you what you do in a campaign,'' said Mr. Atwater, sitting at his
conference table in an interview a few weeks before it was discovered that he
had a benign tumor in his brain. ''You get a table like this every morning at
seven o'clock and spend an hour and a half figuring out what you're going to do
to get on the news that night - to get in the news hole. What stunt you can pull
that will give you 14 seconds of news hole.''

The decline of political parties as the controlling force in campaigns has led
to the rise of a new power: the news media. News coverage, especially on
television, has become so influential in politics and government that Mr.
Atwater says it ''drives the system now.''

Political consultants and politicians have little patience with journalists who
complain about the lack of substance or the rise of personal attacks in
politics. Even when politicians try to talk about issues, the press ignores
them, assert politicians from Mr. Sununu to Senator Mitchell.

Tone of News Darkens

Thomas Patterson, professor of political science at the Maxwell School of
Government, said the tone and content of news coverage of politics had darkened
dramatically over the last 30 years. In the 1960 campaign, 60 percent of the
coverage of the Presidential candidates in Time and Newsweek was favorable, a
study by Professor Patterson found. In 1988, only 30 percent was favorable. The
same trend could be found among newspapers and television.

''Increasingly, the thread running through it is, 'There is something wrong with
the campaign; there is something wrong with the candidate,' '' Professor
Patterson said.

The something wrong now includes subjects previously off limits. Many
journalists defend their interest, saying private behavior can reveal public
character. But Judith Lichtenberg, a professor at the University of Maryland,
challenges this. ''The politics of character tend to drive out the politics of
substance,'' she said in a paper for the Joan Shorenstein Barone Center on
Press, Politics and Public Policy at Harvard.

The Theodore White school of political reporting, with its focus behind the
curtain of campaigns, innovative when he wrote the first ''Making of the
President'' book in 1960, is now the norm. An old-style stenographic reporting
of issue statements is viewed as intellectually uncritical by journalists,
particularly the generation that lived through the official deceit of the
Watergate scandals. But the politicians say the press, by its focus on mechanics
and character, is as responsible as anyone for the negative and trivial quality
of political discourse.

''By lifting the curtain the media fosters the view that campaigns are simply a
game and a deceitful game at that,'' said Gary Orren, a student of campaign
coverage at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government.

Mr. Orren said: ''I don't think it's any wonder that the public wasn't
particularly troubled at all when the issues of the Bush Administration and the
tone of the Bush Administration right after they were inagurated bore no
resemblance to the issues and tone of the campaign waged in the fall. The public
has learned that the campaign is a charade. They've been taught that.''
Surveying the political scene this year, there is every sign that the problems
will only deepen in 1990. The tax issue is already becoming an indicator of the
tolerance of candidates and the public for policy debate.

In Texas, a state with deep fiscal problems, the primary election Tuesday was
preceded by a campaign dominated by big money on the Republican side and by
personal bashing and innuendo on the Democratic side. The closest thing to a
policy debate was between the two candidates who each insisted they would
execute more criminals.

The only real discussion of the state's financial problems came as candidates
tripped over each other to promise they would not support an income tax. The
question to be answered in the 1990 elections, said Mr. Sipple, the Republican
consultant, is ''Does the electorate still want to be lied to about taxes?''




NEXT: The effect on the politicians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: The Trouble With Politics: Running vs. Governing - First of four
articles.

GRAPHIC: Graph: spending on Presidential campaigns reported to the F.E.C., in
1960 dollars, 1960-1988 (Source: Citizen's Research Foundation) (pg. 1); Photos:
Walter F. Mondale/Former Vice President: ''We've got a kind of politics of
irrelevance, of obscurantism, that is more prevalent than in any time I can
recall'' (The New York Times/Marilynn K. Yee); Lee Atwater/Republican Party
chairman: ''Bull permeates everything. In other words, my theory is that the
American people think politics and politicans are full of baloney'' (The New
York Times/Jose R. Lopez); Representative David Obey/Democrat of Wisconsin: ''Is
American politics so brain-dead that we are reduced to having political shysters
manipulate symbols?'' (The New York Times); graph: Money spent on all political
advertising during ele

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              313 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Sex, Drugs, Gore and Guns in Southern California

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 895 words



The Horse Latitudes
By Robert Ferrigno
294 pages. William Morrow & Company.
$18.95.

''This would not be happening if we were in Kansas,'' says Danny DiMedici at
midpoint in ''The Horse Latitudes'' as he watches a mostly naked model he hardly
knows seductively waxing her legs. ''I don't care what they say about 'one
nation indivisible.' ''

No, it wouldn't happen in Kansas. But it's California where Robert Ferrigno's
superior first crime thriller is set. And as another character observes: ''Like
they say, all the fruits and nuts roll to California.''

It's the Southern California coast specifically, in Mr. Ferrigno's imagination a
catchall for drug dealers and big-game hunters, for body builders and health
food addicts, for bikinied narcissists and seekers after kinky sex, for
burned-out Vietnam vets and Cuban ex-convicts, for a mad pharmaceutical tycoon
and an industrial spy who wants his secrets, and, at the center of the bin, for
a bespectacled scientist named Tohlson who has been strung up by his wrists from
a chandelier, punctured to death and castrated.

Out of these weird elements, Mr. Ferrigno has concocted a striking if lurid
poetry of violence. A former syndicated feature writer who lives in Long Beach,
Calif., Mr. Ferrigno writes of ''a tidal wave of blood,'' of storm clouds that
''boil,'' of ''the life fountaining out of'' a machine-gunned man, and of cops
whose voices are ''the verbal equivalent of a twirled nightstick.''

In one of the novel's more violent passages, Danny DiMedici shoots in
self-defense a rival drug dealer who happens to be wearing a Hawaiian shirt.
''Danny emptied the MAC-10 into Wilson's chest. The hula girls kicked and
swayed, wiggled their hips as the shirt turned red. Their grass skirts flew
everywhere. They saved the last dance for me, Danny thought. He had always had a
way with women.''

Happily, Mr. Ferrigno has a wry sense of humor to go with his bloody-mindedness.
''Those flowers are spoiling the ground-zero effect you've worked so hard to
achieve around here,'' Danny tells his ex-wife's brother, who lives and trades
commodities by computer inside a small cinder-block bunker on the edge of an oil
field.

Danny says to a fellow drug dealer, ''She said you looked like you were in
training for a pinky ring.'' He is trying to explain why that ex-wife of his,
Lauren Kiel, who is missing and presumed murdered, never particularly cared for
the dealer.

After Danny finally finds Lauren very much alive, she recalls her honeymoon with
Danny. ''She thought about the morning she awoke to find him laughing in their
bedroom doorway, his arms filled with purple orchids and hundred-dollar bills.
Before she could say a word, he flung them into the air. The two of them made
love, crushing the perfumed blossoms while hundreds of Ben Franklins watched.''

Astonishingly, Mr. Ferrigno has fashioned a form of morality tale out of all
this dark and bloody mayhem. Sure, Danny DiMedici was a drug dealer. But he
never sold anything heavier than pot, and that shootout with the
Hawaiian-shirted man took all the fun out of the game. So he has given it up
when the novel begins. Quit dealing entirely. And before he started, Danny was
an archeologist. ''He had a gift for nonsyllabic languages. Picture languages.
Egyptian. Sanskrit. Babylonian. Mayan glyphs in particular.'' That was how he
and Lauren Kiel had met, ''when Danny was leading a university group to Copan.

''It was his favorite Mayan site, a ceremonial city in the middle of nowhere. .
. . Their last day together . . . they stayed up till dawn smoking hash on top
of one of the pyramids. . . . He had never hated a sunrise so much.''

So the reader can identify with Danny and his pain over the loss of Lauren, who
divorced him after the shootout because the spirit had gone out of him. And the
reader feels for Danny when he sets out in search of Lauren, after the police
report her murdered and name Danny the leading suspect.

But it turns out not to have been Lauren who died so violently in her beach
house. It was that bespectacled scientist named Tohlson, whom Lauren had been
seeing for mysterious reasons. ''Danny stared at the blood on the walls, trying
to see the message left behind by the man who had died here. The walls weren't
giving anything away.'' Neither will this reviewer from here on in.

In a note at the beginning of the novel, Mr. Ferrigno explains his title. ''The
Horse Latitudes was an area in the Atlantic Ocean where the trade winds died,
becalming sailing ships on their journey to the New World.'' To get under way,
sailors had to lighten ship by throwing their load overboard. ''The most severe
and profound doldrums could be escaped only by abandoning their most precious
cargo - horses.

''Once the frightened animals were pushed over the side,'' Mr. Ferrigno
concludes, ''the sails began to fill. The horses swam after the ships for miles
before they drowned. Their screams haunted the superstitious sailors for the
rest of the voyage.''

One suspects that those sailors weren't so much superstitious about what they
had to do as simply sorry for the suffering of innocent beasts.

Some readers will feel similar qualms about ''The Horse Latitudes,'' but the
majority will enjoy the violent, darkly comic and strangely haunting voyage that
Mr. Ferrigno has taken them on. Hearstd(Morrow)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Ferrigno (Jim Mendenhall)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              314 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Immigrants and Jobs: When Being Legal Isn't Enough

BYLINE: By MARVINE HOWE

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1700 words


When Newayit Hassen, a refugee of the Ethiopian civil war, applied for a job at
a Brooklyn home-care service, she was turned down because her refugee card did
not have a picture - even though pictures are not required and the cards do not
carry them.

Ms. Hassen's husband, Melesse Weldekidan Agegnehu, could not get work at a
electric appliance company in Manhattan because the name on his Social Security
card did not match the one on his refugee card -even though the problem was a
Social Security typographical error.

Such stories have abounded since Congress passed the 1986 immigration law that
imposed penalties on employers for hiring illegal aliens. More widespread
discrimination is expected to come to light before the end of this month, when
the Federal General Accounting Office makes public its report on how the law has
affected people who are here legally but who are or simply appear to be foreign
born.

A Pattern of Discrimination

Under a provision in the law, Congress could modify or revoke the employer
sanctions if the G.A.O. finds they have caused a pattern of discrimination.

Recent studies across the nation have found thousands of instances of legalized
aliens, foreign-born residents, poltical refugees and even United States
citizens who have been discriminated against because employers misunderstood the
law or wanted to play it safe.

The Marcel Watch Corporation in New York City, for example, faces discrimination
charges for refusing to hire a United States citizen from Puerto Rico. A civil
suit filed against the company by the Department of Justice last year charges
that Rosa Martinez, who had a Social Security card and New York City voter
registration, was refused employment as a watch packer because she could not
produce an alien residence card, or green card.

The Office of Special Counsel for Immigration-Related Unfair Employment
Practices, part of the Justice Department set up by Congress under the 1986
immigration law, has received more than 830 complaints of discrimination from 41
states and the District of Columbia. Of those, 189 cases are still open, said
Andrew Strojny, acting Special Counsel. Ninety-five were settled, with a more
than $250,000 paid out in back pay and $27,100 in civil penalties.

Immigrant rights groups say the actual number of discrimination cases is
probably much higher. Most people are reluctant to file complaints because they
are afraid they will lose their jobs or get into trouble with the Immigration
and Naturalization Service.

''Employers don't want to have any problems with the Government,'' said
Abdulaziz Z. Kamus, a job developer at the New York City Refugee Employment
Project. Mr. Kamus helped Ms. Hassen obtain nondrivers' identification from the
New York State Department of Motor Vehicles, enabling her to get a job with
another home-care center, this one in Queens. And he helped her husband get work
as kitchen help with Manhattan East Suite Hotels, even though it takes four to
eight weeks to replace a Social Security card.

Documents that prove a person is entitled to legally work in the United States
range from refugee cards to temporary work authorizations to green cards. Even
United States citizens have to show birth certificates or Social Security cards
and some form of identification with a picture.

Many employers will not accept the temporary work permits issued by the
immigration service, said Shirley Lung, who heads the Employer Sanctions Hot
Line at the Center for Immigrants Rights in Manhattan. Even people with green
cards or permanent residence are having trouble, she said, recalling the case of
an Irish woman who lost two secretarial jobs when she told her employers she had
a green card but not citizenship.

'The Position Is Yours'

Arnaldo Lemus, a Guatemalan metal worker, said he was offered a job by Pan
American World Airways, but the offer was revoked when the company found he was
not a permanent resident - even though he was here legally and had been issued a
work permit.

A political science student in Guatemala, Mr. Lemus came to live with his
brother in Nassau County in October 1981, believing it was ''too dangerous'' for
civilian students at home. After a stint in technical school, he worked in a
limousine factory in Southhampton, then with in-flight services at Kennedy
International Airport.

He answered an advertisement for a job as store clerk in aviation supplies with
Pan Am in the summer of 1988. He recalls the interviewer saying: ''The position
is yours. Let me see your green card.''

Mr. Lemus had temporary residence under the 1986 immigration law, which should
have been enough. But he remembers the Pan Am official saying that the company's
policy was not to hire people with temporary residence.

Back Pay and Policy Changes

On May 24, 1989, Mr. Lemus filed a complaint with the Office of Special Counsel.
Later, he said, a lawyer with the agency, Daniel Sutherland, told him that the
airline claimed he had made ''a poor presentation,'' but suggested he call for
another interview. When Mr. Lemus called Pan Am to make an appointment, he said,
he was met with such hostility that he let the matter drop. Now he is back
making parts for a limousine company at Lindenhurst in Suffolk County, and works
as a volunteer at the Central American Refugee Center at Hempstead, L.I., ''to
help others fight discrimination.''

Before Mr. Lemus's case, the Office of Special Counsel had reached a settlement
with Pan Am on a complaint filed by a permanent resident refused job
consideration as a flight attendant. The settlement, announced in March 1988,
required the airline to provide back pay and expenses and stop the policy of
hiring only United States citizens or holders of green cards.

On Mr. Lemus's case, a spokeswoman for Pan Am, Elizabeth Manners, said that in
July 1989, the company submitted the Justice Department a list of temporary
residents who had been hired and that the reason for not hiring Mr. Lemus ''was
not due to the fact that he was a temporary alien resident.''

Mr. Strojny said the Lemus case was dismissed, adding that means that the
department declined to file a complaint before an administrative law judge based
on Mr. Lemus's accusations.

'I Wasn't Looking for a Fight'

Mr. Lemus could have continued to press his complaint on his own, but said: ''I
wasn't looking for a fight. I was looking for a job,''

The Government announced last week a settlement in a similar case involving
USAir. The complaint was filed in July 1989 by a permanent resident, Monique L.
Stennett, a native of Jamaica now living in Florida. Ms. Stennett was denied an
interview for a job as a flight attendant because she did not have a green card.

In the settlement, USAir agreed to compensate Ms. Stennett in cash for the lost
interview; revise its corporate policy manual, which required job applicants to
hold permanent visas, and educate employees on the policy changes. The airline
also agreed to change its employment applications, which had asked whether
applicants were American citizens.

Mr. Strojny said that the settlement shows that ''employers will not be allowed
to refuse to interview temporary residents, refugees, asylees or permanent
residents who do not possess green cards,'' Besides Pan Am and USAir, he said,
the agency has reached similar settlements with American Airlines, Northwest
Airlines and United Airlines.

'A Question of Education'

''It's mainly a question of education,'' said Mr. Strojny. He said the agency
has recently stepped up its campaign ''to educate employers as to their
responsibilities under the Immigration Act.''

But the agency has been widely criticized by human rights groups and others for
failing to fulfill its mission.

Representative Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of Brooklyn, who had pressed for
strict anti-discrimination provisions in the 1986 immigration law, said the
agency ''has not done a good job'' in educating employers or in using the Office
of Special Counsel. He said he believes it is likely that the next G.A.O. report
will show widespread discrimination, but questions whether the White House and
Congress ''will put a real effort into anti-discrimination.''

In anticipation of the G.A.O. report, government and community groups concerned
with immigrants' rights have recently published reports documenting
discrimination.

Got Documentation, Lost Job

In a report issued last month, the New York State Inter-Agency Task Force on
Immigration Affairs concluded that most employers were aware of the penalties
for hiring illegal aliens, but more than half acknowledged they did not know
what documentation was acceptable for hiring legal aliens.

The New York City Commission on Human Rights reported last summer widespread
discrimination against immigrants and people perceived as immigrants. Among the
cases was that of a Puerto Rican man who applied for a job as a mechanic in an
auto-body shop in Queens and was asked for his green card. ''Puerto Ricans are
citizens. They don't have green cards,'' he responded, offering his birth
certificate and driver's license. He was not hired.

In a study last fall, the Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund and
the American Civil Liberties Union documented a broad range of discriminatory
practices arising from employer sanctions in the law.

They cited the case of Kansas City-born Richard Trujillo, who moved to Los
Angeles and applied for a job as a laborer with a cement company. The company
refused to accept his Social Security card and driver's license and insisted he
provide an immigration agency number. When he said he was a United States
citizen and did not have a number, he was denied the job.

Some employers actually prefer to hire illegal workers because they ''are easily
exploited and are unlikely to complain,'' the report said. The report offered
the example of Edgar Castillo, an undocumented employee at a California shop
making handmade rugs. After Mr. Castillo obtained legal status in 1988, he asked
his employer to start deducting taxes from his pay. Instead, he was fired and
his boss hired another cheaper undocumented worker.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Arnaldo Lemus, a Guatemalan metal worker, said that a job
offered by Pan American World Airways was revoked when the company found he was
not a permanent resident, even though he has been issued a work permit. At right
was Shirley Lung, who heads Employer Sanctions Hot Line at the Center for
Immigrants Rights in Manhattan (The New York Times/Don Hogan Charles); Newayit
Hassen, second from right, an Ethiopian refugee, had trouble finding work even
with proper immigration documents. She and Muoi Tran, second from left, from
Vietnam, spoke with Huong Luong and Abdulaziz Z. Kamus of New York City Refugee
Employment Project. (The New York Times/Vic DeLucia) (B4)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              315 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 23, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

F.B.I. Beginning Internal Inquiry On Bias Reports

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 792 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 22


The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, William S. Sessions, has
ordered a broad internal inquiry into reports that Hispanic agents have been the
target of a recent campaign of harassment, F.B.I. officials said today.

A team of investigators, the officials said, will be sent to offices around the
country to determine whether Hispanic agents have been subjected to retaliation
because of their victory more than a year ago in a landmark discrimination case
against the bureau.

Mr. Sessions has also ordered ''sensitivity training'' classes for agents in
Miami, San Antonio, Phoenix and Albuquerque, the offices where serious
allegations of discrimination have arisen.

Robert Davenport, a spokesman for Mr. Sessions, said the actions disclosed today
''show that the Director has a sincere concern in resolving these allegations
and that he's taking them seriously.''

Meeting With Hispanic Agents

In what aides called an important symbolic move, Mr. Sessions has also agreed
for the first time to meet with a delegation of Hispanic agents who took part in
the lawsuit, which ended in September 1988 with a ruling by a Federal judge that
the bureau had engaged in systemic discrimination against Hispanic employees.

The announcement of the internal investigation came on the same day that a
Hispanic agent from San Antonio and two retired colleagues testified before a
House panel that their careers had been sabotaged as a result of their
involvement in the suit.

''They took my weapon away from me, they took my car away from me, and they took
many of my duties away from me,'' said Paul Magallanes, who retired from the Los
Angeles office last July after 21 years with the F.B.I. Hispanic agents, he
said, ''have gone through a lot of retaliation since the trial.''

Leo Gonzales, who retired last December in El Paso, said that before he joined
the bureau he served seven years in the Marine Corps, rising to the rank of
captain and winning commendations for bravery in two tours of Vietnam.

Reprisals for Complaints

''As a marine, I never experienced discrimination,'' he said. ''But it is
something that is ingrained in the F.B.I.''

Gil Mireles, an agent in San Antonio who has remained in the F.B.I., said he had
been passed over for promotions and forced out of major investigations as a
result of the lawsuit. ''If you complain, there will be reprisals,'' he
testified. ''It is still as bankrupt a system today as it was when we went to
court.''

After listening to the testimony, a bipartisan group of lawmakers expressed
outrage at the treatment of Hispanic agents in an agency that is responsible for
enforcement of civil rights laws.

''You've told a tale that's sad for all of us, sad for our country,'' said
Representative William E. Dannemeyer, Republican of California.

Representative Don Edwards, the California Democrat who is chairman of the House
Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights, said that ''it is scandalous
that some in F.B.I. management continue to use petty retaliation against those
who took on the bureau and won.''

Tough Questions Promised

Mr. Sessions is to testify before the subcommittee next month, and the hearing
is expected to focus on allegations that the bureau did little to bring an end
to discrimination against Hispanic agents and other minority employees. Mr.
Dannemeyer said Mr. Sessions would be ''grilled'' at the session.

F.B.I. officials said the internal investigation ordered by Mr. Sessions is
being directed by James R. Perez, the bureau's newly hired director of equal
employment opportunity affairs.

Mr. Perez traveled last week to F.B.I. offices in San Antonio and Miami, the
officials said, and met with Hispanic agents who had complained about
retaliation from non-Hispanic supervisors as a result of the lawsuit.

The San Antonio office has a high concentration of Hispanic agents. The city was
the longtime home of Mr. Sessions, who was a Federal judge there before he was
named F.B.I. Director.

Hispanic agents in the Miami office have expressed dismay over the treatment of
a decorated colleague, Fernando E. Mata, who was recently placed on leave
because of bureau concern over his handling of counterintelligence
investigations involving the Government of Cuba.

Colleagues have said the suspension was retaliation because of Mr. Mata's
involvement in the discrimination lawsuit, a charge the bureau has denied.

Bureau officials said Mr. Perez was expected to travel to at least six other
offices where there are large numbers of Hispanic agents and where there have
also been allegations of discrimination: Los Angeles, El Paso, Albuquerque,
N.M., Phoenix, San Juan, P.R., and the regional F.B.I. office here in
Washington.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The F.B.I. will conduct an investigation into reports that
Hispanic agents are being harassed after winning a discrimination case against
the Bureau. Representative Matthew G. Martinez, left, and Paul Magallanes, a
former F.B.I. agent, conferred before a hearing of the House Judiciary
Committee. (The New York Times/George Tames)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              316 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 25, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 816 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction


 1    102  THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.)
           A submarine driver brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the
           United States.

 2     5   STAR, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.95.) The crossed paths
           of a man and a woman, both destined for stardom, one in
           Washington, the other in Hollywood.

 3     3   MORNING GLORY, by LaVyrie Spencer. (Jove, $4.95.) True love
           answers a young widow's want ad in a small Georgia town.

 4     8   WEB OF DREAMS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           origin of a curse that has haunted a family of orphans in
           five previous novels.

 5     4   THE EDGE, by Dick Francis, (Fawcett, $5.95.) Murder and
           mayhem on a luxury trans-Canadian train trip.

 6     4   PLAYMATES, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $4.95.) The
           private eye Spenser on the trail of scandals in the world
           of college basketball.

 7     3   METAMORPHOSIS, by Jean Lorrah. (Pocket, $4.95.) The 10th
           novel about the "next generation" of "Star Trek" travelers.

 8     4   STORMING INTREPID, by Payne Harrison. (Ivy, $5.95.) Warfare
           waged in outer space between the United States and the
           Soviet Union.

10     6   BLACK SAND, by William J. Caunitz. (Bantam, $5.95.) A New
           York cop joins a Greek policeman in a deadly pursuit of a
           stolen ancient artifact.

11     8   BILLY BATHGATE, by E. L. Doctorow (Harper Paperbacks,
           $5.95.) The life of a 1930's gangster.

12     3   DADDY, by Loup Durand. (Warner, $5.95.) A thriller about
           the operations of a Nazi task force charged with recovering
           a huge fortune.

13*    2   RED ARMY, by Ralph Peters. (Pocket, $5.50.) The fighting of
           World War III in Europe, seen through Russian eyes.

14     3   WHISPERED KISSES, by Janelle Taylor. (Zebra, $4.95.) The
           stormy romance of a Texas heiress and a mysterious British
           safari guide.

15*    9   MUTATION, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $4.95.) A physician's
           attempt to create a superior child results in a prodigy
           that turns into a terror.

16*    1   RIVALS, by Janet Dailey. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Feuding families
           compete in business and romance.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    18   ALL I REALLY NEEDED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by
           Robert Fulghum (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.

 2    15   NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK, by Grace Catalano (Bantam, $3.50.)
           The lives and predilections of the five members of a
           teen-age singing group.

 3    26   BLIND FAITH, by Joe McGinness. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.) The
           family tragedy that came to light after the 1984 murder of
           a Toms River, N.J. woman.

 4    335  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck (Touchstone/S & S,
           $10.95.) Spiritual inspiration.

 5     9   BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, by Ron Kovic. (Pocket, $4.50.)
           The autobiography of a former Marine, gravely wounded
           physically in Vietnam, spiritually on his return home.

 6    95   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel.
           (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The importance of a
           patient's mind and emotions.

 7     6   MURDER IN LITTLE EGYPT, by Darcy O'Brien. (Onyx, $4.95.)
           The Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde life of a physician in an
           Illinois community.

 8     8   IN BROAD DAYLIGHT, by Harry N. MacLean. (Dell, $4.95.) The
           1981 killing of a man on Main Street in Skidmore, Mo.,
           witnessed by 45 people, a case that was never brought to
           court.

 9    74   THE POWER OF MYTH, by Joseph Campbell with Bill Moyers.
           (Doubleday, $19.95.) The ways in which mythology
           illuminates the stages of life.

10    43   CHAOS, by James Gleick. (Penguin, $8.95.) A "new science"
           that makes it possible to see order and patterns in what
           appears to be erratic.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     7   50 SIMPLE THINGS YOU CAN DO TO SAVE THE EARTH, by The
           Earthworks Group. (Earthworks Press/Publishers Group West,
           $4.95.) Ways to combat environmental problems.

 2     1   WIERDOS FROM ANOTHER PLANET! by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &
           McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.

 3    82   CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie. (Hazelden/Harper &
           Row, $8.95.) Solving your own problems while caring for
           other people's afflictions.

 4     1   HAPPY TRAILS, by Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $8.95.)
           "Bloom County" cartoons.

 5    72   DIANETICS, by L. Ron Hubbard. (Bridge Publications, $5.95.)
           The latest edition of a handbook by the founder of
           Scientology.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              317 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 30, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Horrors as No More Than Part of Life

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 29, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 983 words



Because It Is Bitter, and Because It Is My Heart
By Joyce Carol Oates
405 pages. William Abrahams/E. P. Dutton. $19.95.

Readers should not be put off by the awkward title of Joyce Carol Oates's latest
book. ''Because It Is Bitter, and Because It Is My Heart'' is at once a gripping
family melodrama and an expansive narrative meditation upon the rising racial
and social tensions of the late 1950's and early 60's - one of the prolific Ms.
Oates's most powerful novels yet.

Like her earlier novels ''You Must Remember This'' (1987) and ''Them'' (1969),
''Because It Is Bitter'' focuses on an adolescent girl's sexual and emotional
coming of age. Like those novels, it uses realism and an overlay of gothic
imaginings to give the reader a minutely detailed understanding of that girl's
family, and its peculiar emotional geometry. And like those novels, it attempts
to examine the roots of violence in American life, the intersection, in this
country, of private and public nightmares.

Although ''Because It Is Bitter'' culminates at the time of the assassination of
President John F. Kennedy in 1963 (in much the same way that ''Them'' ended with
the Detroit riots of 1967), it begins, like a detective story, with an obscure
murder: a horribly bloated corpse with a bashed-in face has been found floating
in a river near the town of Hammond in upstate New York. The body, it turns out,
is Little Red Garlock, a 16-year-old troublemaker, mentally retarded or
pretending to be, with a history of assault and sexual provocation. Rumor has it
that Little Red has been killed by the Hell's Angels; young Iris Courtney knows
better. She knows that she is responsible for his death.

What has happened is this: Iris has ventured out late at night to buy cigarettes
at a neighborhood hangout known as Cheney's. As she is walking back home, Little
Red Garlock begins following her, making obscene gestures and remarks.
Frightened, Iris runs back to Cheney's, where she asks an employee - a black
classmate of hers named Jinx Fairchild -for help. Jinx tries to escort her home,
but his chivalry only serves to elicit a stream of racial insults from Little
Red, and the two boys are soon locked in a violent fight. When it is over,
Little Red lies dead on the ground.

This shocking event will permanently alter the course of Iris's and Jinx's
lives, though not in the way the reader initially expects. The police will never
tie either of the teen-agers to the murder; their families and friends will
never suspect the truth of what happened that cold spring night. In the next
year or so, Jinx will become the star of his high school basketball team. Always
an earnest student and athlete, he will focus more energy than ever on his
studies in an attempt to put the past behind him; and his efforts will win him
college scholarship offers and the promise of a bright new life, far away from
Hammond.

Iris, on her part, will become increasingly obsessed with Jinx: with Little
Red's death, she thinks, a permanent bond has been forged between them; they now
share a common fate. She sends Jinx notes and presents, even accosts him on the
public bus - an act of considerable daring in the late 50's in the racially
prejudiced town of Hammond.

Eventually, Iris will declare her feelings to Jinx. ''I don't want anything from
you but the fact of you,'' she says, adding, ''it's just that there's no one but
you, for me.'' By the time she says these words, both their lives will have
begun to spin dizzily out of control: two terrible (and possibly self-willed)
accidents will alter the shape of their lives; two marriages (one frighteningly
volatile, the other coldly correct) will pull them further and further away from
one another's orbit; history - in the form of Vietnam and President Kennedy's
assassination - will also intrude upon their lives.

Even though many of the things that happen to Jinx and Iris are violent,
shocking and improbable, the reader never stops to question the logic of them,
so authoritative is Ms. Oates's storytelling. By immersing us in both their
familial and emotional lives, she is able to make what happens to them seem less
like an awful chance occurrence than the inevitable (if somewhat heightened)
result of a lifetime of choices and desires. We are made to see how Jinx and
Iris reflect - and rebel against - their families; how the strengths and
frailties of their respective families find expression in their lives.

There are moments when the portraits of Jinx's family (including his proud,
domineering mother, Minnie; his lazy, God-fearing father, Woodrow, and his
cocky, ne'er-do-well brother, Sugar Baby) veer perilously close to stereotype;
and the reader never quite loses the feeling that these people are being
portrayed from the outside, as representative victims of racism and poverty.

With Iris's family, however, this never occurs. Duke, her charming,
irresponsible father, who's constantly making ill-advised visits to the
racetrack; Persia, her pretty, high-strung mother, who's skidding swiftly into
alcoholism; Leslie, her well-meaning, ineffectual uncle: these people are
depicted with an amplitude of compassion and understanding, and the reader comes
away feeling they are as familiar as hometown neighbors one has known for years
and years.

Like so many of Ms. Oates's other novels, ''Because It Is Bitter'' ends with the
implication that life's horrors may be forgotten, dismissed or transcended; that
human beings (or some of them, anyway) are capable of surviving terrible events
and moving on with their lives, shucking off the past as easily as a snake sheds
its skin. This time, that ending does not feel as though it had been
artificially imposed by the author (as it did in her last novel, ''American
Appetites''); rather it seems a fitting - and decidedly chilling - conclusion to
Iris Courtney's sad and violent story.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Joyce Carol Oates (Brian J. Berman)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              318 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 30, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

LAW;
Testing Privacy Rights in the World of the Deaf

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1682 words

DATELINE: WAUPUN, Wis.


No one disputes that three years ago, Robert Rewolinski strangled his longtime
girlfriend, Catherine Teeters. He was convicted of murder and sentenced to life
in prison here.

But crucial evidence that helped convict him of murder, rather than
manslaughter, exists for only one reason: He is deaf, as was Ms. Teeters, along
with their children. That made for an extraordinary trial and, now, a novel
debate over the constitutional right of privacy.

Shortly before the killing, the two had an angry telephone ''conversation'' via
a Telecommunications Device for the Deaf, or T.D.D., which left a printed
transcript of their words.

That transcript, prosecutors argued, proved that Mr. Rewolinski acted with
premeditation, the key element in murder. But he and his lawyers maintain that
he acted spontaneously and that the transcript was illegally seized and used -
that it was, in fact, wiretapping. They are seeking a new trial, or at least a
reduced sentence for manslaughter.

Tech v. the Constitution

The Rewolinski case, now before the Wisconsin Supreme Court, illustrates the
difficulty of applying an abstract legal principle like the Constitution's
prohibition against ''unreasonable searches and seizures'' to technology like a
T.D.D. The case also highlights challenges faced by the courts in accommodating
the singular world of the deaf.

On the day of the killing, police officers in Pierce County, a rural area across
the state line from Minneapolis, pulled over Mr. Rewolinski for speeding. He was
not arrested, but he was brought into the local sheriff's office. While there,
he called Ms. Teeters at their home and asked her to pick him up.

They ''spoke'' on the T.D.D., which every police department receiving Federal
funds is required to have. Alfred Sonnenstrahl of Telecommunications for the
Deaf, a deaf rights group in Silver Spring, Md., said there are 250,000 to
300,000 such machines now in use around the country.

Mr. Rewolinski and Ms. Teeters began arguing, a common occurrence in their
relationship, which was fraught with abuse, infidelity and discord. ''I am
scared to death you will make us die in car accident,'' Ms. Teeters typed into
the machine, with the words appearing simultaneously on a video screen and on a
cash register-like tape at the sheriff's department.

''You just turn steering wheel, never know,'' she added.

At other points she asked if he planned to rape her, and Mr. Rewolinski conceded
that he had hit her a month earlier.

Battling for a Tape

When he left the sheriff's office, he ripped the tape off the machine and tried
to take it with him. But, asserting that it was state property, a sheriff's
deputy tore it out of Mr. Rewolinski's fist.

A few hours later, Mr. Rewolinski killed Ms. Teeters.

An extraordinary eight-day trial was held in November 1987, in a rural Wisconsin
courtroom specially outfitted with five interpreters of sign language, three
video monitors for displaying simultaneous written translations and a screen
around the defendant to keep any deaf witnesses or deaf spectators from
intercepting his signs to his lawyers. A jury convicted Mr. Rewolinski of
murder.

What Might Have Been

Now 39 years old, he is serving his time in the prison here, a forbidding,
Dickensian structure with turrets and crenellations that is nearly as old as the
state of Wisconsin itself.

To his lawyers, the central issue is what happened to him at the sheriff's
office hours before the killing. Had he not been deaf, the lawyers say, he could
have called home from any public telephone and his incriminating words could not
legally have been recorded, seized and used against him. Nor, they say, would
they have been recorded over an ordinary phone in the sheriff's office.

As a private citizen who was not under arrest at the time, they say, Mr.
Rewolinski was entitled to assume that his conversation was not being monitored.
Seizing the paper tape, they say, amounts to after-the-fact eavesdropping or
wiretapping by the authorities.

Their argument comes down to this: Mr. Rewolinski's dependence on special
technology should not reduce his right of privacy.

''The state violated the defendant's constitutional rights just as surely as if
it had broken into his home to steal his personal letters, just as surely as if
it had tapped his telephone,'' the lawyers, Brady C. Williamson and Jeffrey J.
Kassel of the Madison, Wis. firm of LaFollette & Sinykin, have argued in court
papers.

What the Prosecution Says

Lawyers for the state argue that having used a machine in a public area of the
sheriff's office, with an official standing nearby, the defendant could have had
no legitimate expectation of privacy. ''The dispatch area of a jail is not an
area society as a whole would view as deserving the most scrupulous protection
from government intrusion,'' they argue. ''It is an area pervaded by government
intrusion.''

The case will be argued in early June, with a decision expected later that
month.

If not for the tape, Mr. Rewolinski's lawyers argue, he might well have
convinced the jury that he killed Ms. Teeters in a fit of rage. At trial, he
testified that he strangled her only after she accused him of being an unfit
father and threatened to keep him away from his children. ''I just lost it,'' he
later said. ''I blew it. I just lost my mind and immediately I put her in a
headlock. I don't know what happened.''

Manslaughter in Wisconsin

In Wisconsin, killing ''in the heat of passion'' constitutes manslaughter, whose
maximum penalty is 10 years, Lawyers for the Wisconsin Department of Justice say
that even though he was not technically in custody, Mr. Rewolinski was in the
same position as an inmate or any citizen, deaf or not: whether someone is
speaking over a telephone or a T.D.D., his expectations of privacy in a police
station must be limited, yielding to the superior security concerns of the
authorities.

''The privacy interest of a person who makes a telephone call from a police
station or jail is outweighed by what must be conceded to be the paramount
interest of that institution to monitor, record and preserve a record of all
such calls, whether they be oral or taped via a T.D.D. machine,'' Assistant
Attorney General Sally L. Wellman has argued in court papers.

A few minutes after he had strangled the 27-year-old Ms. Teeters, pulling a
canvas belt so tightly around her neck that the belt broke into three pieces,
Mr. Rewolinski called the Pierce County Sheriff's Department and confessed to
the crime.

''I lost my mind,'' he typed, into the machine that Ms. Teeters had used only
hours before in talking to him. ''Cathy is dead. Please come and take me to
jail, but don't let my kids see Cathy's body in bathtub. Please get here
immediately.'' #4 Witnesses Are Deaf Mr. Rewolinski's lawyers concede that the
judicial system has gone to great lengths to accommodate their client. Counting
Mr. Rewolinski, at least four main witnesses in the case were deaf. The cost of
interpreters and special video technology, along with sequestering the jury,
amounted to more than $63,000, nearly a quarter the annual budget of Pierce
County.

''In all honesty, I think he got a fairer trial than most people who can speak
or hear,'' said Judge Robert W. Wing of Pierce County Circuit Court, who
presided. ''We bent over backwards to make sure Mr. Rewolinski understood
everything.''

Mr. Rewolinski, who supported his family on Social Security benefits and from
peddling sign-language cards, was provided a public defender at the trial and is
now represented by the firm founded by Philip F. LaFollette, a former Governor
and member of Wisconsin's most illustrious political dynasty.

It was in 1923, while Philip LaFollette's father, Robert (Fighting Bob)
LaFollette, was Senator, that the Wisconsin Supreme Court created an
exclusionary rule, ruling that the State Constitution barred the use of
improperly obtained evidence at trial. That was more than 40 years before the
United States Supreme Court similarly construed the Fourth Amendment.

Keeping the System Balanced

While the issue in the Rewolinski appeal is narrow, the deaf man's lawyers say
such cases help reiterate and redefine the character of the law. ''Cases like
this help keep the system balanced and even,'' Mr. Williamson said. ''At the
risk of sounding saccharine, the rights that get established in cases like this
affect everyone's rights.''

Last November, Judges Daniel LaRocque and Gordon Myse of the Wisconsin Court of
Appeals rejected Mr. Rewolinski's argument. They ruled he had not shown he had a
reasonable expectation of privacy, particularly since he could have turned off
the printer attached to the T.D.D. Presiding Judge R. Thomas Cane disagreed, but
concurred in the result, ruling that the admission of the tapes made no
difference in the outcome of the case.

Mr. Rewolinski is less interested in constitutional principles than in getting a
new trial and, he hopes, reducing his conviction to manslaughter. That would
allow a move to a prison with less security, where he would be freer to move
around and, perhaps, would find more deaf inmates.

There are only two other deaf prisoners here. One, who lost his hearing in
Vietnam, does not know sign language, while the other does - but in Spanish.
Some of Mr. Rewolinski's fellow inmates have tried to learn some sign language
from him, but he says it is too tiring to teach. It is also illegal in a place
where, for security reasons, inmates are forbidden to speak anything but
English.

It is even hard getting fellow prisoners' attention, since most do not like to
be touched. Mr. Rewolinski spends his days making ceramics and officiating at
intramural sports contests. ''We use him as a referee in softball and
basketball,'' said Glen Link, a prison official. ''That way the inmates can
swear at him all they want.''

Through an interpreter, Mr. Rewolinski said: ''Prison for a deaf person is
really lonely. I speak with my hands, and I feel as if I've lost them here, as
if they've been cut off.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Technology that allows deaf people to have telephone
conversations is at the heart of the murder conviction appeal of Robert
Rewolinski. He spoke through an interpreter, Julie O'Brien, at prison in Waupun,
Wis. (NYT/Tom Capp)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              319 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 30, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AIDS Outbreak Is Forcing China To Confront Virus and Drug Use

BYLINE: By SHERYL WuDUNN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 966 words

DATELINE: KUNMING, China


A report that 146 peasants from Yunnan Province on China's southwest border used
dirty drug needles and infected themselves with the AIDS virus has sent shivers
throughout China.

It was the first sign of a large incidence in China, where officials asserted
previously that most AIDS cases involved foreigners. In addition to the
discovery, announced in February, more than 100 other samples from Yunnan
peasants have been sent to Beijing for additional testing to see whether they
are infected with the virus, officials here said in interviews.

The more the Government investigates, the more cases the Government fears it
will find, deflatingthe notion that China faces neither a drug problem nor an
AIDS problem.

''The news was explosive,'' a Chinese official here said of the discovery of the
AIDS virus. ''We were shocked.''

Comparatively Tiny Number

So far the numbers are tiny compared with the tens of thousands of AIDS cases in
Western countries, but they are a cause of great concern in China. China had
previously reported that 41 foreigners and 7 Chinese carried the virus, of whom
only 3 actually developed the disease. The latest confirmed findings brought
China's total number of publicized cases to 194.

The spread of the virus here in Yunnan Province, in a temperate corner of China,
points to what officials acknowledge is an increasingly severe problem of
narcotics trafficking. Hard drugs like heroin are transported through China to
the West from bordering countries like Burma, Thailand and Vietnam, the
officials say.

Most of the drugs pass through China, rather than being consumed here. But a
growing number of people are using the drugs, and the discovery that most of
those with the AIDS virus are from ethnic minorities could affect the sometimes
fragile relationship between the Government and some minorities.

''Those farmers have the impression that if you take drugs, they'll have
pleasant illusions,'' said Wang Wenxin, a doctor of infectious diseases at the
office for AIDS prevention and control here. ''These people are poorly educated
and relatively ignorant.''

Victims Used Heroin

The 146 cases were discovered after testing of peasants living in Ruili County,
along the border with Myanmar, formerly Burma. Health officials say all the
victims, including one woman and young men in their late teens, were infected
with the AIDS virus when they injected heroin with shared needles.

Provincial oficials said that so far they had not linked any AIDS-related cases
to foreigners or contaminated blood, and tests on 500 Kunming residents proved
negative.

For China, the role of intravenous drug use in AIDS brings back painful memories
of the nation's suffering in the last century and in the first half of this
century because of widespread opium addiction. Many Chinese attributed the
widespread opium dependency to the country's weakness as it fell victim to
foreign invaders and domestic warlords. About 20 million people - nearly five
percent of the population at that time - smoked opium, and a sizable portion of
the cultivable land in China was used to grow poppies, according to Chen Cunyi,
deputy director of the provincial public security division against drugs.

When they took control in 1949, the Communists virtually wiped out opium
smoking, and for several decades China was considered a drug-free country. But
Mr. Chen said drug activity had not only resurfaced but had also shifted from
smoking opium to smuggling and intravenous use of heroin.

Heroin Seizures Double

Last year, the amount of heroin seized in Yunnan Province rose to almost 600
pounds from about 260 in 1988, while seizures of opium declined to about 300
pounds from 340 in 1988. The heroin seized, however, is highly concentrated, and
one kilogram can be reformulated into 12 kilograms in Hong Kong.

Mr. Chen declined to estimate what portion of the drug traffic is intercepted,
although some estimates have put it at 10 percent.

The discovery that narcotics use is leading to the spread of the AIDS virus has
made the problem much more compelling in China, which has long been concerned
about the disease.

In Chinese clinics most hypodermic needles are reused, although disposable
needles are being introduced, and the hygiene and frequency of blood checks
before transfusions is worse than in the West.

Chinese officials have therefore been very aware of the risks of AIDS, and so
far they have focused their efforts on screening foreigners. All foreigners who
live in China for a year or more must have an AIDS test, and even short-term
tourists are sometimes asked questions intended to determine if they have AIDS.

Diplomatic Ties Involved

The border trade in drugs is a delicate matter for China because of its effect
on diplomatic relations with China's neighbors. Mr. Chen insisted that the drugs
came from the bordering countries, and that China was only a conduit because of
its geographic position between the drug-producing areas and transportation hubs
like Hong Kong.

''It is absolutely not grown here,'' Mr. Chen said. So far the China connection
is not nearly as significant as other sources of the West's heroin - such as
Latin America or other Asian transit points - even though officials here
acknowledge that it is a growing problem.

The authorities have stepped up their efforts, spending about $1 million on
narcotics control in Yunnan Province, but they acknowledge that it is not
enough.

The public security staff has added 1,300 officers to combat the drug problem,
but this is a fraction of the number believed necessary to monitor the porous,
2,500-mile southwestern border.

''It's impossible for us to station guards, one by one, along the border,
because we don't have such manpower,'' Mr. Chen said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Kunming, China

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              320 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 30, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1315 words



INTERNATIONAL    A3-9

Leaders of Lithuania's government offered a compromise to the Kremlin, saying
they were ready to discuss the difficult issue of a referendum on secession if
President Gorbachev agrees to talk with them.    Page A1



German unity has been a nightmare for the far-right Republican Party. Ever since
the Berlin wall fell, polls have traced a decline for the Bavarian-based party
that rose from nowhere a year ago.    A1



Poland is preparing for free elections for a completely reorganized local
government that Solidarity supporters hope will break the grip of the Communist
Party bureaucracy throughout the country.    A8



Survey in Moscow sees a high level of anti-Jewish feeling    A8



Iraq has built missile launchers within range of Tel Aviv and Damascus,
according to American intelligence reports. Experts believe the missiles are
intended in part to discourage any possible Israeli attack.    A6



U.S. details its charges of a plot to smuggle arms parts    A6


Beijing avoids new missile sales assurances    A7



Colombia's cocaine traffickers threatened to renew their war against the state.
A communique by the leaders of the MedellWn drug cartel said that the Government
had betrayed a secret peace pact.    A3



The South African Government announced that virtually its full leadership would
turn out to meet the African National Congress at talks scheduled for April 11.
    A9



In Namibia, U.N.'s first hurdle was highest    A9



A gunbattle in India between pro-independence Kashmiris and Indian paramilitary
forces left at least 11 people dead in Srinagar, the capital of Jammu and
Kashmir State.    A3



Sanliurfa journal: Dam is watering hope for a fertile crescent    A4



NATIONAL    A10-19

A landmark immigration law has produced a ''widespread pattern of
discrimination'' against people with a ''foreign appearance or accent,''
according to a G.A.O. report. Congress must now re-examine that law.    A1



More Federal help for child care was approved by the House of Representatives.
The measure, put forward by the House Democratic leadership, expands day care
and provides more money for existing programs.    A1



Kentucky's public school system will change dramatically under an entirely new
management structure approved by the General Assembly. The state Supreme Court
had declared the current system unconstitutional.    A1



Black enrollment in college up after long decline, U.S. says    A16



The cost of nursing home care has climbed to an annual average of nearly
$30,000. More and more people are facing the problem of how to plan for and
finance long-term care for themselves or an aging relative.    A1



President Bush's address on AIDS featured an appeal for compassion toward people
infected with the AIDS virus. The President also expressed support for a bill to
outlaw discrimination against people with AIDS.    A1



Outbreak of AIDS a shock to China    A18



Vietnam veterans have a higher risk of contracting a rare cancer, but that risk
could not be linked to exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange, a Federal study
concluded.    A10



Representative Gus Savage defended himself against charges that he had made
anti-Semitic remarks in his re-election primary campaign and reiterated the
charge that he had been targeted by Jewish groups.    A10



Washington Talk: Activism, 1990-style: All lips, no money    A10


Art aide backs Cincinnati museum    A10



Gov. Cecil D. Andrus of Idaho hinted that he might veto a restrictive abortion
bill passed by the State Legislature last week. But he said he had not yet
reached a final decision.    A12



By one vote, Senate bars miners' aid    A11


Documents sought by Puerto Ricans    A19



REGIONAL    B1-4

Lawyers for criminal defendants cannot dismiss prospective jurors because of
race, the New York Court of Appeals ruled. The decision upheld three
manslaughter convictions in the Howard Beach case.    A1



The Rev. Bruce Ritter's superiors have concluded an inquiry into allegations
involving his stewardship of Convenant House and have directed him to return to
a friary, the Franciscan order said.    B1



New York State's budget gap cannot be made up through spending cuts alone,
Governor Cuomo said. He made public cuts that he and legislative leaders had
agreed on privately.    B1



The social club business in New York spans the gap between street-smart
entrepreneurs in the city's poorest neighborhoods and wealthy, established
real-estate operators. And everyone seems to make money.    B1



An eyewitness tells how so many perished in the social club fire    B1


A clash at City Hall over new laws on unsafe social clubs    B3



The new Hispanic affairs adviser to Mayor Dinkins had been a board member of an
East Harlem community center that the city cited for fire-safety violations last
year.    B3



Two officials balk at request by Dinkins to resign    B4



Schools are not being protected adequately in New York City against the threat
of fire, the State Comptroller's office said. Auditors found many schools with
empty fire extinguishers and clogged sprinklers.    B2



Connecticut begins battle for governor    B4


Sharpton set up fraud, prosecutor tells jurors    B4



BUSINESS DIGEST    D1

WEEKEND

Music beyond the notes    C1


Dance that tells stories    C1


Met Museum weekend evenings    C1


Muti leaving the Philadelphia    C15


A show on Sephardic Jews    C17


Theater: On Stage    C2


''The Crucible'' revived    C3


''The Golden Apple''    C3


Film: At the Movies    C8


''Mutant Ninja Turtles''    C8


''Opportunity Knocks''    C11


''Homebound''    C12


Music: 30 years of Charnin    C3


Sounds Around Town    C21


Music: Rickie Lee Jones    C21


Dance: Linda Mussman    C13


Art: Baselitz ''Hero'' paintings    C24


John Wesley's abstractions    C25


Alain Kirili's sculpture    C28


Larry Johnson's hybrid photos    C22


Auctions    C26


Restaurants    C20


Word and Image: New novel from Oates    C29


TV Weekend    C30



SPORTS

Baseball: Winfield takes first at bats since '88    A24


Umpire dispute settled    A24


Mets make first cuts of spring    A24


Basketball: Georgia Tech quiet    A23


Reeling Knicks face Jordan next    A26


Sooners draw ire of women's coaches    A26


Boxing: King stirs animosity    A27


Column: Vecsey on Steinbrenner    A23


Football: Slow market    A27


Golf: Rain delays the Tradition    A23


Inkster hits stride    A25


Hockey: Devils top Rangers    A23


Horse Racing: Notebook    A24


Tennis: The best are missing in U.S.-Czech match    A25



LAW    B5

At the Bar
Testing privacy rights in the world of the deaf

OBITUARIES    D17



Lester J. Maitland, a hero of pioneer aviation
Isidore Adler, a scientist, educator and researcher
Karl Brown, a film pioneer

EDITORIALS/LETTERS/OP-ED

Editorials    A30



Cut defense slower, and faster
Questions on long-term care
Debt, and discipline, in N.Y.
Topics: Lamenting larks

Letters    A30


William Safire: Baltics to Baghdad    A31


Anthony Lewis: The two nations    A31


Dick Netzer: How to cut Albany's deficit    A31


Phil Gramm: For Eastern Europe, free trade, not aid    A31


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              321 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 31, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONSUMER'S WORLD;
Few Bargains at U.S. Auctions

SECTION: Section 1; Page 50, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1010 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 30


At a ''smuggler's auction'' in Rockville, Md., in the dilapidated back room of
the National Trade Center, auctiongoers fidget and mumble in rows of folding
chairs, raising fingers as an auctioneer calls out bids for a rack of Oriental
rugs.

The room is full of odds and ends: kettledrums, fur coats, water colors on vast
canvases, stereo equipment and a display case of ornate jewelry and watches.
Some merchandise comes from bank repossessions and pawn shops, but a fifth of it
has been confiscated by police departments and Government agencies like the
United States Customs Service.

Millions in Goods

Every year, the Departments of Defense, Treasury and Justice, and the General
Services Administration auction off millions of dollars in surplus goods,
including real estate, automobiles, jewelry, furniture, clothing and
electronics. There are bargains to be had at those events for the persistent,
but auctioneers and Government officials say, contrary to some advertisements,
most of the goods cannot be bought cheaply.

''We're not in the business of giving property away,'' said Byron Strain, an
official at the General Services Administration.

''Last month we sold a BMW, a three-year-old car without a battery and an oil
pan, and we got $29,000 for it,'' said Mr. Strain, who directs the northern
Virginia branch of the G.S.A. ''The agency that gave it to us wanted only
$21,000 for it.''

Last year, the G.S.A. made $101 million from Government auctions, largely from
the sale of 33,000 vehicles and 200,000 lots of property, said Stan Duda, a
G.S.A. spokesman. The Department of Defense made $60 million from usable
equipment, mainly clothing and furniture, and $77 million from material sold for
scrap.

Free Lists of Sales Sites

The General Services Administration sends a free list of addresses and phone
numbers for its 12 sales sites around the country. Officials at each site have
information about when auctions take place and what kinds of items will be for
sale.

Justice Department auctions of seized and confiscated property are handled by
the United States Marshals Service, which usually advertises the auctions in
local newspapers.

The Department of Defense not only sends out a list of auction sites, it also
compiles a list of sealed bids. To place your name on the bidders' list for
auctions in your area, telephone the headquarters for Defense Reutilization and
Marketing Services in Battle Creek, Mich., 616-961-7331.

Registration for most Government auctions takes place the day of the event and
costs nothing.

Privately published guidebooks are available by mail and telephone hotlines. But
the books are expensive, from $39.95 to $99.95, and Government officials say
they are often unreliable, containing out-of-date addresses and phone numbers.
Most information in them is available at no charge from the Government.

It helps to do some homework before attending any auction: Determine the market
value of the merchandise you want. Inspect the merchandise carefully before
bidding. Set a limit on your bid.

A potential bargain can turn into a loss of several hundred dollars in the heat
of a bidding war.

The ''smuggler's auction'' is a development on the fringes of the Government
auction. Many private dealers sell Government surplus at their auctions along
with bank repossessions and pawned items. Newspaper advertisements can mislead
readers into thinking the smuggler's auctions are affiliated with the
Government. Read the fine print. Most advertisements for auctions of goods
seized by the Justice Department, which are conducted by the United States
Marshals Service, provide brief but detailed descriptions of the merchandise,
including flaws.

Quality Varies

At Government auctions, all items come from a Federal agency. Agency spokesmen
say that prices at private auctions tend to be higher and the merchandise less
reliable. For example, private auction ads may list Army jeeps used in Vietnam
selling for $100 each, but Defense Department spokesmen say that most surplus
jeeps are sold only for scrap.

The quality of merchandise sold at official auctions varies widely, too.
Vehicles and office equipment have been used for three years or more and are
ready for replacement. Some are damaged.

The Justice Department may sell expensive jewelry and cars at auctions, says
Cory Copeland, who directs the agency's auctions, but United States marshals
make sure that big-ticket items are sold in cities where they will bring market
value. And in most cases, the marshals will establish a minimum bid or refuse to
sell a valuable item if there is a small turnout.

Now and then, however, buyers pick up bargains, especially at poorly attended
auctions. In Rhode Island, a fisherman and his wife bought a $55,000 trawler for
only $10 - although it cost them $15,000 to make it seaworthy.

WHERE TO FIND FEDERAL SALES

Federal surplus goods sold at Government auctions have been used for 2 to 10
years and are to be replaced. Before they are made available to the public, the
General Services Administration offers the goods to other Federal agencies, then
to state governments.

Public auctions take place year round, although there are fewer in winter
because vehicle and heavy equipment auctions take place outdoors. Three of the
busiest auction sites for the General Services Administration are in New York
City, at 26 Federal Plaza, 212-264-2034; in Atlanta, at 75 Spring Street SW,
215-597-5678, and in San Francisco, at 525 Market Street, 415-974-9196.

The Department of Defense has 11 regional offices, including one at 26 Federal
Plaza in New York, 212-264-3300; and two busy sites in Fort Worth, at 819 Taylor
Street, 817-334-4824, and in Philadelphia, at Ninth and Market Streets,
215-597-7000.

The United States Customs auctions that do the most business take place in
Miami, at Pier A in the Port Authority; in Los Angeles, at 2332 East Pacifica
Place, and in Jersey City, at 111 Westside Avenue. The information number for
all three offices is 405-357-9194.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Browsers in Maryland at a ''smuggler's auction,'' a private
auction advertised to suggest it was a Government sale. (The New York
Times/Marty Katz)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              322 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 31, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Kind Word for Lyndon Johnson

BYLINE: By FRANK J. PRIAL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1512 words


With a couple of initials tacked on to the end of it, the name on the brass
plaque on the door in a nondescript office building in midtown Manhattan could
be that of a dentist or an accountant. The man who answers the door, in his
staid blue suit, sensible tie and no-nonsense horn-rims, could easily be either
of them, but there are no initials after the name. The plaque says simply Robert
A. Caro.

Mr. Caro, the celebrated biographer of Robert Moses, is now the celebrated
author of a monumental and much-discussed biography of former President Lyndon
B. Johnson, the second volume of which has just been published by Alfred A.
Knopf. The book, titled ''The Means of Ascent,'' deals with Johnson's 1948
campaign for the United States Senate and follows ''The Path to Power,'' which
appeared in 1982.

''The Means of Ascent'' has been greeted with both acclaim and strong criticism:
acclaim for Mr. Caro's exhaustive research and riveting narrative; criticism for
his stark and, some say, simplistic depiction of Johnson as ''a man of utter
ruthlessness'' with a ''seemingly bottomless capacity for deceit, deception and
betrayal'' who stole the senatorial election from his opponent.

Dark and Light Threads

Mr. Caro acknowledged that he had no great love for Robert Moses, who was the
subject of his Pulitzer Prize-winning biography, ''The Power Broker,'' but he
said: ''It's not true that I don't like Lyndon Johnson.''

''Lyndon Johnson,'' he said, ''was a political genius. Two threads run through
his life, a light one and a dark one. Volume II dwelt on the dark thread; Volume
III will deal with the light one.

''What Johnson did to bring electricity to the Texas hill country was
magnificent. Without him, we wouldn't have had the civil rights legislation of
the 1960's. We probably wouldn't have had a David Dinkins or a Tom Bradley or
some 4,000 communities in the South with black mayors.''

Some reviewers said Mr. Caro had turned a now mostly forgotten former Governor
of Texas, Coke Stevenson, Johnson's opponent in the 1948 Senate campaign, into a
romantic, John Wayne-like symbol of the Old West. They said he had done it to
make Johnson's electoral conniving seem even more contemptible than it was.

''That was no literary device,'' Mr. Caro said. ''Not even Johnson's people
disagreed about Stevenson. It was literary only in the sense of contrasts; each
profile threw the other into darker relief.''

Originally planned as a three-volume project with the overall title of ''The
Years of Lyndon Johnson,'' the biography is now scheduled to be four. And the
succeeding volumes, given Mr. Caro's penchant for thoroughness - some call it
verbosity - could take another decade. Mr. Caro said he was ''well into'' Volume
III and expected to finish it ''within three years.''

Writing-Reporting DichotomyA

The drab New York office, a 10-minute walk from his home on Central Park West,
is strictly for writing. One wall is lined with books, another with file
cabinets. The view is traditional Manhattan airshaft. Only the intricate chart
behind the desk indicates that this is a writer's lair. On it, every chapter is
minutely outlined; vertical red lines indicate the work already done. At one
point, Mr. Caro said, the chart was 14 feet long.

While New York is for writing, the reporting is done elsewhere.

''I spent four years living in Texas,'' Mr. Caro said, ''a lot of it in the hill
country where Lyndon Johnson grew up. I'm spending a lot of my time right now in
the visitors' gallery at the United States Senate, where he spent some of his
most important years. When we get to the civil rights section, I plan to live in
a Southern town where blacks couldn't even be registered before Lyndon Johnson.
Later, I want to find and live in a town in Vietnam that was devastated by the
bombing ordered by Lyndon Johnson so I can describe it.''

When Mr. Caro signed the contract for ''The Years of Lyndon Johnson'' in 1975,
he was 39 years old. He has spent almost 15 years on the project and could be
well into his 60's when it is finished.

Volume III, originally planned to encompass Johnson's years in the Senate and
his Presidency, will end with his taking the oath as President aboard Air Force
One, 10 feet from the body of his slain predecessor, John F. Kennedy. Volume IV
will end with his death in his beloved Texas hill country, nearly 10 years
later.

The Cruelest Cut

Mr. Caro is not a minimalist. Given a few spare hours, he reads Macaulay,
Gibbon, Tolstoy, Francis Parkman and other immortals who never said anything in
two pages that might possibly sound better in 10. He still smarts over the
cutting of his epic 1974 biography of Robert Moses, which won him the Francis
Parkman Prize as well as the Pulitzer. ''They tossed it back to me and told me
to cut it,'' he said. ''I really sweated to get it down to a million and fifty
thousand words.'' The published version ran to more than 640,000 words and 1,296
pages. .

The first Johnson volume, ''The Path to Power,'' was excerpted in The Atlantic
in 1982. The current volume was excerpted in The New Yorker in six installments
beginning last November. The last segment ran to 47,000 words. Together, the
first two volumes of ''The Years of Lyndon Johnson'' comprise, with notes, 1,387
pages.

The Vagaries of Time

Time has a special meaning to Robert Caro. ''When I was working on the Moses
book,'' he said, ''I realized that I had to do a separate chapter on a block in
the Bronx, on East Tremont Avenue, that Moses had gratuitously destroyed. I had
to find the people that were driven out and talk to them.

''We were broke in those days and I wanted to get the manuscript in to get paid.
I knew this would add months, but I knew it had to be done.'' He said he had
told his wife, Ina, then as now his chief researcher, and she had told him to go
ahead. He still thinks of it as one of the best sections of that book.

Time is measured in years for projects like Mr. Caro's - except where sources
are concerned. In a series of lectures on Robert Moses he gave at the New York
Public Library several years ago, he deplored the fact that no one had ever done
a first-rate biography of Alfred E. Smith. By then, he said, the original
sources were almost all dead.

Mr. Caro writes about Lyndon Johnson with the realization that the individuals
who knew him are dying, too. ''That's an important question,'' Abe Fortas, a
Johnson intimate, told Mr. Caro in an interview for the first volume. ''We'll
get to that the next time.'' There was no next time; Mr. Fortas died shortly
after their talk.

Guarding Against Glibness

''People think I'm slow,'' he said. ''Actually, I'm too fast. When I was at
Princeton I studied under R. P. Blackmur. I could write fairly well and I'd wait
until the last minute to do my papers. Then I'd bang them out at top speed. One
day he said to me: 'The trouble with you, Mr. Caro, is that you write with your
fingers.' ''

To guard against that kind of glibness, he writes everything in longhand on
yellow legal pads. After a second longhand rewrite, he does yet another revision
on an old electric typewriter. ''People are always recommending a word
processor,'' he said. ''I don't know; I like the feel of the paper; I like
cutting up the paragraphs and pasting them in another place.''

Friends say Ina Caro is her husband's alter ego. ''She's invaluable to him,''
one longtime friend said, ''If they were to come back to New York from, say,
Boston, and he was to realize he'd left some notes in the hotel room, she'd drop
him off, then drive back to Boston and get them.''

''It was Ina who finally got the old women in Texas hill country to talk,'' Mr.
Caro said. ''They were shy and they were suspicious, but with patience, a lot of
patience, she got through to them.''

'Her Eyes Are My Eyes'

Much of Mr. Caro's work is researching documents, mostly in the Lyndon Johnson
Library at the University of Texas in Austin. His wife is the only person he
will trust to do some of this work. ''Her eyes are my eyes,'' he said.

Extra eyes must be invaluable. The library had some 325 boxes of material just
on Mr. Johnson's years as a Congressman from Texas. ''On the stolen election,''
Mr. Caro said, ''there were 70 boxes of 800 pages each - scraps picked up from
desks, telephone memos. There is very little you can't find if you're willing to
sit there and turn the pages.''

Mrs. Caro has her own project in the works, a book on medieval architecture in
France. Each year, if his schedule permits, the Caros head for France. ''We love
it,'' he said. ''My only regret is that I haven't had the opportunity to work
there. The one way to really get to know a country is to work in it.''

In less serious moments, he dreams of a biography of Napoleon, once again to
explore the limits and the impact of political power. But he adds: ''I don't see
it happening.''

He does have a novel in the works but he's reluctant to talk about it. It has
some kind of political theme and, not surprisingly, it is very long.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Caro (The New York Times/Jim Wilson)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
