



Download Request: All Documents: 1-390
Time Of Request: Thursday, November 23, 2017  12:11:57 EST
Send To:

MEGADEAL, ACADEMIC UNIVERSE
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
LIBRARY
CHICAGO, IL


Terms: ((Vietnam OR Viet Nam) and Date(geq(03/01/1991) and leq(06/30/1991)))


Source: The New York Times
Project ID:



                               1 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: THE TROOPS;
Some of the Americans Feel Test of Mettle Was Too Easy

BYLINE: By CHRIS HEDGES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 522 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Feb. 28


The war's swift end has left soldiers and marines relieved that there were few
American casualties, skeptical of Saddam Hussein's intentions and disappointed
that they never got to test their mettle in battle.

Despite Baghdad's announcement that Iraq would honor the United Nations
resolutions and begin a cease-fire, American troops interviewed in Kuwait and
Saudi Arabia question Iraqi motives.

"I breathed a sigh of relief when I heard," said Sgt. Oscar Smith of Jena, La.
"But I don't believe it's over. From what he did in the past, I suspect he will
just rebuild his forces and begin all over again."

Sgt. Frank Thomas of Plaquemine, La., said: "I think it's like Vietnam. When
there was a cease-fire, the North Vietnamese built up their strength. I am
afraid this is what Saddam is doing. We should pound him into the ground until
he surrenders."

Specialist Kenneth White of Sacramento, Calif., said: "I suspect he is up to his
usual tactics. He is not done yet."

It Seemed Too Easy

Many front-line troops said the land war seemed too easy, especially after
months of training and anticipation. The storming into Iraq and Kuwait and the
almost instant collapse of the Iraqi Army proved anti-climactic.

Soldiers and marines, who thought they would be tested in battle, said they felt
they did not get an opportunity to show what they could do.

"The other people who fought wars for our country did a lot more fighting," said
Lance Cpl. David Cartwright, who was one of the first marines into Kuwait. "This
was just a big P.O.W. capture."

Sgt. Edward Swanson of Houston said: "I will have to say I was disappointed. I
waited four-and-a-half-years for this moment. I thought it would be a chance to
find out my true colors. I am glad there were so few casualties, but I would
have liked a little more resistance."

Some Are Pleased

Other front-line troops, however, said they were just as glad they did not have
to shoot and be shot at.

"When I first heard that the ground war had begun, I had to walk away to be
alone for a few moments," said Cpl. Charles R. Phelps of Palmdale, Calif. "All I
could think about was how many people would die."

"I am glad it ended like this," the marine said. "It would have been very
difficult for me to have to kill Iraqis. They are not really my enemies, and I
have nothing against them. It is their leader who is a problem."

To rear-echelon troops the rapid collapse and distance of the war made the
experience remote.

"We felt like we were not really part of it," said Sgt. Laine Kellen of Colfax,
Calif., who is with a supply unit. "We lived in rooms with beds. We had hot
showers, and all we knew of the war was what we heard on the news. We might as
well have been back home."

The troops in the rear, who have been putting in long hours with only one day
off every two weeks, said they hoped that the end of the war would mean their
workload would lighten.

"All we do is work and sleep," said Sgt. Susan Sullivan of Sacramento. "We have
had no time for anything else. We are all running around like zombies. We are
ready for a break."

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: An American soldier flashing the victory sign yesterday as he
guarded the United States Embassy compound in Kuwait City. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR;
Again, a Symbol Of a War's End

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: There is an eerie similarity: military helicopters, rooftop
landings in U.S. Embassy compounds, figures clambering through wide cargo doors.
But the two images evoke a stunning difference in how two wars will be
remembered: one helicopter brought in proud marines, the other carried out
frightened evacuees. Marines touched down in Kuwait City, above. The other
helicopter took off from Saigon, South Vietnam, in 1975. (Reuters; United Press
International)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: KUWAIT;
A SHATTERED CITY STRUGGLES FOR LIFE

BYLINE: By DONATELLA LORCH, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1239 words

DATELINE: KUWAIT CITY, Feb. 28


Behind the newly fluttering flags and the cheers of its residents, this
once-thriving city of wide avenues, opulent residences, modern high-rise
buildings and massive mosques appeared today as a maimed victim of war whose
spine has been hurt and whose nerves and circulation were shattered.

Street after street of stores, banks and restaurants had their shutters drawn.
Scarcely any food was available. The city's desalting plant was in ruins, so
there was no drinking water. The power plant was not functioning and the only
people who had electricity were those with generators and the fuel to run them.
Some Kuwaitis said they had sold furniture and television sets to buy food.

Many of the hotels that had once catered to international businessmen, stood
like desolate hulks, charred from shellfire aimed at them by the Iraqi forces in
the last week of their occupation. The National Assembly Building had been set
ablaze.

Threat of Amphibious Attack

The winding palm-lined boulevard along the seaside, which had given the city the
aspect of a Mediterranean resort, had been turned into a fortified barricade by
the Iraqi troops as they evidently prepared to counter an amphibious landing by
American-led troops that never came. The beach was covered with razor-sharp
concertina wire, bunkers and artillery pieces pointing out to sea,

In marked contrast to the scenes of destruction, the United States Embassy
apparently emerged from the occupation in good shape. The American flag that had
been left flying when the last United States diplomats left the besieged complex
last December, was still flying today when the American military repossessed the
buildings.

In a scene that appeared to be a mirror image of the helicopter evacuation of
the United States Embassy in Saigon at the end of the Vietnam War, a helicopter
hovered over the embassy here and dropped Special Forces troops onto the roof.
The men then searched the buildings and grounds, looking for booby traps and
securing the installation in preparation for the return tomorrow of the United
States Ambassador.

U.S. Troops Welcomed

American troops were posted in a security perimeter outside the high white walls
of the embassy. They were often affectionately mobbed by Kuwaitis who either
shook or kissed their hands. When the helicopters arrived with the Special
Forces, the crowd outside went wild. Some threw candy at the soldiers, some beat
drums and the women joined in a ululating chant.

"I'm sure this equals what our parents saw in World War II," said Capt. Doug
Wisnioski, an Army officer stationed at Fort Bragg, N.C. "It makes the waiting
and anticipation worth it."

Elsewhere in the city, Qatari troops paraded their armored personnel carriers
down the main roads, firing off automatic weapons.

Less jubilant barrages of small-arms fire were also reported in sections of the
city populated by Palestinians. Young Kuwaitis belonging to the Mukhawa, a group
that had mainatained an underground struggle against the Iarqis, were conducting
patrols in search of Iraqi stragglers or collaborators.

A Dark Afternoon

Clouds and the smoke from oil-well fires blocked the sun so that at 2 P.M. cars
had to turn on their headlights.

For most Kuwaitis, the day still had to be spent in struggle, although with the
retaking of the city the main goal was to secure the essentials in life: warmth,
food, and gasoline for transport and generators. Gasoline was being distributed
without cost but only at two or three pumps in the city, which had to be
operated manually. At these pumps, operated and controlled by the young armed
men from the Mukhawa group, cars were lined up for blocks. The first priority
went to ambulances and police cars.

Hospitals are admitting only emergency cases. At Mubarak al-Kabir Hospital, the
largest in the city, the doctors said the Iraqis had removed their most basic
equipment, including many ambulances.

Accounts of Torture

The doctors also confirmed some of the accounts of torture by the Iraqis that
have been surfacing over the last seven months. Dr. Badr al-Otaibi, an
internist, said the hospital had received on average three to four young people
every week who had been beaten, shot in the head, or had their fingernails
pulled out.

A surgeon, Dr. Abdel Sabboubeh, said that the hospital had admitted many
patients sufferring from psychological trauma. Another doctor, Dr. Abdul Rida
Abbas, in charge of the ambulance corps, said that his unit had received two or
three calls a day during the last month to pick up corpses from police stations,
then being used by Iraqi security forces. The bodies were often riddled with
bullets, he said, and often shot through the face.

In the hospital's orthopedic ward, 34 Iraqi soldiers, many of whom were captured
as they attempted to walk to Basra in Iraq, huddled in their beds. One of them,
Col. Rajef al-Azami, 40 years old, said that a day before he had been shot twice
by a member of the Kuwaiti irregular force. He insisted he did not know that
Iraqi soldiers had killed civilians in Kuwait and kept repeating that he was
only a soldier and had obeyed orders.

Iraqi Soldier's Account

But Iraqi infantry soldiers in the hospital gave more extensive testimony to
their experience under fire. Muhta Khodayer, a Bedouin reservist from western
Iraq who was a veteran of his country's eight-year war with Iran, was shot and
wounded at Wafra on the Saudi border on Feb. 26. He spoke of endurring the
terrible bombardments by allied troops and he volunteered a despairing view of
Iraq's role in the war: "We came to the wrong place. This is an Arab country.
They are our family. In Iran it was all Arab nations, even America standing with
us. But in Kuwait everyone is against us," he said.

In a bed near him, 21-year-old Dakhil el-Abbas, lay with broken legs and tubes
through his stomach. He said he had been shot by his own officers when he
refused to walk to Iraq from the Saudi border the previous week. Of his two
brothers who had been with him in the trenches, he said that one had deserted to
Saudi Arabia and the other was killed for trying to desert. He said the last
three days before the ground war began, the soldiers had cowered in their
trenches, terrified by the intense bombing.

Three days after allied troops had entered their city, a trickle of people began
returning to work. At the Kuwaiti International Hotel, darkened hallways were
filled with hundreds of journalists and and military personnel. Some of the
reporters struggled under flashlights to coax expensive satellite phones into
operation.

Among those arriving for work were some Bangladeshi employees who had stayed put
since the beginning of the war. Among these people was Mahmud A. Qatanani, who
at dawn turned up to resume his duties as a security guard at the United States
Embassy across the street from the hotel.

But in addition to the cheers of triumph and the wails of the vanquished, some
Kuwaitis again enjoyed small and ordinary pastimes. For the first time in seven
months, Dr. Iman Mokaddas, a 29-year-old pathologist, took her 3-year-old
daughter, Radya, for a walk on the long, meandering promenade that overlooks the
harbor here. Rolls of barbed wire and Iraqi tanks had made it off-limits before
the city was retaken.

"Little by little, we will try to get our lives back to normal," said Dr.
Mokaddas.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A family in Kuwait passing the office of the Emir, which had
been damaged by Iraqi troops. (Agence France-Presse) (A10)

Map of Kuwait City, Kuwait (pg. A10)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: CASUALTIES;
Military Experts See a Death Toll Of 25,000 to 50,000 Iraqi Troops

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 957 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 28


While the exact figure will never be known, military experts said today that
25,000 to 50,000 Iraqi soldiers probably died during the six-week war in the
Persian Gulf.

Some estimates put the number of Iraqi deaths higher and some lower as the
allies marked a military victory with casualties that commanders called
extraordinarily low, including 79 Americans killed in combat.

Bush Said to Order Estimate

Although the Pentagon steadfastly refused to say how many Iraqis were being
killed as the war progressed, a senior White House official said that President
Bush today ordered Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
to make an estimate.

Any such tally will take time, as the military sifts through the nearly deserted
but still dangerous Iraqi trenches and buries the dead.

Iraq suffered 150,000 to 340,000 killed in its eight-year war with Iran, and the
deaths of so many more men in six weeks is another painful blow for the nation's
19 million people. But military experts said that this week's bloody rout might
have been far worse. Most of the Iraqi soldiers saved their lives by swiftly
abandoning their tanks and guns in the last week, the experts said.

The speed of the Iraqi collapse helped keep allied casualties in the low
hundreds. Among those killed since the offensive began on Jan. 17 were 79
Americans who died in combat -- 23 before the start of the ground offensive a
week ago, 28 during the final push, and 28 killed when a Scud missile struck a
barracks in Saudi Arabia. Fifteen British soldiers and 44 Saudis were killed in
action. Dozens of allied troops are listed as missing or captured.

But for Iraq the toll clearly was orders of magnitude greater.

Prince Bandar, the Saudi Ambassador to the United States and son of the Saudi
Defense Minister, said this week that his country's military estimated that
85,000 to 100,000 enemy combatants were killed or wounded. Les Aspin, chairman
of the House Armed Services Committee, told reporters that he believed that at
least 65,000 were killed, although he had no official information to support
that figure.

Retired Col. Trevor Dupuy, a highly regarded military historian who specializes
in estimating casualties, said the total number of Iraqis killed and wounded was
probably between 100,000 and 150,000, with a quarter to a third of the total
killed.

Kenneth Brower, a Pentagon consultant and international research fellow at
Sandhurst, the British military school, said he believed that 12,000 to 20,000
Iraqi soldiers had been killed during the bombardment that preceded the ground
offensive, and that several thousand probably had been killed in the last week
of the war.

About 58,000 Americans died in Vietnam, 47,000 of them killed in action.

Red Cross Team Expected

Thousands of civilians have probably also been killed, in Iraq and in Kuwait,
although it is difficult to find reliable figures for civilian deaths that can
be independently corroborated.

The Iraqi Mission at the United Nations said it had absolutely no information on
Iraqi casualties in the gulf war.

The observer mission of the International Committee of the Red Cross at the
United Nations said it had no estimates. The Red Cross maintains a small mission
in Baghdad, but its members have not been able to travel outside the city. A Red
Cross team is to arrive in Kuwait City soon.

Another view came from Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the allied commander. Of the
Iraqi troops who manned the front lines in southern Kuwait, and absorbed the
brunt of allied air strikes and then the ground assault, the General said
Wednesday, "There's a very large number of dead in these units, a very, very
large number of dead."

Little Chance of Exact Count

He was asked if there ever would be an accounting. "No, there will never be an
exact count," he said.

"Probably in the days to come, you're going to hear many, many stories, either
overinflated or underinflated, depending upon who you hear them from," he said.
"The people who will know best, unfortunately, are the families that won't see
their loved ones come home."

Nonetheless, estimates are being developed, based on a variety of calculations.

One way to make the estimates is to extrapolate from historical experience,
using well established data to calculate how many people are typically killed
per tank, cannon or vehicle destroyed. The Pentagon has been very precise in
saying how many weapons have been destroyed in the war.

Colonel Dupuy, in a book about estimating casualties, wrote that "the personnel
casualties can be estimated if materiel losses are known." But he said in an
interview today that his formulas for doing so are based on engagements in which
the losing side puts up a major fight, which with a few exceptions the Iraqis
did not do.

Many thousands of Iraqis probably died in the first weeks of bombing rather than
in the final assault. During those early weeks, 14 front-line divisions were
pummeled to the point that they were at less than half their full combat
capability when the war began. But that does not mean that half of the troops in
those divisions had been killed. Rather, some of the units suffered desertion
rates as high as 30 percent, General Schwarzkopf said.

And most of the bombing of those forces concentrated on artillery formations.
Colonel Dupuy said that fewer lives were typically lost per artillery piece
destroyed in war, because artillery is deployed less densely in fighting units
than, for example, tanks.

And although in a classic tank battle troop losses are usually fairly high in
proportion to the number of tanks destroyed, there were few classic tank battles
in the gulf campaign, Mr. Brower said.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Iraqi prisoners in Kuwait City carrying the body of a comrade
to a collection point for dead Iraqi soldiers. (Associated Press) (pg. A1);
Surgeons from the Fifth Mobile Army Surgical Hospital treating an Iraqi soldier
wounded in the war. (Pool photo via Reuters) (pg. A11)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: TANK BATTLE;
G.I.'s Who Beat the Guard Remain Wary

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 699 words

DATELINE: WITH U.S. VII CORPS, in Iraq, Feb. 28


Lieut. Gen. Frederick Franks Jr., who commanded the American armor that broke
through to crush the Iraqi Republican Guard, strongly urged his forces today to
maintain a wary vigilance even though the single entry on his headquarters
bulletin board proclaimed: "Ceasefire. 0800. 28 Feb. 91."

General Franks, a 52-year-old officer who had lost his right leg in combat in
the Vietnam war, offered his warnings in his first interview since his men began
to play their pivotal role in the 100-hour ground war. "We have to continue to
be ready and alert," he said in elaborating on the theme of preparedness that
was spreading among the tens of thousands of victorious soldiers.

Sgt. Maj. Robert E. Wilson, the highest ranking noncommissioned officer in the
VII Corps, said, "It's just a very dangerous time right now, the uncertainty."

Referring to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, he added: "This guy may rally
some people who get across and try something stupid, I hope for his sake he
doesn't. In Vietnam they just used the cease-fire to resupply."

Reports today from the battlefront in southern Iraq and Kuwait indicated that in
the first hours after President Bush ordered offensive action to stop, small
pockets of Iraqi resistance fired on American units.

Maintaining Concentration

General Franks said the mission of the VII Corps, which delivered the knockout
punch to Iraq's best force, would not be over until all Iraqi resistance had
ended and the exiled Government of Kuwait was once again in control of the
emirate.

"A soldier responsible for conducting a military operation like this one wants
to keep his sense of focus and concentration until the mission is completed," he
said.

Speaking with a small group of reporters at the VII Corps tactical operations
center, more than 80 miles inside Iraq, he reviewed the events of the last few
days by pointing to a map of the battlefield, with a plastic overlay showing the
deployment of allied and Iraqi forces.

In a detailed account of what is being described by Pentagon officials as the
largest armor battle since World War II, General Franks paid ardent tribute to
the VII Corps troops, saying American tanks and artillery had picked off targets
in the Iraqi desert with remarkable accuracy.

"Tanks behind revetments make very small targets," he said. "I think the speed
of the battle is a great tribute to our soldiers, their skill, their valor and
their heart."

20 Corps Soldiers Killed

The corps has reported that 20 of its soldiers were killed and 65 wounded.

The general said attacks by the VII Corps left the Tawakalna and Medina
Divisions of the Iraqi Republican Guard destroyed. The Guard's Hammurabi
Division and a brigade of the Adnan Division were heavily damaged.

The American attack on the Hammurabi Division, which was deployed in dug-in
fortifications southwest of Basra, was in progress when the cease-fire was
declared.

General Franks said it was too early to estimate the amount of Iraqi armor that
had been destroyed in the war, although other allied officials have said the
weaponry of the Republican Guard was largely destroyed.

Guard Not Well Coordinated

He said units of the Guard were destroyed at distances of over 1,000 meters,
with coordinated strikes by air and artillery forces. In other skirmishes, he
said, Iraqi and allied scouting patrols came within 500 meters of each other.

The response of the Guard, Iraq's best-trained, best equipped force, was poorly
organized, the general said. "Sometimes they would try to back out and move," he
said. "But their artillery did not seem well coordinated with their maneuver
force. It didn't seem linked to their ability to shift rapidly."

He suggested there was evidence of the Iraqis' intention to use chemical
weapons, although no shells were found. Iraqi troops, he said, had been provided
with gas masks and decontamination equipment.

The VII Corps, which is based in Stuttgart, Germany, oversaw more than 100,000
troops and thousands of tanks from four Army divisions -- the First and Third
Armored, the First Infantry and the First Cavalry -- as well as the British
First Armored Division.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: 'Iraq's Weapons Losses' shows Iraq's losses of major weapons in
Kuwait and southern Iraq through yesterday.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
Turning Back the Clock

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1307 words


"THE SPEED OF DARKNESS," Steve Tesich's new play, is only a few minutes old when
a character announces that blood will eventually be spilled on the living-room
carpet of the all-American home where it takes place. By the time the final
curtain falls more than two hours later, blood has indeed been spilled, and so
have guts, shameful secrets and a heap of dirt that stands for the stain on a
family and a nation. That's the kind of play Mr. Tesich has written: one that
tells you what it is going to do and then does it, messily perhaps, but with a
vengeance and, once it finally gets going, with an inexorable grip.

It is also the kind of defiantly old-fashioned drama, big-boned, unsubtle and
aflame with passion, that few writers as high-minded as Mr. Tesich, best known
as the author of the film "Breaking Away," would be caught dead writing anymore.
There could be no more perfect setting for it than the Belasco Theater, a
glorious old Broadway house that has known its own darkness more often than not
in recent decades. David Belasco, the impresario and dramatist who built the
place in 1907, believed in thunderous emotions, and his theater, an almost
ecclesiastical cavern glinting with mosaics of colored glass, seems designed to
showcase them. In "The Speed of Darkness," Mr. Tesich's best scenes mesh with
some thrilling acting to turn back the Belasco's clock.

The evening's cast is headed by Len Cariou and Stephen Lang, as Vietnam soul
mates whose paths cross again 20 years after they left the service. Mr. Cariou
is Joe -- war hero Joe, self-made Joe, Middle American Joe, the archetypal
father who runs a construction business and presides over the
Naugahyde-upholstered South Dakota household at hand. Mr. Lang is Lou, the buddy
he long ago rescued, and these days a homeless man with moth-eaten clothing,
lice-infested hair and a gift for street-corner philosophizing. Lou devotes his
energies to following a copy of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial -- a traveling
"son of wall" -- that has found its way to Sioux Falls as part of a
cross-country tour. He soon settles in with Joe, Joe's wife (Lisa Eichhorn) and
their high-school senior daughter (Kathryn Erbe) as an uninvited if not entirely
unwelcome guest.

To say more about the story of "The Speed of Darkness" would be to spoil one of
its prime assets, for Mr. Tesich unabashedly believes in narrative. He also has
faith in other familiar verities of traditional American dramaturgy. The fifth
member of the cast, that sensitive young actor Robert Sean Leonard, plays a
neighborhood boy who doubles as an unofficial Greek chorus, promising the
audience a tragedy and sometimes sounding like the lawyer who portentously
narrates Arthur Miller's "View From the Bridge." Mr. Tesich also gives "The
Speed of Darkness" a buried crime out of Mr. Miller's "All My Sons" and a
symbolic, imaginary baby out of Edward Albee's "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?"
or more recently Sam Shepard's "Buried Child." Joe's family sometimes behaves
like the Vietnam-era brood of David Rabe's "Sticks and Bones," and is it my
imagination that Mr. Cariou is starting to look like Lee J. Cobb?


Sure, there's a paint-by-numbers quality to some of this, and no, Mr. Tesich
does not deliver a Great American Tragedy by the final scene -- just a very
chewy climactic soliloquy for Mr. Cariou that substitutes an excess of
melodramatic revelations for the one deep truth that might raise characters and
audience alike to higher ground. But speaking as someone who has found Mr.
Tesich's more recent plays ("Division Street," "Square One") and screenplays
("The World According to Garp," "Four Friends") either precious or pretentious,
I was almost always captivated by his heartfelt writing here, despite his
sometimes open manipulation of his character's strings and the slow-motion
exposition that cripples the first half or so of the first act.

Many of the best lines belong to Mr. Lang, a fascinating actor who specializes
in psychos ("A Few Good Men," the coming film "The Hard Way") but here keeps us
guessing whether Lou is the craziest or wisest person on stage, or both. With
his military stature, feral eyes and weathered face, he is, as always, a
mesmerizing figure, and his diction, as classically polished as his body and
clothes are filthy, adds to his unsettling presence. He could not have a better
opportunity to show off his range than "The Speed of Darkness." Mr. Lang is
brilliant in his delivery of Mr. Tesich's funniest speech -- a Robin
Williams-esque spiel about the relative merits of pre- and post-modern public
statuary to the urban homeless -- and he gives a searing account of the play's
most moving monologue, in which Lou recounts his arrest for trying to scratch
his name with a can opener into the Washington wall of the dead.


Lou's point is that the survivors of the Vietnam War deserve a memorial, too,
because many of them, like him, survived in name only and are still what he
calls M.I.A., or Missing in America. ("We weren't saved. We were rescued," is
how Joe puts his own emergence alive from battle.) Mr. Tesich's larger theme is
that the entire country must break through the wall it has erected around an
unhappy chapter in its history if it is to be free of its guilt. Along with the
wall, the evening's other principal metaphor is garbage, for it is in garbage
removal that Joe got his postwar start in civilian life, taking his neighbors'
"trash and filth and waste" and burying it "somewhere, anywhere, out of sight."
In the playwright's view, that waste, however ugly and poisonous, must be
brought from the darkness into the light if it is at last to be understood and
overcome.

Mr. Tesich has not so successfully worked out his play at the marital level, and
Joe's wife, well played by Ms. Eichhorn in apparent emulation of Dianne Wiest,
never adds up. Though it still lacks a wholly satisfying ending, "The Speed of
Darkness" has otherwise been profitably shorn of much, if not all, of its
overwriting since its premiere almost two years ago at the Goodman Theater in
Chicago. Then as now the firm director is the Goodman's artistic leader, Robert
Falls, and if he shares responsibility for the evening's early leaden gait (and
the unfortunate "Twilight Zone" music accompanying it), he also presumably
deserves credit for the inspired recasting. (Only Mr. Lang is a holdover from
the Chicago company.) In Ms. Erbe, a beautiful and poised young actress who
makes Joe's daughter an intelligent girl-woman with a rapidly evolving,
transparently exposed psyche, he may have made a major discovery.

For Mr. Cariou, "The Speed of Darkness" may be the most challenging assignment
since "Sweeney Todd," and he acts his heart out in a role that variously calls
for Chamber of Commerce boorishness, belligerent drunkenness, paternal
tenderness and finally the promised self-exorcism in which he spews out Joe's
own garbage of a lifetime. By then, the V-shaped back wall of Thomas Lynch's
domestic set seems to have blackened into another, hellish image of the war
memorial, a jolting go-for-broke gesture that typifies a drama intent on
retrieving the theater's past no less than the trauma of Vietnam.

The Speed of Darkness



By Steve Tesich; directed by Robert Falls; set design, Thomas Lynch; costumes,
Merrily Murray-Walsh; lighting, Michael S. Philippi; music and sound, Rob
Milburn; production stage manager, William Dodds; associate producers, Howard
Platt, Sheila Henaghan, Michael Cullen and Constance Towers. Presented by Robert
Whitehead and Roger L. Stevens with Robert L. Sachter and American National
Theater and Academy. At the Belasco Theater, 111 West 44th Street.

Joe . . . Len Cariou
Anne . . . Lisa Eichhorn
Mary . . . Kathryn Erbe
Lou . . . Stephen Lang
Eddie . . . Robert Sean Leonard

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Len Cariou, left, and Stephen Lang in "The Speed of Darkness,"
Steve Tesich's new play at the Belasco. (pg. C1); Kathryn Erbe (pg. C3) (Martha
Swope/Belasco Theater)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Stage, and Off

BYLINE: By Alex Witchel

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1088 words



No Deal on 'Assassins'

"Assassins," the Stephen Sondheim-John Weidman musical about Presidential
assassins, directed by Jerry Zaks, is not opening on Broadway or anywhere else
this season. Despite reports that the show, whose limited run at Playwrights
Horizons ended on Feb. 16, would move to the Golden Theater, negotiations
between the Shubert Organization and David Geffen, the Hollywood movie- and
record-industry executive and occasional Broadway producer, broke off this week.

This is how it went, says an executive close to the negotiations. Three
different budgets were drawn up for a potential move, two for Off Broadway
theaters, the third for the Golden, which would cost $1.1 million. It was
assumed that whatever the venue, the show would be produced as a labor of love,
since "Assassins" was widely panned and even Mr. Sondheim's well-received
musicals rarely turn a profit. But Mr. Sondheim insisted on Broadway, and turned
to Mr. Geffen, who agreed to match whatever the Shubert Organization, which owns
the Golden, would put up. Flora Roberts, Mr. Sondheim's agent, sought additional
investors.

But Mr. Geffen made it a condition of his commitment that the Shuberts invest
their own money, rather than call in outside investors.

"It was supposed to be a real gesture," Mr. Geffen says. "I volunteered to do
this. No one asked me. I was making the money available to Steve as a gesture to
support the theater. Since the Shubert Organization is owned by the Shubert
Foundation, they're supposed to be supporting good work in the theater, so this
is the kind of project they should be doing. Stephen Sondheim has contributed
mightily to the profits of the Shubert Organization throughout the years.
'Gypsy,' 'West Side Story' -- these shows all played in their theaters."

"But," he continued, "I'm not willing to match every investor they could come up
with, just the investment they would come up with themselves. It's not
appropriate to ask investors to come in when you know they'll lose money. I'm
not looking to get into some conflict with the Shuberts, but if you pledge a
charitable contribution to the Red Cross, for example, and you get your neighbor
to pay for it, you haven't given anything, have you? If you want to support good
work, put your money where your mouth is."

Enter Cameron Mackintosh. The producer of "Miss Saigon" is a friend of Mr.
Sondheim's (he was the first to occupy a chair endowed by Mr. Mackintosh at
Oxford University) and he is on good terms with both Mr. Geffen and the
Shuberts. Mr. Sondheim asked him to speak to both parties, who were not speaking
directly to each other. Mr. Mackintosh did, to no effect.

Bernard B. Jacobs, president of the Shubert Organization, declined to comment,
as did Mr. Mackintosh. Ms. Roberts, who is Mr. Sondheim's spokeswoman, did not
return calls.

The score of "Assassins" will be recorded by RCA next week for release this
year. And the National Theater in London has expressed interest in a production.
If you missed "Assassins" here, you might be able to catch it over there.

High Half-Price

"The Speed of Darkness," the first play to be produced under the Broadway
Alliance, is suffering some guinea-pig blues. The Alliance, a program that
limits theater producers to a modest $400,000 production budget, allows the
public to pay a top price of only $24 for orchestra seats, $19 for mezzanine and
$12 for balcony.

The $24 ticket is a good buy compared with the $42.50 some Broadway plays cost.
But, with "The Speed of Darkness," a drama about a Vietnam vet coming to terms
with his past, two problems have cropped up so far. Like most Broadway shows, it
sells a number of tickets at the TKTS booths. Yet the $24 orchestra tickets are
not being sold there for the usual half-price, but for $19.50: $17.50 each plus
the $2 TKTS surcharge. Customers are complaining, and perhaps with good reason.
The TKTS price for some other Broadway plays, which have a list top ticket of
$42.50 ("Prelude to a Kiss," "Shadowlands"), comes out to only $3.75 more than
the ticket to "Darkness." And at the Wednesday matinees of "Prelude" and
"Shadowlands" with a list top ticket of $37.50, "Darkness" is only $1.25
cheaper. So where's the bargain?

"It's a valid question," says Jane Slotin, plan manager for the Broadway
Alliance. "TKTS means half-price and this ticket isn't. We made a special
arrangement with the Theater Development Fund, which operates the TKTS booths,
to sell the tickets at 50 percent of the lowest-priced ticket being sold there,
which was the Wednesday matinee price of $35. It can't be lower because the show
needs the money to run on. The solution may be to drop the surcharge."

It compounds the problem that TKTS customers are not informed of the price
discrepancy until they pay. James Duncan, director of arts services for the
Theater Development Fund, says: "We're supposed to be making up a sign and
posting it but I guess that hasn't happened yet. The whole thing is so new that
several mistakes have been made."

The second glitch in the Alliance plan is that since the first preview of "The
Speed of Darkness" on Feb. 14, the balcony of the Belasco Theater has been
closed. Some patrons who go to the box office, where a clearly posted price
scale lists a $12 balcony seat, have been told those seats are unavailable.
Stuart Thompson, the show's general manager, says that by closing the balcony
the show has saved the salaries of two ushers, and a ticket taker, about $500 a
week. But, he says, "we have made the last two rows of the rear mezzanine
available at $12 a ticket." That is 25 mezzanine seats instead of 201 in the
balcony.

Mr. Thompson says that the box office had only "around 20" requests for $12
tickets that they couldn't fill, but that after the show opened, which it did
last night, the balcony would open, too. Why advertise balcony seats that aren't
for sale? "It's a teething problem," he says. "We're new at this."

The No-Pressure Workout

The Vineyard Theater has a pretty good track record producing musicals ("Goblin
Market," the revised "Flora the Red Menace"). So now, it has started a New
Musical Theater Lab in Manhattan where composers and lyricists can try out their
work without the pressures of being reviewed. The two lab productions this
spring are "Bodoni County" by Frank Gagliano and Claibe Richardson, about
suburban life, and "The Don Juan and the Non Don Juan" by James Milton and David
Goldstein, about two men searching for love.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: Lloyd Richards ends his 12 years as the artistic director of the Yale
Repertory Theater by directing Eugene O'Neill's "Moon for the Misbegotten"
starring Frances McDormand (above). The actress received an Oscar nomination for
"Mississippi Burning" and a Tony nomination for the 1988 revival of "A Streetcar
Named Desire." The show runs at Yale from April 30 through May 25.
Photo: "O'Neill at Yale "

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: THE FAMILIES - OCEANSIDE, CALIF.;
Joy for Marines, And a Little Envy

BYLINE: By Seth Mydans, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 423 words

DATELINE: OCEANSIDE, Calif., Feb. 28


Here at the base of the Marine First Division, euphoria over the cease-fire
today was tinged with mistrust of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq and with a
touch of envy among marines who missed a chance to take part in the battle.

"This city is ecstatic," said Margo Taylor, an employee of the Y.M.C.A., who,
like almost everyone in town, wore a button supporting the troops.

The city, already adorned with flags and yellow ribbons, has scheduled a welcome
home parade for April, and arrangements that were already under way for several
rallies next weekend in support of the Persian Gulf war are proceeding with a
new, more celebratory theme.

But Kathi Putman, a receptionist at Oceanside Christian School, voiced an
underlying caution among people here. "I'm relieved but a little apprehensive,"
she said. "I wonder, should we trust this guy? Is it for real or will we all get
out and then he does something else?"

Ruthie Davis, a barber with several close friends in the war zone, echoed that
sentiment, saying: "I'm not going to believe it's over until all the guys come
home. I don't want to get my hopes up."

Many wives seem to be expecting their husbands to return immediately, said Susie
Anderson, who wore a button reading, "Don't Mess With the U.S."

Mrs. Anderson said her husband, a Vietnam veteran who runs a rifle range at Camp
Pendleton, the Marine base, had mixed emotions. "He's really glad," she said,
"but he's a little disappointed he didn't get a chance to go."

A 40-year-old Marine gunnery sergeant who served two tours in Vietnam voiced
pride in the accomplishments of his younger colleagues, but regretted that his
generation had been forced to fight what he termed a political war.

"I would have loved to have been part of this action," said the marine, who
would give his name only as Alvin G. "I missed out and I hate that. I was
scheduled to go over, but now that has been canceled."

Cpl. Roger Hayward, a 26-year-old marine, had just arrived from his home in
Jackson, Mich., after re-enlisting so he could join the war effort. "I'm glad
it's over and everything," he said, "but I hope I can still go over there to
help clean up."

In this town populated by active and retired marines, one veteran of both Korea
and Vietnam said the credit should be shared by the troops at home. "I'd like to
see them give a reception to the ones that didn't go over and stayed here," said
the veteran, Philip R. McElroy. "They work just as hard but they don't get the
pat on the back they deserve."

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: THE REACTION - WASHINGTON;
A Special Reason To Celebrate

BYLINE: By Peter T. Kilborn, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 450 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 28


After the Vietnam War, the Watergate affair and lesser embarrassments that
sometimes made the Government look dumb, clumsy or worse, many career public
servants have a special reason to celebrate a swift, successful war.

"It was uplifting that we did something right and it worked," said Pat Gurley, a
47-year-old secretary at the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation who has
worked for the Government for 28 years.

Joseph E. Talbot, 50, an economist at the Department of Labor, said: "I
certainly felt quite proud watching the President's announcement. Not just
because I'm a Federal employee, but because it's good for the country over all."

Mr. Talbot's department is now absorbed in assuring that the reservists among
the men and women who went to war get their civilian jobs and keep all their
other employment rights.

Thinking Positive About Bush

Top officials are political appointees, and they predictably support the
President down the line. But many career workers, who tend to leave their
political biases at home, say they, too, are impressed by the Bush
Administration's execution of the war.

Jacqueline Storey, a union leader in the American Federation of Government
Employees at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission who is a paralegal aide
at the agency, said the Administration terrified her co-workers a few months ago
in proposing budget-cutting layoffs.

But the agency escaped the layoffs, Ms. Storey said. And now, with the gulf war,
she said: "Opinions have changed regarding the President. I think they're more
positive now. He let us know every step of the way what was happening. It was
like soap opera. He did no more than what he had to do."

Joseph Jackson, a cartographer, said the Bush Administration's regard for his
agency, the Commerce Department's National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, must have improved in the war because of the agency's own
little-heralded contribution.

Normally, the agency develops maps of the United States, but some of Mr.
Jackson's colleagues were called upon to help the Defense Mapping Agency with
its maps of the gulf region that pilots used in finding Iraqi targets.

Mr. Jackson said the maps "had to be constantly updated because Hussein was
constantly changing the topography," digging trenches and building berms. The
information was then fed into the computers the pilots used in firing their
weapons.

Like many other Federal agencies, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration has also faced budgetary threats, in its case proposals to hand
its work over to private industry.

"We're coming through that all right," Mr. Jackson said. "I think our value has
increased."

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: The White House;
Excerpts From Bush's News Conference on Postwar Plans

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3156 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1


Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference today at the White
House:

 OPENING STATEMENT

In the hours since we suspended military operations in the Kuwaiti theater of
war, considerable progress has been made in moving toward a cease-fire and
postwar planning. As our forces moved into Kuwait City and as the faces of these
jubilant Kuwaiti citizens have warmed our hearts, the coalition leaders started
the arduous task of addressing the next stages of the Persian Gulf situation.

As a first order of business this afternoon, I want to thank the American people
for the affection and support that they have shown for our troops in the Middle
East. In towns and cities across this nation, our citizens have felt a sense of
purpose and unity in the accomplishment of our military that is a welcome
addition to the American spirit. And as our service men and women begin coming
home, as they will soon, I look forward to the many celebrations of their
achievement.

In the meantime we are focused on the many diplomatic tasks associated with
ending this conflict. General Khalid, General Schwarzkopf, and other coalition
military leaders of our forces in the gulf, will meet with representatives of
Iraq tomorrow afternoon, March 2, in the theater of operations to discuss the
return of P.O.W.'s and other military matters related to the cease-fire. We will
not discuss the location of the meeting for obvious security reasons. But this
is an important step in securing the victory that our forces have achieved.

Work is proceeding in New York at the United Nations on the political aspects of
ending the war. We've welcomed here in Washington this week the envoys of
several of our close friends and allies. And shortly Secretary Baker will be
leaving for a new round of consultations that I am confident will advance
planning for the war's aftermath.

Again, and as I said Wednesday evening, the true challenge before us will be
securing the peace.

 QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Q. Mr. President, you've always said that you were not targeting Saddam under
the U.N. mandate. And the coalition has no claim on the Iraqi territory. Is that
still the case?

A. We are not targeting Saddam. And we have no claim on Iraqi territory.

Q. Well, will we try to hunt him down for any kind of war-crimes trial?

A. No, I'm not going to say that, hunt him down. But nobody can be absolved from
the responsibilities under international law on the war-crimes aspect of that.

 Reports of Atrocities

Q. Mr. President, along that line, the reports of atrocities in Kuwait
apparently go far beyond the horror stories that you've already described in
recent weeks. Who will be held accountable for those, perhaps, other than
Saddam? And do you think that the allied forces will hold any part of southern
Iraq as a security zone for any time?

A. . . . I agree that the reports are just sickening that are coming out of
Kuwait. We have been concerned about it. Early on in all of this, I expressed
the concerns that I felt.

But I think we have to just wait and see. Because I think the persons that
actually perpetrated the torture and the insidious crimes will be the ones that
are held responsible. Now how you go about finding them? But I think back to the
end of World War II. That process took a long time to evolve, but justice was
done. I can't say it was complete. I can't say everybody that committed a war
crime was tried.

But it's a very complicated process. But the answer is, the people that did it
-- now, a lot of them, obviously, took off and fled out of Kuwait. But some of
the Kuwaitis know who they were, so we'll have to wait and see on that one.

And what was the second part, Terry?

 Security Zone

Q. The second part was about a security zone. You know, you've had all this
destruction. Is there any thought of establishing a security zone to protect
----

A. Well, on the question of a security zone, and arrangements out there, these
matters will be discussed when Jim Baker is out there with the coalition
partners. I don't believe they will be discussed at the military meeting
tomorrow.

 Prisoners of War

Q. Mr. President, what are your options, sir, if the meeting tomorrow and
subsequent meetings do not produce prompt satisfaction to you that our E.P.W.'s
or P.O.W.'s will be released immediately?

A. Well, I really, Brit, don't want to get into the hypothesis. Because I'm
convinced they will. I really believe we will get satisfaction on that. And they
know that they must comply, and I believe they will comply. And put it this way:
they better comply.

 Iraqi Reparations

Q. Well, there have been reports, sir, already from the early days of the air
war that one of the airmen for example was killed, his body dragged through the
streets of one of the towns. Does the United States plan to seek any kind of
retribution because of that, or will there be measures taken in that regard?

A. Well, I've addressed myself to war-crimes trials and abuse of prisoners
certainly is provided for. And I, you know, the Geneva Convention cites how
prisoners should be treated. I had not heard that report and I don't want to
leave it stand that I know of it or know of its accuracy. But it would be a
horrible thing if that happened.

 Sanctuary for Hussein

Q. I know you've heard those reports from the Le Monde newspaper. Secretary of
State Baker said he knows nothing about the fact that the Algerians have worked
out a deal with Saddam and he can come there for political asylum.

First of all, have you heard anything about those reports, and if not, have you
-- do you agree with your chief of staff Mr. Sununu that it's an unstable
situation for him, and you think he might be overthrown?

A. John, I think that subsequent to your discussion with Secretary Baker, the
Algerians denied this. I'm seeing General Scowcroft confirm that, that they have
denied that. And I don't -- we don't really know about the stability inside.
There are rumors. But that -- I think it's early. In my own view I've always
said that it would be, that the Iraqi people should put him aside, and that
would facilitate the resolution of all these problems that exist. And certainly
would facilitate the acceptance of Iraq back into the family of peace-loving
nations.

Q. Sir, could I just follow that up. Even though that report from Algeria
apparently is erroneous, there was something interesting in there. It said the
Algerians have worked out a deal whereby the allies, including yourself have
agreed that if Saddam came there, he would not be tried for any war crimes.

You've said that no one can be absolved. Would you not agree to any deal whereby
he got political asylum?

A. I would leave it stand that we cannot absolve anyone from his responsibility
under international law. But that -- we were not approached on that at all. So
the report is simply fallacious if it included that.

Q. Just to get him out of the country, you wouldn't agree to not try him?

A. I would leave that matter to the international system of justice. And they --
we cannot absolve somebody. I cannot wave a wand and absolve somebody from the
responsibilities under international law.

 U.S.-Jordan Relations

Q. Mr. President, what can King Hussein do to get himself out of the U.S.
doghouse? And if it turns out Jordan was violating the arms embargo against
Iraq, can he do so?

A. Well, I think you know we have had differences with Jordan. And it's going to
take some time. I think the Jordanians have to sort out their internal problems
the way they look at this matter. The Jordanians I don't believe have even
received the truth as to what has happened to the Iraqi armed forces. From just
watching from afar, it seems to me that they have been denied the truth. And the
truth is we have destroyed Iraq's armor. And I see people dancing around in the
streets still talking about a victory. Or still saying that we've sued for peace
because we were done in by Saddam.

So first thing that has to happen in Jordan, the truth has to hit the streets.
And then it will be time to discuss future arrangements. We have no lasting
pique with Jordan. Everybody knows we've had very pleasant relationships with
Jordan in the past. But I have tried to be very frank with His Majesty the King
and with the Government of Jordan, pointing out a certain sense of
disappointment that all Americans feel that they moved that close to Saddam
Hussein.

But I think it's just going to take time. And I can't say how much, but clearly
we do not want to see destabilized Jordan. I have no personal animosity towards
His Majesty the King. So we'll just have to wait and see.

 Germany and Japan

Q. Sir, why do Americans have the impression that Germany and Japan didn't carry
their weight in the Persian Gulf crisis, and they find Germany's involvement in
the Iraqi chemical weapons and Scud missile operations particularly odious?

What can the Germans and the Japanese do to rehabilitate themselves in American
public opinion?

A. Fulfill the commitments that they already have made. I'm told that the
Germans have already come in with a substantial, close to 50 percent of their
commitment, and I'm also told that the Japanese Diet yesterday approved this $9
billion payment. And so I would simply say Japan and Germany have constitutional
constraints. American people may or may not understand that. Constraints that
kept them from participating on the ground in the coalition.

But I have tried to make clear to the American people that both of them have
stepped up and have offered to bear their share of responsibility by putting up
substantial amounts of money.

 U.S. Money to Rebuild Iraq

Q. Provided that Saddam Hussein is toppled, ousted and/or leaves the country,
what is your attitude about the U.S. helping to rebuild Iraq? And, secondly, how
do you feel now about a peace conference for the Middle East to deal with these
larger Arab-Israeli questions that you said would be among the issues on the
table once this war was over?

A. Well, on the second one, the peace conference or the whole concept of trying
to bring peace to the rest of the Middle East -- and I would say it relates to
the Palestinian question, it relates to the Lebanese question, clearly it
relates to how Iraq is brought back into the family of nations. All of those
things are going to be discussed now with our coalition partners by Jim Baker.
We are also discussing it, as I said, with those emissaries that have been here.
For example, the Germans don't have forces, but they have some very good ideas
on how all of these matters can be brought forward. I want to repeat my
determination to have the United States play a very useful role now in the whole
question of peace in the Middle East, and that includes all three of these
categories. And whether it proves to be a peace conference or some bolder new
idea, time will tell. But we are beginning very serious consultations on this.

In terms of rebuilding Iraq, my view is this: Iraq, had they been led
differently, is basically a wealthy country -- they are a significant oil
producer, they get enormous income. But under Saddam Hussein and this
Revolutionary Council they have elected to put a tremendous amount of their
treasure into arms, and they've threatened their neighbors. And now they invaded
-- up to now have invaded a neighbor. And so Iraq has a big reconstruction job
to do, but I'll be honest with you, at this point I don't want to see one single
dime of the United States taxpayers' money go into the reconstruction of Iraq.
Now, you want to talk about helping a child? You want to talk about helping
disease, something of that nature? Of course the United States will step up and
do what is -- that which we've always done, lay aside the politics and help the
health-care requirements, or help the children especially. But not
reconstruction. They must work these things out without any help from the
American taxpayer.

Q. If I may follow, Mr. President, you said your argument has never been with
the Iraqi people, that the United States did not seek the destruction of Iraq.
If Saddam Hussein is gone and the Iraqi people appear to need help because of
this crisis in leadership that you spoke about, why not, if not contributing
----

A. Well, we'll give them a little free advice. And the advice will be: Use this
enormous oil resource that you have to further develop your oil resource and
other natural resources, live peacefully and use that enormous money to
reconstruct and do the very questions you're asking about. And, in addition to
that, pay off these people that you have so badly damaged. They've got a big row
ahead of them there. That's the way I look at it.

 U.S. Role in Global Conflicts

Q. Mr. President, today you declared an end to the Vietnam syndrome, and of
course we've heard you talk a lot about the new world order. Can you tell us, do
you envision a new era now of using U.S. military forces around the world for
different conflicts that arise?

A. No, I think because of what's happened we won't have to use U.S. forces
around the world. I think when we say something that is objectively correct --
like don't take over a neighbor or you're going to bear some responsibility --
people are going to listen. Because I think out of all this will be a new-found
-- let's put it this way: a re-established credibility for the United States of
America. So I look at it the opposite. I say that what our troops have done over
there will not only enhance the peace but reduce the risk that their successors
have to go into battle some place. . . .

 Bush's Grim Demeanor

Q. Sir, I'm struck by -- I know these are serious topics, but I'm struck by how
somber you feel, you seem, at least here. And I'm wondering, aren't these great
days? Is this the highlight of your life? And how does this compare to being
plucked out of the ocean a couple of years back?

A. Well, to be very honest with you, I haven't yet felt this wonderful euphoric
feeling that many of the American people feel. I'm beginning to. I feel much
better about it today than I did yesterday.

But I think it's that I want to see an end. You mention World War II. There was
a definitive end to that conflict. And now we have Saddam Hussein still there,
the man that wreaked this havoc upon his neighbors. We have our prisoners still
held. We have people unaccounted for.

So I -- I think I'm beginning to -- beginning to feel that the joy that
Americans all feel now is proper. It has to do with a new wonderful sense of
patriotism that stems from pride and the men and women who went over there.

I sense that there is something noble and majestic about patriotism in this
country now. It's there. And so I'll get there. But I just need a little more
time to sort out in my mind how we -- I can say to the American people, it's
over, finally. Last "t" is crossed, last "i" is dotted.

 U.S. Presence in Mideast

Q. Mr. President, going into the security talks with the countries of the Middle
East, are you willing to consider a long-term presence of American troops as a
peacekeeping force, or do you think that would be better handled by Arab
nations?

A. I think it would be better handled by Arab nations. There will be a United
States presence, there was before this, but there will be -- one of the things
that Secretary Baker is talking about is -- is all these different security
arrangements. Perhaps there will be a role for a U.N. force, perhaps there will
be a role for an all-Arab force. Certainly there will be some security role for
the United States. But I would repeat here: I do not want to send out the
impression that U.S. troops will be permanently stationed in the gulf. I want
them back. So we're still working -- we're just beginning to work out these
security arrangements, but one of it -- a part of it will not be a continued
presence of substantial quantities of U.S. troops. I'd like to see them all out
of there as soon as possible. But there's some -- there's some shorter-run
security problems that I don't want to underestimate.

 Controlling Arms Sales

Q. Will you see that the United States and others quit selling arms?

A. I will work very hard for peace, just as hard as I have in the prosecution of
the war. And it's interesting you mention the arms sales, I don't think there
will be any arms embargo because we are not going to let any friend come into a
role where its security is threatened. But let's hope that out of all this there
will be less proliferation of all different types of weapons, not just
unconventional weapons.

 Prospects for Mideast Peace

Q. Mr. President, you've said that the true challenge now is securing the peace.
Do you detect any chinks of light, either on the Arab side or on the Israeli
side, which really would lead to a lasting settlement in the Middle East?

A. Well, it's a little early, because these consultations are just beginning.
But what I really believe is is that the conditions are now better than ever.
And it's not simply the restored credibility of the United States, for example.
There are a lot of players out there. There's a lot of people that know a lot
about the Middle East. And the British and the French and other coalition
partners are very interested in moving forward.

So I can't tell you that anything specific in what went on in the last 100 days
will contribute to this, but I can tell you that each of the people that I have
talked to have said, now let's get on with this.

And so we want to do it. It's in the interests of every country there. It's in
the interest of Arab countries. It's in the interest of Israel. It's in the
interest of the Palestinian people. So I sense a feeling, look, the time is
right, let's get something done. . . .

Q. Do you feel it's a more hopeful scenario now than it has been for some years?

A. I think so. I think so. And I've been wrestling with this in some role or
another since U.N. days back in '71 and '72. And part of this is the new-found
viability of the United Nations. Part of it is that even though we had some
nuances of differences here with the Soviets, that that veto-holding power is
with us, is together with us in feeling that there must be an answer.

China is different than it was in those early days when it first came to the
U.N., and they've been supportive of the resolutions against Iraq.

And so you've got a whole different perspective in the United Nations, and I'd
say in countries out there. There are still some historic prejudices, historic
differences exist. But I think your question is on to something. I think there
is a better climate now.

And we're going to test it. We're going to probe. We're going to try to lead to
see whether we can do something.

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A Consumer Who Uses Shopping to Try to Alter Many Corporate Policies

BYLINE: By BARRY MEIER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 48; Column 1; Style Desk; Consumer's World Page

LENGTH: 844 words


Consumer advocacy has its personal limits, and three years ago Alice Tepper
Marlin found one of hers. Her daughter insisted on eating Skippy brand peanut
butter. But Ms. Tepper Marlin's book, "Shopping for a Better World" said that
Skippy was a politically incorrect choice.

"At that time Skippy was still doing business in South Africa," said Ms. Tepper
Marlin. "We rated Jif higher, but my daughter won't eat it."

Skippy's corporate parent, CPC International no longer does business in South
Africa. Her daughter's peanut butter obsession has waned. But Ms. Tepper Marlin
remains committed to changing the behavior of companies by using pocketbook
politics.

As a result, she has also helped to spawn an era of what might be called
socially conscious shopping. The ethos of the book (Ballantine, $5.95), of which
Ms. Tepper Marlin is an author, is now mirrored in a rash of books. And
corporate America has taken notice, wrapping itself in the "green" marketing
movement, a development Ms. Tepper Marlin views with both excitement and unease.

Ms. Tepper Marlin, an animated 46-year-old with a wide, easy smile, said, "We
are concerned to the degree that it has remained a public-relations issue, and
how little change has taken place in the marketplace."

Not everyone is fond of Ms. Tepper Marlin, particularly corporations that have
run afoul of her relentess and ever-widening campaigns. "We really don't have
any comment, but thanks for calling," said a spokeswoman for Abbott Laboratories
, which Ms. Tepper Marlin's book rates as cheap toward charities, insensitive
about promoting women and intransigent about South Africa.

Married to an economist with whom she adopted two Korean children, Ms. Tepper
Marlin has long tried to intertwine capitalism and social activism. In 1968,
while a securities analyst, she was asked by a synagogue to help it invest in
companies with no interests in the Vietnam War.

That and other experiences showed her that managers of such alternative funds
need a source of reliable corporate data. The result was the Council on Economic
Priorities, founded in 1969 by Ms. Tepper Marlin.  Interests for the center,
which is located in lower Manhattan, today focuses on not only information on
corporate policies, but also on Federal military spending.

Last year, Ms. Tepper Marlin and her husband, Dr. John Tepper Marlin (who took
his wife's maiden name as his middle name), traveled to the Soviet Union for a
conference on converting United States and Soviet military plants to peaceful
uses.

800,000 Copies of Book Sold

But Ms. Tepper Marlin's biggest clout has come from "Shopping for a Better
World," which in three years has sold more than 800,000 copies. "The rating of
companies is a reality of life and we have no problem with her ratings because
they are fair and objective," said Neil Nyberg, a spokesman for Kellogg Company,
which received one of the book's highest ratings in the 1991 edition.

The book started as an effort to help interested shoppers buy products from
companies that performed best in such as areas as the environment and charitable
giving. Recently, it has added other categories like animal testing. Companies
are downgraded for landing on the wrong side of public controversies, applauded
if they provide day care.

"We are trying to get people to look at their entire shopping basket," Ms.
Tepper Marlin said. "It is not a matter of looking at just one issue or just one
company."

The book seems a bewildering array of symbols, and does not consider the quality
of products. But its social messages are clearly reaching some shoppers and many
businesses.

Just this week, for example, officials of Church & Dwight Company (very good on
animal testing, but weak on promotions for women, according to the book) called
Ms. Tepper Marlin's group to set up a meeting to discuss ratings for the
company, which makes household products like detergents.

Oreos and Cigarettes

But Ms. Tepper Marlin's nit-picking is not just with Fortune 500 companies. She
claims some credit for getting Ben & Jerry's Homemade Inc. to phase out Oreo
cookies as an ingredient in its ice cream. The reason: Oreos are made by one of
her arch-enemies, RJR Nabisco , a purveyor not only of cookies but also of
cigarettes.

"I will not buy anything made by a cigarette company," Ms. Tepper Marlin said.
Rob Michalak, a spokesman for Ben & Jerry's, said he could not comment on Ms.
Tepper Marlin's specific impact.

Ms. Tepper Marlin is also using other vehicles to push corporations to change.
Last year, for instance, she played a pivotal role in the creation of Green Seal
Inc., a public-interest group which plans to award a seal of approval to
products deemed environmentally sound.

This whirlwind of activity seems to suit Ms. Tepper Marlin. When her children,
now 13 and 16 years old, leave home in a few years Ms. Tepper Marlin sees not
more time to relax, but more time to work.

"When my kids go to college," she said, "I'd like to return to being more of a
workaholic."


LOAD-DATE: March 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alice Tepper Marlin's Council on Economic Priorities gathers
information on companies' policies on social, political and economic matters.
(William E. Sauro/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 16 words


"By God, we've kicked the Vietnam syndrome once and for all." -- President Bush.
[1:2.]

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: White House Memo;
War Introduces a Tougher Bush to Nation

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1533 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1


War never leaves a nation where it found it, the British statesman Edmund Burke
once said. It also never leaves a President where it found him.

When Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, saw news accounts about Mr.
Bush taking solitary walks around the South grounds, grappling with the weight
of war, he appreciated the paradox.

"Before the crisis, it was just the President walking his dog home," Mr.
Fitzwater said. "After the crisis started, it became the President walking
around the grounds in a contemplative, reflective thought process."

War or no, great moment in history or no, this President has not suddenly
sprouted a contemplative side or metamorphosed into a whole new leader. But
certainly, the nation has seen a different aspect of Mr. Bush as he directed a
lopsided war intended to teach Saddam Hussein a lesson in humility and the world
a lesson about the wages of aggression.

For now, Mr. Bush has the confidence of a Commander in Chief who successfully
gambled on an enormous political and military venture that, with less skill and
less luck on the part of Mr. Bush and his generals, could have wrecked his
Presidency.

No More Vietnam

"By God, we've kicked the Vietnam syndrome once and for all," the President said
today, in a spontanteous burst of pride, at the end of a speech to state
legislators at the White House.

But it remains to be seen if Mr. Bush has brilliantly redefined himself, or if
he has given himself too tough an act to follow, since he must now focus on
domestic affairs, where he has floundered, and on the unyielding problems of the
Middle East, where he has difficult new obligations.

The war provided a clarity and passion to Mr. Bush's leadership that had been
missing. He seemed more focused, more constant in purpose, and less a chameleon
of public opinion.

Call it Yankee rectitude, as did one exasperated American diplomat who thought
it was possible to negotiate with Iraq and avoid war. Or call it moral
leadership, as Mr. Bush did.

What was striking, whether or not one agreed that a war was the only way to
punish President Hussein, was that Mr. Bush appeared to be acting from strong,
unequivocal beliefs. The power of principle, the stark and vivid definition of
purpose, allowed Mr. Bush to reverse the conventional wisdom, and turn a
conflict that no one wanted at the outset into the most popular American war
since the one he fought in himself.

The nation had become accustomed to a George Bush with flexible principles and a
pragmatic approach.

It was only a year ago, when he was criticized for not taking a more active role
when the Soviets put a stranglehold on their runaway republic, Lithuania, that
Mr. Bush quoted Yogi Berra to explain his hesitancy: "I don't want to make the
wrong mistake."

Four months ago, White House fumbles on domestic policy had plunged the
Administration and the Republican Party into chaos. Republicans were appalled by
the President's indecisive and rudderless leadership on the budget, by the way
he let himself be pushed by his advisers and outside groups.

With Mr. Bush's approval ratings dropping sharply, pundits talked about the
disintegration of the Bush Presidency.

Now the same pundits are talking about a second honeymoon for the President and
a coronation for Mr. Bush in 1992.

In a New York Times/CBS News poll this week, Mr. Bush received an 87 percent
approval rating, which matched the highest level ever recorded in such a survey
-- the resounding cheer given to Harry S. Truman after World War II ended in
Europe. After the war was won with astonishingly few casualties, and as the
nation basked in the euphoria of feeling like No. 1 again, the President
garnered 91 percent in a USA Today poll published today.

The President's advisers like to joke that they are going for 100 percent. Mr.
Bush had spent so much time consciously holding himself apart in a serious
demeanor, scaling back on his customary teasing of advisers, that he found it
hard to suddenly unbend when the war ended.

"I haven't yet felt this wonderfully euphoric feeling that many of the American
people felt," he said today. "I'm beginning to."

He said he needed "more time to sort out in my mind how I can say to the
American people: 'It's over, finally. The last T is crossed, the last i is
dotted.' "

But when Mr. Bush walked out to his helicopter this afternoon to leave for a
weekend at Camp David, Md., with hundreds of executive branch staff members and
their families trailing with American flags and hand-lettered signs reading "The
Great Liberator" and "91 Percent," he lingered behind a moment to smile and
wave, clearly savoring the moment.

Many Questions

Mr. Bush knows as well as anyone that popularity is ephemeral. And while his new
surge is impressive in cutting across age, income, education, race and even
party lines, it also raises some intriguing questions.

Will the President use his political capital to take a new, more forceful
approach on domestic issues, or will he continue to amble along in an
unimaginative and uninterested way, cleaving to the status quo?

Will he learn the power of fixed principles in leadership, or will he continue
to engage in waffling and expedient stances on issues like abortion, civil
rights and taxes?

Having waged a vociferously "moral" war, will the President speak out more
boldly on other human rights abuses abroad and social inequities at home, or
will he return to the muted voice that kept him from articulating the national
outrage about the pro-democracy demonstrators killed in Beijing and the Baltic
republics?

Or, having finally learned how to convey passion and marshal public support for
a cause in which he believes, will he continue to try to connect with voters on
a gut level, or will he return to his phlegmatic "we know best, so trust us to
do the right thing" approach?

Areas of Confidence

Mr. Bush seemed different during the seven-month crisis not only because he was
acting on a firm principle -- one baked into him during his years at Andover and
Yale, that honor and duty compels you to punch the bully in the face -- but
because he was dealing in areas where he felt intrinsically confident.

The part of his Presidency he likes best is palavering with the global club of
world leaders. Because he feels it is important to "put yourself in the other
guy's shoes" in diplomacy, he was deft and patient in his constant dialing to
hold together a disparate coalition with wildly varying domestic and
international agendas.

Daily Exercises Preferred

With his fast metabolism and grasshopper attention span, Mr. Bush prefers daily
tactical exercises to long-range geopolitical strategizing and planning.

In a January cover that infuriated the President and his advisers, Time magazine
gave Mr. Bush two faces and declared him Men of the Year because he offered two
different personas. "One was a foreign policy profile that was a study in
resoluteness and mastery," the magazine said, "the other a domestic visage just
as strongly marked by wavering and confusion."

In domestic affairs, Mr. Bush can appear disengaged and malleable. For instance,
he was flexible on the issue of whether to raise taxes, and seemed to be
flip-flopping, because he did not have a philosophical underpinning on the
subject as Ronald Reagan did. He merely wanted to cut a deal that he though he
could sell and get an unpleasant issue off his back.

Mr. Bush delegates a lot, and his success depends to a large degree on the
advice he gets. When he delegated in war, his foreign affairs advisers and
generals performed in a way that made him look good. When he delegated on the
budget, his chief of staff, John H. Sununu, and his budget czar, Richard G.
Darman, performed in a way that made him look bad.

Vague Domestic Speech

In stark contrast to his clarity on the war, Mr. Bush gave a major domestic
policy address here on Wednesday that was vague and mushy. The speech was
studded with buzz words like "choice" and "opportunity," but offered no new
proposals.

When Mr. Bush was first elected, he suited the mood of the country, which seemed
ready for a quiet, unintrusive brand of politics after the Reagan revolution.
But now, once again, through luck or shrewdness, Mr. Bush has matched himself to
the national mood.

The President felt compelled to fight in the Persian Gulf partly because he
feels strongly that it is the obligation of the United States to protect
less-powerful countries against aggression.

Whether they realized it or not at the start, Americans now seem thrilled to
have exorcised the ghost of Vietnam and to have the notion restored that, once
unsheathed, military force should be used in overwhelming proportions.

As Lieut. Gen. Thomas Kelly, director of operations for the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, put it when a reporter asked whether using B-52's to attack an Iraqi Scud
site was kind of like killing a fly with a sledgehammer: "My own personal
opinion is that's a delightful way to kill a fly."

Americans may not know or care what the new world order is, but they like their
position in the starting lineup.

NAME: George Bush

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush as he displayed his upbeat mood yesterday outside
the White House. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)(pg. 1); When President Bush
and wife, Barbara, left the White House for Camp David, staff members and their
families came out to cheer them. A sign referred to his public approval rating
in a poll. Mr. and Mrs. Bush were accompanied by Senator Alan K. Simpson and
wife, Ann, foreground. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)(pg. 7)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Military Vs. The Press

BYLINE: By Malcolm W. Browne; Malcolm W. Browne is a reporter for The New York
Times. He has covered wars in Vietnam, Cambodia, Punjab, Bangladesh, North
Africa and Latin America.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 27; Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4274 words


LIEUT. GEN. PRINCE KHALID BIN SULTAN, commander of the Joint Arab Forces,
glanced around at the reporters and television cameras crowding in on him and
beamed. The setting was perfect, and the general had good news.

The full moon illuminated the wreckage in the street -- the spent cartridge
cases, the masonry rubble, the congealed pools of aluminum from the melted hulls
of still-burning Iraqi armored vehicles. Behind the general, a large-scale map
of Khafji was propped against the shattered bow of an Iraqi BTR-60 personnel
carrier, and to one side lay the body of one of its crew, his head twisted
grotesquely under his shoulder. In the background the blazing trails of Iraqi
artillery missiles streaked through the clear night sky, and the jarring rumble
of carpet bombing signaled the presence of B-52's.

"As you can see, gentlemen," the general said, "we have retaken Khafji at heavy
cost to the enemy, and with very few casualties of our own. A few snipers
remain, but we shall mop them up in the morning."

Ignoring the usual battlefield injunction against bright lights, the cameramen
switched on their dazzling lamps. General Khalid blinked in the glare but smiled
and began answering questions shouted at him in English and Arabic by a score of
reporters who had arrived in an ancient school bus.

Compared with fights I had witnessed in other wars, Khafji was no more than a
minor skirmish. It was obvious that an Iraqi battalion had blundered badly,
sending thinly armored personnel carriers across the Kuwaiti-Saudi border into a
meat grinder, where Saudi and American missiles had all but demolished the
invaders. But to the few reporters who reached the town before the blood dried,
Khafji was the high point of a war that up to then had been mostly covered in
briefing rooms or from aircraft and ships safely distant from Iraqi fire. It had
been a video war -- at that point, Americans had not yet seen the horrible
images of headless bodies, some of them women and children, being extricated
from the bomb-blasted ruins of a building the United States described as a
military command center and Baghdad called a civilian bomb shelter. Even in
Khafji, this war seemed to smell more of greasepaint than of death.

For most of the news people most of the time, the gulf war has been played out
in the Dhahran International Hotel, across a six-lane highway from the Dhahran
International Airport -- a hotel whose turquoise-domed swimming-pool changing
rooms are familiar to Americans as the backdrop for countless television network
"stand up" reports from Saudi Arabia.

At one end of the third-floor ballroom of the hotel during this first month of
the war, Saudi officials in white robes and off-duty Americans in camouflage
uniforms sprawl indolently over sofas facing an array of television monitors,
where it seems the war never ends: cruise missiles whiz down Baghdad streets,
howitzers and tank guns boom, military briefers sum up from Riyadh, the Saudi
capital, and commentators explain what it all means. Many of the people on the
sofas doze as CNN's war drones on.

At the other end of the ballroom a swarm of hopeful newsmen and newswomen crowd
the plush theater-lobby rope barring them from the J.I.B. -- the United States
Armed Forces Joint Information Bureau. They all want access to the war, but that
is a privilege bestowed on fewer than one in seven of the thousand-odd
correspondents, photographers, producers and technicians who have come to the
gulf seeking action -- a mob far larger than the Saigon press corps, which
rarely surpassed 700 at the height of the Vietnam War.

For most of those who are turned away by the J.I.B., there has been little
chance of seeing the war firsthand, apart from watching Patriot missiles
intercept Iraqi Scuds high overhead. But day after tedious day, the accredited
correspondents not assigned to combat pools -- some of them famous editors and
writers on special missions -- swallow their dignity, return to the J.I.B. and
plead.

The only war I have covered where access to the front was as limited as it has
been in Saudi Arabia was the 1971 war between Pakistan and India. During that
conflict, Pakistani troops barred all roads and paths leading to the front and
imposed a censorship amounting to total blackout. (Correspondents filed copy by
driving over the Khyber Pass to a cablehead in Afghanistan several times a
week.)

The war-coverage system in the Persian Gulf, worked out by the Pentagon and
representatives of major American news organizations last summer, has
antecedents that date from the brief Grenada war of 1983, which reporters were
barred from covering. Their employers objected so strongly that the Pentagon
convened a commission headed by Maj. Gen. Winant Sidle, retired chief of Army
information, and made up mainly of military and Government public-affairs
officials. It recommended that future wars be covered by pools of news
representatives -- selected, controlled and censored by the military.

"Media representatives appearing before the panel," the commission's report
said, "were unanimous in being opposed to pools in general. However, they all
also agreed that they would cooperate in pooling agreements if that were
necessary for them to obtain early access to an operation."

THE POOL SYSTEM OPERATING IN SAUDI ARABIA grants berths only to nominees from
the wire services, a couple of magazines, a few newspapers, the television
networks and some radio groups. The idea is that the "product" (as the J.I.B.
calls all forms of news) of any pool member -- dispatch, photograph, tape or
sonnet -- becomes the property of all the accredited organizations covering the
war.

In effect, each pool member is an unpaid employee of the Department of Defense,
on whose behalf he or she prepares the news of the war for the outer world.

Nonetheless, the few who gain places in the pools -- groups of 7 to 18 --count
themselves lucky. As their price for seeing the war, they are taken under the
wings of escort officers for "deployment" to ground, air or naval units, or to
catchall "rapid reaction" pools. In theory, the larger pools are to join field
units for periods of two weeks, while the "rapid reaction" groups will be
whisked from place to place, lapping up the cream of the breaking news.

Several days before the outbreak of war, I join the mob of supplicants filling
out forms, and draw an assignment to a rapid-reaction pool.

The questionnaires demand my blood type, my religion (important to the Saudis),
my next of kin. I sign my agreement to two pages of "guidelines" and "ground
rules," which enjoin me from revealing military secrets and bind me to submit to
a "security review" (censorship) of everything I report, among other conditions.
The guidelines assure the correspondent that "material will be examined solely
for its conformance to the attached ground rules, not for its potential to
express criticism or cause embarrassment" -- a stipulation I will soon have
grounds to doubt.

I am photographed, fingerprinted and handed a Saudi press badge, a Geneva
Convention card identifying me as a noncombatant accompanying United States
forces and a steel dog tag embossed with the kind of information (including
religion and blood type) useful to medics and graves-registration teams.

I meet Col. Bill Mulvey, the J.I.B.'s boss -- a West Point man wearing a combat
infantry badge earned in Vietnam, an officer whose cheerful, frank demeanor
contrasts strikingly with the suspicious glances and evasions of some of his
predecessors in other wars I have covered. The colonel, clearly no press baiter
but the administrator of a system hateful to most reporters, has an unenviable
job.

It is soon evident that the United States military means to take care of me as I
have never been taken care of in previous wars. I am issued a field jacket and a
liner, field pants, a sleeping bag, a web belt, a canteen with a
chemical-warfare cap through which a straw can be inserted, a sturdy field pack,
surgical dressings, a gas mask with three injectors of atropine antidote for
nerve gas (and three shots of Valium, in case the atropine sends my heart into
fibrillation), a poison-gas-proof suit with boots, sand goggles and a helmet.

The ritual of being fitted for all this gear stirs the blood with the heady
prospect of battle; it would be some weeks before Baghdad would stir a flurry of
hope for ending the war by capitulation, and as far as the reporters were
concerned, the war was just beginning. Recidivist war correspondents have
difficulty explaining the thrill of anticipation of combat to healthier minds.
We scarcely understand the feeling ourselves, or why it is that we are so
powerfully drawn to combat, even against the revulsion most of us feel for the
sights, sounds and smells of death.

I SOON FIND MYSELF IN A BUS WITH THE OTHER members of my pool on the way to the
front, which turns out to be an auditorium about 10 minutes away. After a short
wait, an "Air Force operational commander" (identity withheld under the ground
rules) introduces himself and prefaces his briefing with the following remarks:

"I'm not a great fan of the press, and I want you to know where we stand with
each other. I suppose the press has its purpose. But one thing is certain: you
can't do me any good, and you sure as hell can do me harm."

But then, despite this unpromising overture, the officer goes on to present one
of the most lucid and informative briefings on fighter tactics I have ever heard
-- an account that, not incidentally, rings with pride for the expertise of the
Air Force's F-15 pilots. The thought crosses my mind that the commander's
unfriendly opening was intended to establish his bona fides as a bluff but
honest leader of men, rather than as a Pentagon publicity seeker.

On the other hand, he may really have meant to needle us, protected as he was by
anonymity. I cannot entirely dismiss from my mind the anti-press cant that has
pervaded American military journals and pronouncements ever since the Vietnam
War. Typical of the genre was a widely read article published last September in
the semiofficial magazine Army, written by Maj. Gen. Patrick H. Brady, former
chief of Army public affairs and now deputy commanding general of the Sixth
Army. He wrote:

"Some look on news as just another four-letter word, but I believe it is more
useful to look at it as a C-letter word: chaos, confusion, contradiction, crime,
corruption, color, catastrophe. It does not hurt if you add some S's -- sex,
sensationalism, state secrets.

"The words of a reporter for a national news syndicate best sum it up. He came
to us for some information we provided with the comment that we were always
happy to get it right. He replied rather hurriedly, 'I don't care if I get it
right; I only care if I get it first.' "

General Brady is not alone in his insistence that military correspondents must
be kept under strict control. In many recent public statements and articles,
influential military officers have implied a causal relationship between two
facts: that reporters were barred from on-the-ground coverage of the Grenada war
in October 1983, and that Grenada has been America's only unequivocal military
victory since World War II.

It needs to be said that news people also have staunch friends and defenders in
the military community -- men and women who recognize that combat correspondents
are for the most part honest men and women dedicated to keeping a free people
sufficiently informed to make intelligent decisions. They know, also, that most
of us like and admire our servicemen and servicewomen, and that within the
professional limits of our calling, we often try to help them. Older servicemen
recall that the late Charley Mohr of The New York Times was awarded a Bronze
Star for pulling a wounded American soldier to safety while under Vietcong fire.

But there are also those who regard us as enemies; some even seek to pillory
CNN's Peter Arnett for continuing to report useful (albeit censored) information
from Baghdad through the teeth of the enemy. Peter was my friend and colleague
for six years in Vietnam, where we both worked for The Associated Press, and I
know no more honest newsman. When I hear critics sharpening their claws on him,
feelings are rekindled in me that I thought had long been laid to rest --
feelings of contempt for the real betrayers of American ideals during the
Vietnam years.

IT IS DAWN ON JAN. 17, and the war has begun. Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf tells
the men and women under his command that they are members of "the most powerful
force our country, in coalition with our allies, has ever assembled in a single
theater to face an aggressor." Radio Bahrain tells its listeners in Saudi Arabia
that broadcast air-raid warnings will be preceded by the playing of a few bars
of de Falla's "El Amor Brujo," which mimic the pounding heels in a flamenco
dance, and are loud, staccato and arresting. CNN's Baghdad bureau begins airing
the first reports of the bombing of the Iraqi capital.

I am in the bowels of a C-130 Hercules transport plane, my 30-pound pack and
helmet lashed to the floor, along with my typewriter -- an implement I am forced
to carry for the sake of the field censors, who insist on reading paper rather
than laptop-computer displays. Behind our pool's field gear is stacked a heavy
cargo of cardboard cartons containing Composition-C plastic explosive. The
loadmaster announces that smoking will not be permitted during the flight.

The C-130 has no windows, and it is far too noisy for conversation, so one
daydreams on the way to war.

In my mind's eye it is 30 years ago, almost to the month, and I am aboard one of
three Vietnamese Government landing craft on a branch of the Mekong River south
of Ben Tre. It is still an hour before dawn, and the sluggish river is shrouded
with a fine mist, obscuring all but the pinpoints of light marking the
anchorages of sampans and houseboats. I am in the grip of that excited
anticipation that always precedes the first shots of battle.

It had been surprisingly easy to get here -- a conversation with a helpful
Ministry of Information official, a car trip from Saigon to the lush palm groves
and rice paddies of Kien Hoa province, and a chat over tea with the
French-educated province chief. Years would pass before uniformed Americans
arrived in Vietnam in sufficient numbers to think of organizing the foreign
press corps, which in 1961 numbered fewer than a dozen.

Officials in Saigon had not known what sort of equipment I should take to my
first Vietnamese combat operation, but at the Saigon flea market I had bought a
tattered legionnaire's pack, a ground cloth and a pair of rubber-soled shoes.

Abruptly, our speeding landing craft hit something, and screams came from the
black water below us. By the light of a gasoline lantern we could see the
shattered remains of a sampan, and two adults and three small children flailing
to stay afloat. We churned onward, scarcely slowing down.

It was daybreak when we reached the hamlet that was to be our target, and we
approached quietly at quarter speed. Then, as our boats crunched into the river
bank, we heard a woman's cry of alarm -- a cry that our troops took as a signal
to open fire.

As our Civil Guard company raked the hamlet with machine-gun fire, a man in
black farmer's garb stood up and ran away from us across a rice field, but he
took only a few steps before the hail of bullets cut him down.

Five minutes later, having encountered no resistance, the Civil Guards ceased
fire and began searching the hamlet. In one hut they found some paper Vietcong
flags. As I followed them I stepped into a ditch where a bamboo- spike booby
trap had been planted; I recoiled in intense pain, and thus learned the
disadvantage of shoes with thin rubber soles.

In a field behind the hamlet, two soldiers found the man our assault force had
shot, and the man, unarmed, was still alive, bloody foam pouring from his mouth.
I protested in horror as the soldiers wedged a rifle stock next to the man's
throat and pressed down, trying to throttle him. Whether they did so for revenge
or as an act of mercy, I never learned. But the image of that atrocity (which I
photographed and sent back to The Associated Press, which distributed it for
publication to member newspapers around the world) has never faded from my
memory.

I can't say whether that first taste of Indochina combat colored my view of the
Vietnam War in general, but it certainly made me aware that there is more to war
than what one may learn from official briefings.

IT'S HARD TO IMAGINE A greater contrast between my first operation in Vietnam
and my first pool "mission" in Saudi Arabia -- an operation I watch from the
comfort of an overstuffed chair with a thermos of fresh coffee at hand.

It is late at night, and we members of the pool find ourselves in a bomb-proof
hangar housing the operations center for a wing of radar-evading F-117A Stealth
aircraft. The square-jawed commander of the unit, who flies frequent missions
over Iraq himself, could have been the model for the old comic-strip pilot-hero,
Smilin' Jack.

As the cockroach-shaped F-117A's land and taxi into their shelters, the pilots
tell us of a hard night's work, with spectacular bombing results in spite of
heavy antiaircraft fire. In the comfort of the commander's office, we look at
videotapes of the bombing, recorded automatically when the pilots aimed laser
designators at targets to guide their 2,000-pound bombs.

In ghostly, slow-moving, black-and-white video images, we see a cross-hair
aiming device centered on a large building the unit commander tells us is a
telecommunications center in Baghdad. After a few seconds, white jets spurt from
the building, and it disappears in a silent puff of video pyrotechnics. We look
at another videotape, in which the cross hairs are fixed on the skylight of a
building described only as "a high-value target," and this, too, flies apart in
jets of debris. A half-dozen more videotaped attacks tell the same story. This,
manifestly, is the first war in history in which bombing is conducted with
almost unerring accuracy.

The pilots are jubilant, the tape confirms all their claims, and it only remains
for us news people to report what we have seen and heard, including the results
of our close-up examination of the F-117A itself -- an aircraft about which
little was known until a few months ago. Ours is a positive story, likely to be
as reassuring to American readers and viewers as it is informative: the first
shots of the war have been "surgically" precise, destroying enemy nerve centers
without causing widespread destruction or loss of life.

But for Frank Bruni of The Detroit Free Press and myself -- the two "pencils"
(as the Defense Department calls writers) in the pool -- it is a story that will
reach the world only belatedly.

We type out our dispatches and hand them over to our escort officer, who finds
nothing to censor or flag. Greg Jarrett of ABC News plays the audiotape he has
prepared for the escort officer, who finds nothing objectionable in it. In
minutes, a telephone line is transmitting the tape to the Dhahran International
Hotel for distribution to radio pool members and the outside world. The
videotape made by an NBC crew, including the correspondent Rick Davis's stand-up
commentary, pilot interviews, close-up shots of the F-117A aircraft and their
laser-guided bombs, is approved sight unseen for shipment to Dhahran and
distribution.

We spread our sleeping bags on cots in an abandoned commissary building and go
to sleep, secure in the belief that the armed forces will transmit our copy to
the news community, which includes our respective employers. But at 3 A.M. Frank
and I are awakened to learn that problems have arisen with our written
dispatches.

It turns out that the wing commander has spotted passages in both of our stories
that he regards as improper, and he has made some excisions and changes to which
we are asked to agree. None of them appear to have anything to do with security.
In Frank's copy, the adjective "giddy," used to describe the pilots, has been
changed to "proud," and in my story, the words "fighter-bomber" have been
changed to "fighter." I can only guess why this phrase was censored. The Air
Force is currently waging a campaign to save the costly B-2 Stealth-bomber
project. Could it be that if the F-117A is also called a "bomber," Congressional
critics might argue that a second Stealth bomber -- the B-2 --is unnecessary?

But to make newspaper deadlines throughout the United States, Frank and I agree
to all the proposed changes, on the condition that our copy is dispatched
hastily, via fax machine to pool headquarters in Dhahran. This proves a forlorn
hope. We learn the following day that our stories have been sent instead to
officials at the Tonopah Test Range in Nevada -- the home base of the Stealth
fighters -- where everything we wrote has been deemed a breach of security.

More than 24 hours after they were written, our stories are finally cleared, but
of course, the war has already moved on, and our perishable dispatches are
hopelessly stale.

Next, we learn something new and vitally important: Our Stealth-pilot friends,
in their latest attacks, have smashed Iraq's laboratories and plants involved in
developing nuclear weapons. This is news of the first magnitude that will come
as a great relief for those who had feared Iraq would soon have nuclear warheads
for its missiles. We ask the Stealth commander for permission to report the
happy tidings, but he turns us down on the grounds that new attacks on the
nuclear facilities might be needed, and that nothing should be reported until
the job is completed.

We of course agree, but the following day Agence France-Presse, the French news
agency, scoops us on the story by getting details of the raid from the staff of
a United States senator. And the day after that, General Schwarzkopf announces
the raid himself.

By now it has begun to seem that pools are not the best way to cover the war,
and many correspondents and cameramen are violating Saudi laws and American
military regulations by setting out on their own. Among these frustrated news
people are Bob Simon, CBS's warwise correspondent, and three of his associates,
who drove north from Dhahran toward the Kuwaiti border in search of something
meatier than briefings.

Something happened to Bob and his comrades after they reached the border, where
their abandoned car was later found, still containing a large bundle of cash
they had left in it.

It is not clear at this writing whether the CBS crew was captured by Iraqi
soldiers; CBS News believes they are being detained in Baghdad. I cannot help
feeling that part of the responsibility lies in a system that goads people into
taking unnecessary -- or necessary -- risks.

We have found ways to see the war. Those of us who made it to the skirmish at
Khafji, where a small Iraqi mechanized force briefly occupied Saudi territory,
did so as part of a Saudi pool, not an American pool.

But the Saudi hinterlands, unlike those of Vietnam, India or Central America, do
not favor news coverage by stealth. Only a handful of roads cross the naked
desert -- mostly six-lane highways on which traffic is sparse and a press
vehicle is conspicuous. The desert itself, particularly near the gulf coast, is
crisscrossed by camel tracks that a four-wheel-drive vehicle can navigate. But
driving in the desert is dangerous, even when there is no need to evade American
M.P.'s or Iraqi patrols. Constant winds churn a fog of fine dust, which confuses
the sense of direction and clogs air filters as well as lungs. Distances are
great, and filling stations nonexistent. And then there are mine fields along
the Iraqi and Kuwaiti borders.

Some reporters, hiding out in American Marine and Army field units, are
meanwhile working in the guise of mascots, given G.I. uniforms and gear to look
inconspicuous, enjoying the affection (and protection) of the units they're
trying to cover -- concealed by the officers and troops from the handful of
press-hating commanders who strive to keep the battlefield free of wandering
journalists. Life is hard for these infiltrators from the press. Nearly all the
reporters who have tried to reach American front-line units have been arrested
at one time or another, and sometimes been held for up to 12 hours in field
jails, facing the threat that their press credential would be permanently
confiscated and their Saudi visas canceled.

Eric Schmitt, John Kifner and Chris Hedges of The New York Times have all been
arrested and detained by American military authorities for varying periods of
time, as have Guy Gugliotta of The Washington Post, John King and Fred Bayles of
The Associated Press, Joseph Albright of Cox Newspapers, and many others.

"I spend two-thirds of my time evading the M.P.'s and only one-third
interviewing the troops," a friend told me. "You have to wonder whether it's
worth the effort."

I think it is worth the effort. News correspondents have their share of problems
reporting this war -- problems that seem to evoke little sympathy from some of
our countrymen. But aside from the introduction of some spectacular new
technology and communication systems, the gulf war has much in common with
earlier conflicts. Americans still need to know what is happening, and it is
still the task of the press to maintain the flow of information.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cover photo: A United States military official delivering the daily
briefing at the allied command center in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (Dennis
Brack/Black Star)

Photos: A pool of reporters observing the oil spill. Such access is granted to
fewer than one in seven of the thousand-odd journalists in the gulf. Above: The
daily briefing at Riyadh. (Kenneth Jarecke/Contact)(pg. 26); A military surplus
of censors, each with a stake in restricting the images of war. (Charles
Steiner/J.B. Pictures); In the ballroom of the Dhahran International Hotel,
reporters pull up chairs and wait for scraps of information. (Kenneth
Jarecke/Contact)(pg. 28); Allied soldiers steer a cameraman away from a
disturbance outside the Dhahran International Hotel. (Derek Hudson/Sygma); Pool
reporters returning from the battle of Khafji fall in to board a military
transport. (Chip Hires/Gamma-Liaison)(pg. 29); The F-117A Stealth in a hangar
somewhere in Saudi Arabia. In the official language of the censors, it's a
fighter, not a bomber. (Wayne J. Begasse/Department of Defense Pool Photo via
The Associated Press)(pg. 44)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Coins

BYLINE: By Jed Stevenson

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 65; Column 3; Style Desk; Pastimes Page

LENGTH: 647 words


The war in the Persian Gulf is the first in 45 years in which American soldiers
are not being paid with a special military currency. Because of the relative
wealth of Saudi Arabia, the stability of its economy and the ubiquity of the
American dollar in the region, military authorities apparently felt that an
alternative currency was not needed.

During most of World War II, soldiers stationed overseas were paid in the local
currencies, but in 1946 the United States found itself holding nearly half a
billion dollars of unwanted foreign currency. The Government began printing a
special Allied Military Currency that was issued to all allied occupation
soldiers, including Russians. This common currency facilitated a booming black
market among the allied soldiers and, to a lesser extent, among German
civilians. Soviet soldiers heading home knew that their Allied Military Currency
would be confiscated so they paid inflated prices for articles difficult to
purchase in the Soviet Union. Cameras and watches could be sold for small
fortunes by the G.I.'s.

In the summer of 1946, the United States had nearly five million troops
stationed overseas and was paying them in some 40 different foreign currencies
as well as in special military notes. The deficit problem continued. But in July
the military began issuing the A series of the Yen Allied Military Currency to
be used by all United States soldiers in Japan for purchases in military
commissaries and post exchanges. In September the new currency was printed for
the troops in Europe and soon was being used from Iceland to Iwo Jima.

The wartime currency most familiar to Americans was the Military Payment
Certificates issued in Vietnam. Four different issues were printed by the Bureau
of Engraving and Printing from August 31, 1965 until March 15, 1973.

The different issues were produced because a huge market for the conversion of
MPC's into dollars developed. Anyone possessing greenbacks could almost double
his money by trading them illegally for MPC's. The MPC's could then be taken to
huge military exchanges in Saigon to buy stereos, washing machines, cameras or
other high-priced items. Goods in military exhanges are sold cheaply and
untaxed, so anyone who had doubled his money by illegal conversion could buy
many items and sell them to the Vietnamese who were forbidden to shop in
military exchanges. Thus small fortunes were made. Legends abounded in Vietnam
of soldiers who had returned to the United States with hundreds of thousands of
dollars hidden in their personal gear.

To counter this activity, the military would declare a Conversion Day, kept
secret until the last moment. At dawn on C-Day military bases were locked,
civilian workers told to stay home and every soldier required to change his
stock of Military Payment Certificates for a new and different issue. Anyone
trying to change large amounts was taken aside and questioned. The old issue was
declared worthless, and all notes collected were burned. Of course, the new
issues played havoc with the black market, but also with the incomes of the
myriads of Vietnamese casual workers -- the maids, barbers, bar girls, tailors
and shoeshine boys that worked on and around the bases. C-Days could wipe out
their small savings, and any rumor of an impending C-Day caused panic as workers
tried to get rid of their own MPC's.

The last issue of 1970 was finally withdrawn in 1973 and MPC's have not been
reissued since. All soldiers are now paid in United States dollars. But anyone
who has held onto Vietnam-era MPC's is in for a pleasant surprise. The scrip,
called "funny money" among the troops, has increased in value. Some notes in
fine or extra-fine condition are now selling for as much as twice their face
value. But an uncirculated $10 MPC note issued from late 1968 until the summer
of 1969 is worth nearly $600.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A one-dollar Military Payment Certificate issued in Vietnam.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
Fight Night of the Century

BYLINE: By Dave Anderson

SECTION: Section 8; Page 5; Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words


In the tradition of the time, the signing of the contracts for Ali-Frazier I was
announced at a luncheon at Toots Shor's. Up on the dais, Jerry Perenchio, who
was promoting the bout with Jack Kent Cooke and Madison Square Garden, boasted
that the gross would be anywhere from $20 million to $30 million. Hearing that,
Muhammad Ali jumped to his feet and glanced at Joe Frazier.

"They got us cheap!" Ali shouted. "Only 5 million out of 20 to 30 million! We've
been taken!"

Ali and Frazier had each been guaranteed a flat fee of $2.5 million, then an
unprecedented sum, for what Harry Markson, the Garden boxing director, correctly
predicted as a boxing extravaganza that would never be duplicated.

"Two unbeaten fighters with claims to the heavyweight championship," Markson
said. "And each at the peak of his career."

But it was more than a boxing show. As the 20th anniversary of this Monday March
8, 1971, event approaches, it is remembered mostly as a morality play: Ali the
Black Muslim braggart who had emerged as the symbol of protest against the
Vietnam War during his three-and-a-half-year exile from boxing vs. Frazier, who
had emerged not only as Ali's successor as champion, but somehow as the symbol
of the establishment.

"I got no quarrel," Ali had said in 1967, "with them Viet Cong."

When Ali, then still known to some as Cassius Clay, refused to take the required
step forward at his Army induction in 1967, he suddenly had a quarrel with the
Federal Government. Three months after Ali-Frazier I, he was cleared by the
United States Supreme Court of a charge of refusing induction. And as boxing's
only three-time heavyweight champion, Ali is cherished now. But in the months
before the Garden fight, much of the nation still resented him.

"Some people don't like me because of the draft," he said. "Some because of my
religion. Some because I'm black. Some because of things I don't even know
about."

While Ali was a lecturer on college campuses during his boxing exile, the
27-year-old Frazier was constructing a 26-0 record with 23 knockouts. At age 29,
Ali, who had stopped Jerry Quarry and Oscar Bonavena late the previous year, had
a 31-0 record with 25 knockouts. Ali predicted a sixth-round knockout, but
Frazier was the 6-5 betting favorite.

"I'm a small piece of leather," Frazier liked to say, "but I'm well put
together."

Billed, like so many other bouts, as the Fight of the Century, it is treasured
more as the Fight Night of the Century. When the lights dimmed for the national
anthem, Frank Sinatra slipped into a press-row seat as a Life magazine
photographer not far from Don Dunphy's microphone. In the glitzy $150 ringside,
Diana Ross wore a shimmering gown, men pranced in purple or lemon suits, women
preened in mink and diamonds.

At the noontime weigh-in, Frazier had been 203 1/2 pounds before returning to
the Pierre Hotel with several New York City detectives guarding him because of
death threats. Ali had been 215 pounds but instead of going to his room at the
New Yorker hotel, he remained inside the arena. With so many Ali fans gathered
outside, it was decided that he would stay in the Garden rather than risk a wild
street scene.

"We were trapped," recalled his trainer, Angelo Dundee. "We ate in the Penn
Plaza Club there and instead of taking a walk on the street, Muhammad had to
walk around counting seats."

When the bell rang for the first round, 20,455 seats in the Garden were filled,
as well as an estimated 300 million seats at closed-circuit sites and foreign
television sets all over the world. Frazier quickly established the tempo. In
his green-and-gold brocade trunks, Frazier bored in, slamming left hooks to the
body and head. Ali, in red trunks and with red tassels flopping on his white
boxing shoes, was unable to float like a butterfly or sting like a bee.

"My guy started playing around," Dundee has said. "Patting him on the head,
hamming it up by looking out at the people at ringside. I told him to stop
messing around. But while my guy was playing, Frazier came on strong."

In the 11th round, Frazier had Ali wobbling. Early in the 15th round, Frazier
threw a lunging left hook to the already swollen right side of Ali's jaw. Ali
fell backwards onto the canvas, the sound of the knockdown resembling a clap of
thunder. Quickly gathering his legs and his senses, Ali was up as fast as a
boxer can get up. But at the final bell, Frazier smiled through his mouthpiece.
He knew he had won, just as Ali knew he had lost. His head bowed, Ali turned to
those in his corner.

"Let's get out of here," he said.

In the unanimous decision, Judge Bill Recht scored it 11-4 in rounds, Judge
Artie Aidala 9-6 and Referee Arthur Mercante 8-6-1. After a patter of boos,
cheers hailed Frazier's deserved triumph. Uncharacteristically, Ali never
appeared in the interview area. He hurried to Flower Fifth Avenue Hospital for
X-rays of his jaw, which were negative. Eight days after the fight, Frazier
entered St. Luke's and Childrens Medical Center in Philadelphia. He remained
there about a week for treatment of kidney damage and exhaustion.

Ali quickly proclaimed: "I really won. Joe Frazier had to go to the hospital
after the whuppin' I gave him." But the day after the fight, sprawled in his
hotel bed, Ali knew who won.

"When a man gets me going, that's a punch," Ali said, meaning Frazier's left
hook. "And when a man drops me, that's a hell of a punch. I didn't give the
fight to him. He earned it."

The promoters, Cooke and Perenchio, earned about $750,000 after taxes from the
$20 million gross but for two decades they have guarded their film, "The
Fighters," to be released in videotape by Petersen Communications later this
year. And the Garden earned its share of the record $1,352,951 gate.

But more than each's $2.5 million, even more than in their Thrilla in Manila
epic in 1975, Joe Frazier and Muhammad Ali earned their pedestals in sports
history by justifying the Fight Night of the Century.


LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Muhammad Ali falling to the canvas after taking a left hook from
Joe Frazier in the 15th round in 1971. (United Press International)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Phases of War: Politics;
Did Someone Say 'Domestic Policy'?

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1160 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


IT was a familiar political tableau: A Republican President confidently striding
across the center stage of foreign policy, while a chorus of Democrats stood in
the wings, saying, "Yes, but...."

What about the economy, Democrats began to ask last week. What about education,
the environment, health care, civil rights? Where is President Bush's domestic
agenda? Their voices, however, barely broke through the cheers as the war in the
Persian Gulf wound down.

Mr. Bush's approval rating was at 86 percent, while Republican strategists
charted a surge of national optimism in the public opinion polls. "It's morning
again in America," said Richard Reed, a Republican polltaker, referring to the
triumphant slogan of Ronald Reagan's 1984 re-election campaign.

Assuming that Mr. Bush's successes in foreign policy hold, a key dynamic of the
1992 Presidential campaign may have already emerged: Democrats arguing that the
nation must address an array of domestic problems, while Mr. Bush offers himself
as a tested, seasoned Commander in Chief.

Mr. Bush may need an aggressive new domestic policy for the judgment of history,
but does he need one for re-election? He obviously must worry about the economy,
but must he match the Democrats, program for program, on all the other domestic
problems that register in the public opinion polls? These questions seem minor
compared to the challenge the Democrats face in finding a nominee who could
compete against a President who has just won a popular war.

"Voters view national security as the single most important quality in a
President, and they have always been unwilling to take risks with it," said
Robert Teeter, a top political adviser to Mr. Bush. "Voters have concluded that
the one time they did that over the past 20 years, it was a mistake." He was
referring to the Carter Presidency, a favorite point of reference last week for
some of the more partisan Republicans as they basked in victory.

Democratic analysts, by and large, did not minimize their predicament. "Being
Commander in Chief became larger in the Presidential job description because of
the war in the gulf, and it will be harder for Democrats, for Democratic
candidates, to prove that they're up to that part of the job," said Geoffrey
Garin, a Democratic polltaker. "The historical reality is, this is exactly the
reason voters elect a George Bush rather than a Michael Dukakis."

Changing the Subject

Yet some Democrats privately worry that their nominating system is likely to
produce yet another outsider in 1992, with views on national security closer to
those of the party's liberal wing than those of the general electorate. In the
meantime, even as Democrats made the first gentle attempts to turn the
discussion to domestic policy, they were careful to hail the President and the
allied victory.

"The country deserves and needs to appreciate the fullness of this success,"
said Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House majority leader and potential
Presidential candidate. "Clearly, the President gets and deserves credit for
sticking with his policy, putting the coalition together, and skillfully leading
the military to a very positive conclusion." Such deference was the norm among
Democrats last week.

This was no Panama or Grenada, events that held the public's attention for a
matter of days or weeks and then vanished from the television screens. The gulf
crisis dominated the nation's psyche for seven months -- week after week of
People Magazine stories on the troops in the desert, song dedications on the
radio to spouses and lovers "in Saudi," yellow ribbons everywhere and local
blood drives.

As a result, Operation Desert Storm will probably produce more than a short-term
spike in the President's popularity, said John Mueller, a professor of political
science at the University of Rochester and the author of "War, Presidents and
Public Opinion."

"I think it's likely to linger for a substantial period of time," he said. "The
best analogy is probably Maggie Thatcher and the Falklands. She was able to ride
the crest of that for quite a while."

Many analysts say the war was also a remarkable confidence-builder for a
generation that was bred on bitter memories of Vietnam. These were the powerful
chords that Mr. Bush was striking last week. "It's a proud day for America and,
by God, we've kicked the Vietnam syndrome once and for all," the President said.

Depending on how long the afterglow lasts, and how much the economy begins to
improve, the Democrats could face a strategic dilemma as the 1992 campaign
begins: How to make the case for change without leaving themselves open to the
charge of being "gloom and doom Democrats," as the Republicans put it so often.

"When Americans love themselves and their country and feel good about
themselves, I don't think the Democratic platform is very appealing," said
Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, chairman of the National Republican Senatorial
Committee and one of the most partisan voices in Washington.

Some Democrats sought comfort in the case of Winston Churchill, a revered
wartime leader who saw his Conservative Party defeated at the polls three months
after the surrender of Germany, as British voters turned to domestic needs and
wants. A foreign-policy Presidency is not enough, they suggest; Americans will
want something more. This argument, however, overlooks the fact that this is not
a parliamentary system and Americans choose a President, not a party.

The White House recognizes that it cannot seem indifferent to domestic concerns.
The President paused last week to give a domestic policy address, although it
revolved around proposals previously advanced, such as tougher crime laws and
greater opportunities for parents to choose the schools their children can
attend.

Two days later, the Administration turned its attention to civil rights and
protection against job discrimination, a subject that prompted a lengthy fight
with Congress last year. But the measure the Administration proposed late Friday
night ---- not the most opportune time to release new initiatives ---- was
largely a rehash of the proposals Congress had spurned last year.

The President's critics say his domestic agenda has been a combination of
rhetoric, political positioning, and change around the margins. Many cited the
Administration's recently released energy policy as an example of Mr. Bush's
lackluster interest in domestic affairs. Many of his fellow Republicans are
urging the President to use his newly enhanced popularity -- as Mrs. Thatcher
used hers -- to push through new domestic programs.

But if the economy improves, Mr. Bush may be able to pursue his passion at
little political cost and be, essentially, a foreign-policy President. Until
Democrats produce a nominee with credibility as a potential Commander in Chief,
they will continue to plead the case for domestic problems -- but from Capitol
Hill.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A confident President Bush at a news conference on Friday. (Jose
R. Lopez/The New York Times)

Graph: "More Popular Than Ever" shows percentage approving of the way George
Bush is handling his job as President. (Source: Based on New York Times and CBS
News polls)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Done.;
A Short, Persuasive Lesson In Warfare

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1258 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia


THE 42-day war in the Persian Gulf Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf's hit-hard,
hurry-up, high-tech, hyper-successful campaign to savage Iraq's military and
oust it from Kuwait -- was a study in lessons learned.

In a political, military and especially a psychological sense, it drew a line
beneath the hauntingly inconclusive Vietnam tragedy. The United States will not
soon forget its sins and humiliations in Southeast Asia a generation ago, but it
has learned from them, and as President Bush exulted on Friday, "By God, we've
kicked the Vietnam syndrome once and for all."

The list of lessons is long, but start with this trio.

* Never go to war before insuring domestic consensus and establishing
international support. Lyndon B. Johnson never managed to do either; George Bush
did both, with a master's touch. The President coaxed Congress to the point of
backing a war -- not by much, but by enough to carry him through a few weeks or
a few months -- and he and his Secretary of State, James A. Baker 3d, built and
maintained an international coalition that cut across lines of economic,
religious, political, ideological, regional and even personal conflict. They
said it couldn't last, but it did.

The First Principle

* Never go to war without a clear objective. Lieut. Gen. Thomas Kelly, the
avuncular oracle of the Pentagon these past weeks, called it "the first
principle of war" -- a target, clearly designated and steadfastly lit by the
politicians, that the generals and admirals could take a bead on. Mr. Bush must
have said five times a day for six months that Saddam Hussein had to leave
Kuwait, without conditions, to satisy the United States. No such goal was ever
convincingly articulated for the Vietnam adventure.

* Take no half measures. Mr. Bush gave his commanders the troops they said they
needed, right away, instead of feeding them in slowly. He granted no sanctuaries
to the enemy. He resisted the inevitable calls for a cease-fire until he judged
the job done, lest he give the Iraqis a chance to catch their breath, rearm and
fight again. Those three decisions enabled General Schwarzkopf to develop and
execute a strategy that placed the heaviest fighting squarely on President
Saddam Hussein's own territory, brought American firepower to bear all at once
and kept it there to do the job. The result was clearest, perhaps, in the
casualty figures -- the staggering gap between the 89 Americans known to have
been killed and the tens of thousands of Iraqis dead on the battlefield, as well
as even vaster numbers taken prisoner.

There were old lessons, too, left over from other wars in other decades, other
centuries, but no less apt for that. Here are seven:

* Deception can be worth a dozen divisions. General Schwarzkopf assembled all
the paraphernalia and manpower for amphibious operations, practiced amphibious
operations and talked about amphibious operations. But they were never part of
his basic plan. He fooled his foe into wasting thousands of men and guns. On an
elaborate battle model of Kuwait City discovered in a school on Thursday, every
Iraqi gun and troop unit in the region of the capital faced the sea, like the
guns of Singapore during World War II. They were of little use in combating
invaders coming from other directions.

* Without air cover, tanks are tin gasoline cans, just waiting to blow up. When
the Luftwaffe could no longer protect him, Rommel lost in North Africa; when the
clouds that had protected him finally parted, von Rundstedt lost the Battle of
the Bulge; with his air force destroyed or dispersed and his attack helicopters
-- Soviet, French and German -- mysteriously uninvolved, Mr. Hussein could do
nothing to protect his T-72's and T-62's from American tanks and, especially,
the terrifying Hellfire missiles fired by the army's Apache helicopters and the
equally deadly Mavericks fired by A-10 Warthog attack planes flown by the Air
Force.

* In the desert, supply is everything. Armies can live off the land, to a
degree, in many parts of the world, but not in the sands of Arabia, where nature
is an implacable enemy. Again, air supremacy made the difference. It meant
American logistics specialists, under a tough general from Pennsylvania named
Gus Pagonis, could move mountains, and allied forces had 10 of everything,
thousands of miles from home; it meant many front-line Iraqi troops had so
little they ate grass and hoarded cups of rainwater.

* Modern weapons become obsolete terrifyingly quickly, which is why maintaining
modern armed forces costs so much. For all the oil wealth he squandered on arms,
Saddam Hussein went to war against the United States -- cruise missiles, Stealth
bombers, electronic countermeasures and all -- with an air-defense system that
was a generation or two out of date.

* Men matter as much as machines, and there the Iraqi forces were outclassed in
two ways. One was training, skill, sheer ability. "Not everything depends on the
quality of the technology," said Nikolai Kutsenko, a ranking military planner in
the Soviet Union, which supplied so much of Iraq's best equipment. "More depends
on the professional training of those who use and service it, and both, in the
Iraqi Army, left much to be desired."

So did the troops' morale, a second key area of deficiency. For that, General
Schwarzkopf blamed a leadership "so uncaring that in the end they could keep
them there only at the point of a gun."

* If you can't communicate, you can't command. Battlefield evidence collected by
Marines showed chemical weapons ready for use, but orders never came from the
top. And the total lack of coordination between squadrons of tanks and between
tanks and artillery in the big battle that ended the war convinced American
armored commanders that their adversaries were operating with nothing
approaching adequate radio links between units.

* Get around him, if you can, and hit him from the flank or the rear, rather
than marching into his strength. Talking military history long before he
launched last week's ground offensive, General Schwarzkopf often dwelt on
Cannae, the epic battle in the heel of the Italian boot in which Hannibal
perfected the double envelopment. The American commander used a single
envelopment to equally good effect, forcing the Republican Guards, potential
battle-winners, to fight on his ground at a time of his choosing.

In Vietnam, the United States overestimated its own power and prowess and
underestimated that of the enemy. Here, it was just the opposite.

Saddam Hussein proved to be as full of folly on the battlefield as in the halls
of diplomacy, relying on a Maginot line as easily flankable as the original,
making his tanks vulnerable by digging them into the sand and robbing them of
their mobility.

It proved impossible for a nation with the population of the Netherlands and the
gross domestic product of Portugal even to dent a coalition that included the
United States, Europe and two of the main Arab military powers.

On the other side of the line, the new, all-volunteer American military, with
its new, smart weapons, proved formidable. Especially the Air Force, Naval air
and Army air, which severed the enemy's logistical lifelines, scrambled his
communications, blinded his reconnaissance eyes and finally killed his advanced
tanks, his last best hope of averting disaster.

As Col. Hal Hornburg, a top Air Force pilot, said, it took the grunts to apply
the coup de grace. It always does. But air power decided it.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Kuwaiti woman stomping a fallen portrait of Saddam Hussein
after the recapture of Kuwait City from Iraq. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Phases of War: Making Peace;
The Next Step Will Be Building a Solid Future On the Shifting Sands

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 3; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1433 words


POLITICAL power grows out of the barrel of a gun, as Mao Zedong said. But peace
does not; it grows out of human hearts and minds. No place has proved the point
better than the Middle East, over and over, for most of this century.

Having swept to victory against Saddam Hussein's tanks and troops in the desert
battlefields of Kuwait and Iraq, the American-led allied coalition will now try
again to win a peace. In Washington and the capitals of Western Europe last
week, the hope was that this time not only the Persian Gulf but the Arab-Israeli
conflict could be settled, with Mr. Hussein's menace cut down to size and
without the East-West conflict magnifying regional tensions as it did from 1948
until the end of the cold war last year.

Militarily, the allies are unchallenged in the region for the moment. But in the
months ahead they may have cause for amazement, as the Israelis often did in the
past, at how fast military victory can seem to trickle into the political sands.

On the broader canvas of history as well, vast military might has often proved
illusory. In large part because the political terrain was so hostile, the Soviet
Union's vast military machine did not save it from military defeat in
Afghanistan and political undoing in Eastern Europe, just as American military
advantage failed to win the day in Vietnam.

Yet it would be wrong to conclude that military strength has been rendered
somehow obsolete by these failures and, now, by the reduction of tension between
the superpowers.

The end of the cold war may actually have encouraged Saddam Hussein to send his
military machine into Kuwait last August because he thought the United States
would see no Soviet military threat behind it. But it also allowed the United
States and Moscow to join in condemning Mr. Hussein's aggression. And because
the United States and Britain no longer needed to deter Warsaw Pact aggression
in Central Europe, they could move overwhelming force to the gulf within weeks.
With no danger of inadvertently bringing on World War III with Moscow, the
allies could bomb Moscow's former Iraqi proteges at will, and then go in for the
coup de grace.

But if Western military forces stay in the gulf too long, they could
paradoxically endanger peace and stability, by feeding Arab resentment of
Western powers imposing their will on them like the imperialists of the past.
This, in turn, could cause political danger to the shaky sheikdoms of the gulf.
They and other important members of the allied coalition like Syria hardly rest
on pillars of democracy, and in the gulf they will now all have to deal with
Iran and its deep mistrust of Western intentions.

Even after his humiliating military defeat, the collapse of Saddam Hussein's
dictatorship could take months or years. Western European leaders, like
President Bush, made clear after the victory that they would shed no tears if he
were overthrown, but they have to concentrate on other things now: organizing
regional Arab support for a new structure of stability in the gulf, and seeing
whether they can break the Arab-Israeli logjam. Pressed by his British, French
and German allies, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d will go to Saudi Arabia,
Egypt, Syria, Israel, Turkey and the Soviet Union this week. The purpose is to
take soundings on postwar security arrangements in the gulf; the Arab-Israeli
conflict is also high on his list.

A political settlement imposed from the outside, whether it concerns the gulf or
Israel and the Palestinians, has little chance of success. Allied leaders agreed
last week that the ideas from the gulf should come first of all from the states
of the Gulf Cooperation Council themselves, with key Arab countries like Egypt
also playing a crucial role. Iran's interests also cannot be overlooked, though
few Western powers except for France and Germany have much leverage in Teheran
these days. Clearly Mr. Baker has his work cut out for him, and he will need
help.

Life, as the Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev might say, does not always
reward countries that resist the temptation to use military force. Israel may
find that out this time, although it expects a reward for not retaliating
against Iraq for the scores of Scud missile attacks against Israeli civilian
population centers. The Germans, too, have hardly been showered with praise by
their allies for insisting that their history made it impossible for them to
participate directly in allied military operations against Iraq. There are
dictators you can't simply negotiate with, as the Germans should know better
than most other people, and Saddam Hussein was one of them.

But for all the contributions the British and French made, the war was an
American show, and it demonstrated to the whole world that there is really only
one superpower these days, the United States. The lesson has not been lost on
the generals and admirals of the Soviet Union and their hard-line Communist
supporters. They were arguing even before the war that Mr. Gorbachev and former
Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze had sold out Soviet interests in the
Middle East by being too willing to align themselves with Washington, and in
Europe by ceding the strategic ground to NATO. That argument seemed especially
pointed last week, when the Warsaw Pact agreed to dissolve its military alliance
by March 31.

In the Middle East, the old Soviet method of buying a political stake was to
sell arms to powerful clients -- Egypt, before the 1967 war, and more recently,
Syria and Iraq. The Soviets weren't the only ones, of course; arms dealers from
France, Germany, the United States and elsewhere also helped create the dragon
that Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf's troops had to slay last week, with losses of
139 allied soldiers killed in action and another 56 missing.

Mr. Gorbachev didn't send any troops, but he helped by pulling all but a handful
of the thousands of Soviet military and civilian advisers out of Iraq before the
allied bombing started in January. And whatever the Soviet military knew about
allied battlefield preparations from satellite intelligence, it appeared that
they didn't tell their former Iraqi proteges. Once Iraq's air force collapsed,
General Schwarzkopf said last week, "we took out his ability to see what we were
doing."

The quick achievement of allied supremacy in the skies over Iraq apparently gave
pause to Mr. Gorbachev's generals. They were scurrying last week to blame the
Iraqis, not Soviet military hardware, for the quick defeat. But Defense Minister
Dmitri T. Yazov said that the Soviet Union's own air defenses might have to be
reviewed in light of the ineffectiveness of some of the same technology in Iraq.

Mr. Gorbachev's advisers in Moscow acknowledge that he is leaning on the
military for political support these days, for help in keeping the Soviet Union
from flying apart. That shift to the right has already caused the deaths of
pro-independence demonstrators in the Baltic republics. Whether it also means
that it was too early to consign the cold war to the ground remains to be seen.

If it was, building the peace in the gulf will be even more difficult. What is
beyond question is that the Soviet Union, whoever rules it, will have a vital
political interest in the future of a region on its soft strategic underbelly.
The more impotent the Soviet Union feels as a military power, the more intense
will be its interest.

As the example of the Soviet Union shows, vast military strength alone does not
make a superpower, something Americans would do well to try to remember in this
hour of victory.

Peter Pringle, a British newspaper correspondent in Washington for 15 years,
recently wrote in The Independent, "What America really needed was a way of
outsmarting Japanese televisions, VCR's, computers and cars, not some distant
dictator's stock of nasty weapons." Indeed, without the wealth of the Japanese,
the Saudis and the Germans, both the United States and Britain would have had
trouble footing the bill for the victory.

The U.S. military-industrial complex manufactures the world's best weaponry, but
a new arms-merchant scramble to sell Western and Soviet arms again to Middle
East clients eager to buy them would show that the world had learned nothing
from this war.

And while American military strength will still be needed to keep the peace in a
world still plagued by rapacious dictators, it cannot do so all by itself. Every
battle comes to an end. The burden of sustaining peace is endless, mundane, and
ultimately far more challenging.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d on the White House lawn
last week. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Dear Mr. President . . .

BYLINE: By Leslie H. Gelb

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 757 words


I didn't try to telephone because I knew you'd be busy. So here's a public
communication where candor may be easier than in private conversation with a
President, especially one who has actually succeeded at something.

If you're only reading short adulatory messages, this paragraph constitutes an
executive summary: You, your advisers and the fighting men and women of the
United States brought great honor to our country in the Persian Gulf. After the
celebrations, however, don't expect any deference from Democrats on domestic
issues (they'll be righter than ever for having been wrong on the gulf),
cooperation from those nations you helped save (they said thank you on Thursday)
and further compliments from journalists (we're not in that business).

On the war, I was with you 87 percent. The other 13 percent was constructive
criticism, most of which you fortunately ignored.

Everybody else, as you now know, was with you 103 percent. Some experts and
colleagues would have been with you 105 percent had you been a little tougher
and used maybe one very small nuclear weapon, just to make sure they work.

You have every right to feel like Superman. No President since Truman ended
World War II has brought such uncluttered success to America. You have our
undying admiration. That and $1 trillion will help you close the deficit.

Here are some test cases of what's to come in Congress. Say instead of reducing
the Pentagon budget, as you promised, you now want increases. Maybe you'll get
20 new Democratic votes, but not enough to win. Say you want a big jump in
spending on Star Wars. Perhaps Democrats will give you a few extra million,
simply to cover their retreat; no more.

On domestic issues like energy, education, child care and the economy, Democrats
will have to be even more rambunctious than before the war. Your dominance in
foreign affairs will make it more important for them to distinguish themselves
in areas where you haven't done very well and don't seem to care very much.

It's fair for you to unleash Republican pit bulls to chew up Democrats for being
soft on the gulf. It's your party's only chance to gain control of Congress. But
you should retain your credibility and never gainsay that the Democrats backed
you after they lost the vote to stop you from warring on Iraq. Republicans, when
they disagreed with the way the Korean and Vietnam Wars were being fought,
abandoned Democratic Presidents.

Besides Americans, the deepest debt to you is owed by the Kuwaitis, the Saudis,
the Israelis and our allies from Egypt to Europe to Japan. Expect even less
generosity than from the Democrats.

The Saudis probably will give you a year's worth of oil at low prices, to show
where their hearts are. After that it will be all wallets, once again. Just ask
them to sit down at the peace table with Israel.

Nor will Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir feel he owes you much for dispatching the
Patriot missiles to defend Israel against the Scuds. Instead, he is likely to
remind you about Palestinians cheering on the Scuds and present his bill for the
destruction.

As for the Kuwaitis, don't count on enlightenment. A senior Kuwaiti cabinet
minister acknowledged to "60 Minutes," the CBS news program, that the war "has
made us know that what we used to do was wrong." For example, he offered, "I had
four maids, or three maids in my house; you can have two maids. Why should you
have four maids in the house? Why doesn't your wife do some of the work?"

Yes, indeed, women's liberation comes to Kuwait. Will it be said of these royal
gentlemen what was remarked about the Bourbons returning to rule France after
the defeat of Napoleon -- that they learned nothing, and forgot nothing?

Also, our loyal allies still owe us about $40 billion for their share of war
expenses. They've paid only a fraction of their pledges, which were far too low
to begin with. Yes, it's unbecoming for a world hero to travel hat in hand, but
also make sure they don't pay off, as before, in used Sony tape recorders and
East German military uniforms. Cash, preferably in Deutsche marks and yen, will
do fine.

Probably the threat to your re-election ended when the cease-fire began last
week. But all heroic leaders of democracies should keep in view the fate of
Winston Churchill, whom the British loved for leading them toward victory in
World War II but whom they voted out of office before war's end for his
inattention to Britain. Democracies love their war heroes, but they love their
country even more.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PUBLIC & PRIVATE;
The Microwave War

BYLINE: By Anna Quindlen

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 766 words


Barely 18 hours after the war ended, a man was on Broadway near Times Square
hawking victory T-shirts. "We Won!" they said on the front, the words flanked by
two American flags. "Operation Desert Storm. Jan. 16-Feb. 27." All I could think
of was some smooth small-time entrepreneur, standing with one eye on the
television and one on the boys in the back room, yelling, "Roll 'em, Harry" at
the moment that the President said, "I am pleased to announce that at midnight
tonight . . ." This is some amazing country, where you can turn a commemorative
item around in less than a day.

It was like that from beginning to end, the microwave war, ready to be consumed,
digested and cleared away in a fraction of the usual time.  No wonder the
television people seemed to be running on 78 rpm for the first week. The ground
war took less time than it takes to get over the flu. And fewer Americans died
in combat over the six weeks of the gulf war than are habitually murdered in New
York City during a comparable period of time.

To read over the early predictions is an exercise in the frailty of political
scientists, retired military men, pundits, politicians and the press. The war on
the ground would be long. It would be bloody. The Iraqi Army would use chemical
weapons. Their numbers were great. They were relentless. It all seems like a
parody now.

Throughout this brief and enormous encounter, I kept remembering a peacenik line
from my past: What if they gave a war and nobody came?  The enemy never really
showed up. When we were in the air, we supposed he was saving his knockout punch
for the ground. Instead, on the ground, he marched beneath a flag of white. We
talked at home about not automatically associating the troops with the policy.
It turned out the troops not in tune with their policy were the ones on the
other side.

Euphoria has been one of the war's buzzwords. We have been repeatedly cautioned
not to feel it. The President said the other night this was not the time for it.
It has never crossed my mind. I am reasonably sure of only three things today:
that George Bush will be re-elected President in 1992; that if he chooses either
Colin Powell or Norman Schwarzkopf as his running mate, he might win by the
largest landslide in the history of the nation, and that we are incredibly
skilled at war.

I know that last should provide a certain security. When I was trying to feel
something the night the peace began, something more electric than fatigue and
relief, I pictured all the homes in which people must be holding each other and
grinning with wet faces because someone who meant the whole world to them was
alive and whole and coming home. There were many more of those scenes that night
than we ever expected when we talked about thousands of casualties, when we
wondered how many lives were too many.

The lesson we learned from Vietnam was that it was possible for the United
States to be an abject failure in the theater of war. The lesson we've learned
from this is that we are a smashing success. Because of technology and tactics
and training, we are a staggering fighting force.

We have learned that we do this superlatively. And that frightens me.

Oh, if it makes each nation in the world think thrice about aggression because
it fears the biggest kid in class, I say hooray. But if it makes us cocky -- and
a cocky American is the cockiest creature on earth -- that will be a disaster.
The failure of Vietnam made us gun-shy for almost two decades. It is a much
greater failure to be trigger-happy. If the Iraqi rout becomes our model of
conflict resolution, we will have suffered a great defeat.

Too soon to tell. That is our refrain.  Never has the first rough draft of
history been produced under such deadline pressure.

Not far from the T-shirt stand was that spot on Times Square where people
celebrated the end of World War II, and where a photographer took that picture
of a soldier kissing a woman, with the celebration raging around them, that is
one of our great visual images of the euphoria that can accompany victory and
peace.  Perhaps we will see images like that when the soldiers come home.

The test may be the T-shirt, 20 years from now, a relic at the bottom of
someone's dresser drawer, a reminder of the last time we went to war. "Every 20
years it happens," a soldier's father said to me when this all began, all those
years ago, in January. Maybe now we have the authority, and the confidence, to
allow that span to stretch. This is the peace before the storm. Now comes the
testing of our mettle.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

If There's a War, He's There

BYLINE: William Prochnau is working on a book for Random House about the small
band of early Vietnam war correspondents.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3003 words

DATELINE: By William Prochnau


Last summer, in the Jerusalem office of his Cable News Network, Ted Turner
delivered one of those fiery take-no-prisoners pep talks for which he has become
renowned throughout his far-flung empire. CNN, Turner exhorted his minions, is
on the cutting edge of a communications revolution. He wanted troops who would
hold back nothing, who would take the final step. "I want people," Turner
finally thundered, "who are prepared to die for CNN!"

One young cameraman raised his hand sheepishly, a tentative volunteer. Peter
Arnett just smiled at his boss's locker-room hype. At 56, Arnett had put his
life on the line many times during a 30-year career that spanned 16 wars and
insurrections. He did not raise his hand.

Six months later, of course, it was Arnett who leaned out a ninth-floor window
of the Al-Rashid Hotel in downtown Baghdad to describe for the world the
spectacular start of his 17th war, the aerial bombardment of Iraq. The next day
it was also Arnett who stayed behind when all other Western reporters left.

Arnett, it is safe to say, has seen more combat than any other journalist in the
world. Is he a war freak? Does he have a death wish? His old buddy from Vietnam,
David Halberstam, dismisses those ideas. "War freaks don't last," Halberstam
says. "Arnett may be the gutsiest man I know, but he calculates every risk he
takes."

Once the attack on Baghdad started, Arnett refused to go to the hotel bomb
shelter with the other Western reporters. Bernard Shaw, the CNN anchorman who
was with Arnett that first night, recalls the scene: "When the Iraqis knocked on
the door, Peter placed his chair in front of the window and sat down with his
back to the antiaircraft tracers. He crossed his legs, started waving his arms
and wouldn't budge. He said he had been bombed before. He said small places
drove him crazy and he would rather be bombed. It was a remarkable show."

And a good bluff. When the Iraqi officials exited in exasperation, Arnett and
his CNN colleagues were left alone with an open telephone line to Atlanta and an
exclusive eyewitness story that crackled live around the world.

By morning, no one doubted what Arnett would do next. While about 40 other
Western reporters -- many under orders from their news organizations -- headed
for the Jordanian border, Arnett stayed behind. He understood the dangers: Not
only would he be under air assault but, as the only Westerner reporting through
heavy censorship from behind enemy lines, the personal fire would be hostile,
too.

Alone in Baghdad, Arnett found himself with the story of a lifetime. But many
back home didn't see it that way, questioning his loyalty and calling him a pawn
of Saddam Hussein. "I've taken some flak," he said in a telephone interview 17
days after the war started. "So what else is new?"

EVEN BEFORE THE bombs fell, Arnett had decided, as he put it, "to miss the bus."
His boss, CNN executive vice president Ed Turner, knew as much and despaired of
even trying to move him out. "Peter thinks he's bulletproof," Turner says.

Watching television, Nate Polowetzky, a former foreign editor of The Associated
Press, must have thought he was seeing a rerun. During the fall of Saigon in
1975, Polowetzky also tried to move Arnett out of harm's way. "I told him to get
out," Polowetzky recalls. "He told me, pretty clearly, to go screw myself."

A few hours later, Arnett was pounding away on his old Olivetti portable in
A.P.'s Saigon office when a North Vietnamese major marched in. Arnett, who'd
covered the war longer than any other correspondent, offered the invader a warm
Coke and a cookie, interviewed him and sent out the story before his wires were
cut.

A dukes-up kid from the wrong side of the tracks on the wrong side of the world,
Arnett was perfectly cast for a war without heroes. A teen-age fistfight had
left a broken nose pushed sideways across his face and a jaw set permanently in
a challenging jut. He looked "like an Anglo-Saxon Belmondo," says one of his
pals. "If you had to invent a reporter for the Vietnam War," Halberstam says,
"you would have invented Peter."

Arnett, born in 1934 in a small whaling village on the southernmost point of New
Zealand, started out with nothing below him but Antarctica. As a young man, he
found college too confining and bummed around in newspaper jobs before taking a
tramp steamer to Australia.

Still restless and bored, he boarded another ship in search of adventure. "I was
the wide-eyed innocent," he says. "I was Kipling's Kim, watching out at the
world." It was 1959 and Southeast Asia coursed with opium smugglers,
revolutionaries and obscure little wars in obscure little kingdoms.

Fables glued themselves to Arnett early, and sometimes it is difficult to sort
myth from truth. Some believe he inspired "The Year of Living Dangerously," the
Australian film about war correspondents in Indonesia. That isn't so, though the
Indonesian Government did kick him out of the country for his aggressive
reporting.

One story, both true and much savored by colleagues, tells of the time that
Arnett slept through a Laotian palace coup after a hard night on the town in
Vientiane. The place was remote, and Arnett was the only reporter in town. Once
he awoke, he blithely wrote stories for all three competing wire services and
got congratulatory cables, and checks, from each.

By the time he reached Saigon in June of 1962, Arnett was 27 years old, a runt
of a man lucky to tip the scales at 140 pounds in his rain poncho and stretch to
5-foot-6 in his combat boots. But he had earned his way with hardball reporting
throughout Southeast Asia, and A.P. made him a full correspondent. He arrived
the same day as A.P.'s German-born combat photographer, Horst Faas, who also
became legendary for his derring-do and words he swore he never uttered: "Vot I
like iss boom-boom."

The war was small and distant from the unseen horror to come. American military
"advisers" had only begun to arrive, and grinning Vietnamese troopers still
marched off to battle with live ducks hanging head down from their gunbelts.
Ancient American helicopters returned from battle occasionally with primitive
spears jutting from their metallic hides.

Arnett joined a tiny band of correspondents as young and brash as he was. Only a
half-dozen regulars were covering the beginning of America's longest war. They
included Malcolm W. Browne, then Arnett's boss as A.P.'s Saigon bureau chief;
Neil Sheehan of the rival news service, U.P.I., and Halberstam, of The New York
Times. All would go on to win Pulitzer Prizes. All would be enshrouded in myth
and controversy.

Within a year, the young turks would be under assault from all sides. They were
on Vietnamese assassination lists and White House enemies' lists. Some of the
nastiest attacks came from their own -- the old-guard press corps who cast
aspersions on their truthfulness, their youthfulness, their manhood and their
patriotism.

Arnett and the other reporters did not oppose the war. Like most Americans of
that era, they believed to the core in the justness of the American cause. But
they were activists, challenging the Government's optimistic reports, needless
secrecy and outright lying with a ferocity that had not been seen in the
American press in generations.

Later, as the fighting dragged on and wave upon wave of young reporters came in,
American officials pleaded: "Don't be a Halberstam. Don't be a Sheehan." But the
early rebels had set in motion a cycle of skeptical reporting that would
challenge America's very right to be in Vietnam and ultimately change the face
of journalism.

"Write only what you see," Browne had instructed Arnett upon his arrival. It was
advice Arnett would follow all the way to Baghdad, although politicians,
generals and sometimes even the public would not always understand it.

ARNETT BECAME A soldier's reporter, following the Vietnamese troops into the
paddies and jungles when few other journalists bothered. "He was like Kilroy,"
one of them recalls. "Wherever you went, Arnett was there."

There are two famous photographs of Arnett from those days. One shows him in the
middle of a street brawl with a group of South Vietnamese secret police, his pug
face bloodied as he comes up off the ground. The other pictures him slogging
through the mud in his trademark oversize poncho, marching into the paddies at
the head of a column of ragtag Vietnamese soldiers.

Sheehan remembers Arnett at the first big battle involving American combat
troops in a valley called Ia Drang. Arriving together at battalion rear, the two
reporters watched helicopters going out with ammunition and coming back with
body bags. They were scared stiff. "I looked at Peter and he just said, to hell
with it, and we ran for a chopper."

Roughly 300 Marines died in the battle of Ia Drang. But Arnett went back in, day
after day, coming out only to transmit his stories. The following year, 1966, he
also won the Pulitzer Prize.

There was a potent and binding chemistry between Arnett and Vietnam. He fell in
love, married a Vietnamese woman and had two children. He covered the war's
fiercest battles and reported its most unforgetably bitter moments, including
the time an American major told him, "It was necessary to destroy the village in
order to save it."

By 1968, Arnett had become part of the landscape. As the war turned terribly
sour, that made him part of the target. New reporters arrived to a revised
warning from the brass: "Don't be an Arnett."

President Lyndon B. Johnson, in political extremis, went hard and heavy after
the New Zealander, trying to get him fired, calling him a Communist and making
his marriage sound like collaboration with the enemy. (In fact, Johnson never
believed his own charges against Arnett, his one-time aide Bill Moyers said
recently.)

At an American Embassy dinner party, Arnett, an infrequent guest, was seated
near the columnist Joseph Alsop, an unremitting supporter of the war. Alsop made
the mistake of greeting Arnett superciliously: "Oh, yes, you're the one who
invented the quote about the village." Arnett's dukes went up instantly, forcing
Alsop to beat a hasty retreat behind the startled Ambassador.

As the war dragged on, reporters came and went -- "punching their ticket,"
cynics called it, a career requisite as surely as Harvard or Yale had been the
proper first step toward the Paris bureau, the White House beat or an editor's
chair. But Arnett stayed. "For me, it wasn't a matter of punching a ticket," he
once told me. "I didn't have a ticket."

Finally, even Arnett tired of Vietnam. By the time he left in 1970, he had
written more words than any reporter and seen more combat than any soldier. His
departure became an event. Time magazine, a harsh critic early on, featured him
as one of the war's "most energetic and resourceful" reporters.

AWAY FROM THE ACTION, in A.P.'s New York office, Arnett found it hard to adjust.
So he went back, first in 1972 when Saigon seemed in danger. Later that year, he
visited Hanoi for the release of three American P.O.W.s, getting his first taste
of reporting from behind enemy lines. In 1975 he returned to Saigon again for
the finale. "In for the beginning," he said, "in for the end."

After the war, Arnett, like other Vietnam veterans, found the real world wasn't
his real world. His bosses didn't know what to do with him either. He had been
their "poster boy." But where do you send an aging war correspondent whose war
had ended?

He felt twinges of bitterness, watching his buddies grow famous off books, take
editorships, move to major newspapers. It galled him that A.P.'s management
ranks had been filled with returning war correspondents after World War II, but
none of the Vietnam crew had moved up.

But it was another legacy of Vietnam that bothered him most: the growing
drumbeat that the press had lost the war. For the first and only time, Arnett
took to the soapbox. The press didn't send troops into Vietnam, he lectured, and
the press didn't pull them out: "Our generation of reporters opened a Pandora's
box in Vietnam. We wrote about what we saw and heard, rather than practice the
selective reportage that enthusiastically enhanced national objectives in
previous wars." As time added distance to the memory of America's only failed
war, it was not a popular stance.

Still, by nature, Arnett is not a brooder, not given to living in the past. He
laughs often and uproariously. An avid collector of art and books, a gourmand
and bon vivant, he is a man who, as Faas describes him, thrives on "lots of
salsa living."

In 1981, he surprised many of his friends by throwing over two decades at A.P.
and hitching on with the upstart cable network CNN. Arnett on TV? Would they
redo the bent nose, drop a rug over the thinning hair? And the accent: that Down
Under voice scraped like a badly strung violin.

But CNN was the ideal fit. In a world of multimillion-dollar anchors, it arrived
on the scene with a roster of reporters with soft chins and jug ears. Ed Turner
laughs about it now: "Arnett was our sex symbol."

And CNN finally gave him a ticket. Early on, the network made a mistake, trying
to assign him to the White House. But Arnett, then pushing 50, knew himself too
well. "He was appalled at the thought of sitting on those green couches in that
press room," Turner recalls.

So they sent him back to war -- Afghanistan, El Salvador, obscure uprisings in
Africa. When hostilities died down, he sometimes stirred them up. In Moscow
during the rise of glasnost, Arnett fought fistfights in the street again, this
time with belligerent K.G.B. agents.

Parts of his life suffered chasing all those wars. His marriage broke up. But
his personal life also hit a high in 1989 when his daughter, Elsa, graduated
with honors from Harvard. Elsa hero-worships her galavanting father and, as a
teen-ager, declared she would follow him into journalism. Thinking she should
get a taste of it first, Arnett took the 15-year-old into the jungles of El
Salvador, war-hunting. Elsa now works as a reporter for The Boston Globe.

LAST YEAR, CNN MOVED Arnett to Jerusalem. He shifted into Baghdad four days
before the bombing started.

Overnight, a man who'd already earned a place in the pantheon of his peers
became famous worldwide. Isolated in Baghdad, it was hard for Arnett to
comprehend the global magnitude of it -- his reports had gone live before 60
million Brazilians, dominated three networks in Britain, shoved aside TV's big
boys in the United States.

One of his editors tried to explain over the one open line to Baghdad: "Peter,
your name's all over the front page of The New York Times." Arnett's guffaw
rattled the eardrums of both the Iraqi censors and American spooks listening in.
"They shoulda hired me when they had the chance!" he roared.

Then the personal attacks began. At first it was Vietnam redux, building like an
animal's growl. R. Lawrence Coughlin, an obscure right-wing Republican
Congressman from Pennsylvania, said Arnett was to Saddam what Goebbels had been
to Hitler. In Atlanta, CNN's switchboard bogged down with angry calls asking why
the network's man was mouthing Iraq's propaganda.

Senator Alan K. Simpson, a Wyoming Republican, threw the lowest blows. Simpson
accused Arnett, who had conducted a 90-minute interview with Saddam Hussein, of
being an Iraqi "sympathizer." He also revived, and then embellished, Lyndon
Johnson's canard about Arnett's ex-wife, contending that she had a brother in
the Vietcong.

By the time Simpson made his charges, Arnett had already left Baghdad for the
southern Iraqi city of Basra. He never officially commented on what Simpson had
said, but it didn't take much imagination to envision his instant reaction:
dukes up, Senator.

The escalating criticism perplexed Arnett more than it wounded him. No one could
have any illusions about the shackles the Iraqis had placed on his reporting.
But did people in America, a country that had fought so long and hard for the
right to know, now prefer to know nothing at all? "They just don't understand,
do they?" Arnett said during the 30-minute interview from Baghdad.

The flash point came with the controversy over civilian casualties, specifically
the story about the bombing of a so-called baby-milk factory in Baghdad. When
Arnett's story was broadcast, the White House claimed that the baby milk was a
cover for a chemical-weapons plant and that Arnett had been duped.

The controversy goes to the heart of questions that will require thoughtful
answers after the end of this first satellite television war. But at the time,
almost no one noted that Arnett, never a sucker for anyone's official line, had
gone to great pains to point out (slipping it by the censor at his elbow) that
the factory's "baby milk" signs were printed in English.

"You just report what is going on around you." Arnett said. "I've said on the
air that when you unload enormous amounts of weaponry on a place like this, you
are going to hurt civilians. Pretending it's not happening is silly. It's better
. . . to learn this stuff up front so that we don't have surprises and start
being ashamed later for what we didn't know or didn't want to know at the time."

Later in the interview, he talked about pushing his luck. "I don't believe in
taking the kind of risks that really are going to get myself or my colleagues
killed," he said. "But I am prepared to step across the unknown, to weigh the
odds against the ultimate story."

After 30 years and 17 wars, Arnett is keenly aware that the odds have a way of
shifting.

"Let me tell you I can be scared," he said. "I can be scared at a roadblock when
a soldier looks angry and cocks his gun at my head. But I can face my Maker now
with less concern than I could a few years ago.

"I would not be surprised if I did get hit one day," he added. "I'm not wanting
it. I don't expect it. But if it did happen, I would not regret it, and I hope
no one else would."

NAME: Peter Arnett

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Have war, will travel: Arnett slogs through the mud with
Vietnamese troops in 1965 (Associated Press)(pg. 30), above, and reports from
Baghdad last month, right. (Eyup Coskun/Sipa)(pg. 31)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Chats With a Dead Lover

BYLINE: By Michael Malone; Michael Malone's novels include "Handling Sin,"
"Time's Witness" and "Uncivil Seasons."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1675 words



SWEET EYES
By Jonis Agee.
405 pp. New York: Crown Publishers. $18.95.

In "Pretend We've Never Met," her 1989 collection of short narrative sketches,
Jonis Agee drew with a strong, spare lyricism a portrait of a rural Midwestern
landscape she called Divinity, Iowa. In "Sweet Eyes," her first novel, she
returns to Divinity's environs (Mercy River, Spirit Lake) and its people, who
remain as solitary, marginal and obsessively eager to tell their stories as the
inhabitants of Edgar Lee Masters' Spoon River cemetery once were.

"Sweet Eyes" shares the haunted imagery of the short stories: Ms. Agee revisits
Stiller's Pond (haunted by a drowned couple pulled from its depths, their eyes
plucked out by turtles) and the orchard of Mr. Aronson, whose handsome son sits
in prison for rape and murder. Honey Parrish, the novel's narrator, her former
husband, Jake, her dead lover, Clinton, as well as members of her family and her
friends -- the casually carnal hairdresser Twyla Tooley, the teen-age Billy
Bond, who goes mad after his state champion pig is butchered for a town barbecue
-- have all made appearances in Ms. Agee's earlier work and now join the cast of
this long, complex novel.

"Sweet Eyes" has as its epigraph the last lines of the "Inferno," in which
Virgil at last guides Dante out of hell to glimpse the stars. Honey Parrish has
her own guide through the hell of Divinity: her lover, Clinton, a drug-dealing
Vietnam vet, who continues to communicate with her 15 years after his suicide --
naked, he drove his car onto Spirit Lake one January and crashed through the
ice. As a teen-ager, Honey had fallen in love with this wild, brainy farm boy;
he took her to Iowa City to sit in on university classes on Spengler, taught her
the names of all the flowers, introduced her to drugs and the pleasures of an
inquiring mind and then abandoned her by dying. She's never recovered. Neither a
marriage nor many drunken one-night stands can still the voice she continues to
hear, tutoring her from beyond the grave with such Dantesque remarks as, "Love,
my dear girl, is another circle of hell."

On the walls of her trailer, Honey has inscribed a chart, a kind of "moral
geography of Divinity," in which she categorizes her fellow townspeople as to
their vices: gluttony, avarice, lechery and other failings. She has plenty of
locals to pick from because the town is packed with candidates for the infernal
circles: sadists like Honey's father (who scarred her forehead with a hammer)
and her maniacal brother Sonny Boy (who terrorizes her by shooting through her
windows and by bashing her bumper with his own car while going 75 miles an
hour); lechers like her boss (a Babbitty town booster); gluttons like her
450-pound sister, Baby; drunks (like almost everyone in Divinity, including
Honey herself); and a crew of provincial bigots -- as irredeemable as the
hillbillies in "Deliverance" -- who casually indulge in such cruelties as
cutting off the feet of a big snapping turtle and laughing at "the severed legs
clawing to get out of the way." It is these good ol' farm boys who nearly beat
to death the area's only black farmer, Jasper Johnson, the "Sweet Eyes" of the
title, with whom Honey is having an affair. (She also sleeps with one of the
bigots, but regrets it.)

These people of Divinity carouse as hard as they work, and usually with as
little satisfaction. They age early. Young, muscular bodies are soon "crippled
up from machinery and animals." Beauty fades fast. Tension and the frustration
spawned by failure spill over into drunken brawls. This is a world of bruises
and black eyes, of beer cans popping open, of drunks playing Willie Nelson tunes
in bars beside the highway then staggering out to parking lots full of dented
cars and throwing up there. Honey's trailer, with its cracked Formica and torn
Naugahyde, is littered with unwashed clothes and spilled plastic garbage bags
overloaded with "rotted food and booze bottles." She and Jasper don't have
conversations; they yell, pound tables, take swings at each other, curse, throw
things. On one night alone, Honey has two explosive blowouts with Jasper, a
drunken fight with her former husband (he cuts open her lip with a thrown beer
can), a philosophical chat with the sheriff, a violent confrontation with her
brother, and she suspects that, while drunk, she may have had sex with a chance
acquaintance. It's a far cry from the rural Midwest we met in sweet films like
"State Fair."

Ms. Agee's novel takes us through a year in Divinity, from the April snowstorm
when Honey first becomes involved with Jasper to the summer of the following
year and the centennial parade. That progress is appropriate: it is in the midst
of nature, in harmony with the seasons, their months threaded together by the
Fourth of July or Appreciation Day or a Halloween dance, that these people live.
Most of them farmers, they live in nature, with the weather, their shoes thick
with mud and manure. That physical closeness to the natural world underscores
all the best imagery in "Sweet Eyes," where talk of animal life is pervasive:
"The chickens cluck softly and flap in the hazy, straw-filled house where
ammonia needles eyes and nose." Early in the novel Ms. Agee gives us a dramatic
account of the death of a mare following the birth of her foal; the scene is
deeply affecting, in a way more moving than the parallel human episode that
occurs later in the novel.

In moving from short fiction to the novel's broader form, Ms. Agee runs into a
number of stylistic problems that she had successfully avoided in her short
stories, most of which are very brief, emotional tone poems, portraits of single
figures with little or no dialogue; here, however, her narrative line at times
unravels; at other times, it clumps into a tangled ball as she is tempted to
tell us too much, too often. When an old geologist decides to leave town,
announcing that he is giving his house to Honey, we're obliged to hear his
detailed instructions on checking the oil tank gauge, water heater, fuses and so
forth. People talk in paragraphs, if not pages, of dialogue that sound written
rather than spoken. "They'd been under heavy bombardment, planes pounding in on
them nightly," Honey begins in one of her many long monologues, in this case
reciting the experiences of her dead lover, Clinton, in Vietnam. The plot is
thereby not so much enacted as recounted as Honey incessantly recapitulates her
past for anyone who asks. "Don't you ever get tired of rehashing family
history?" she complains to her sister, but she herself seems incapable of
stopping.

Her story is rooted in a dark, mysterious secret involving her brothers and
lovers. The secret stems from a violent incident that took place 15 years ago;
names and events associated with this episode are brought up again and again,
but the (relentlessly foreshadowed) truth behind the event is revealed only
after several hundred hint-filled pages. Honey's endless self-questioning ("Can
I stay here and keep Sonny Boy's secret forever?") wears the reader down. And
Honey's inability, until the climax of the novel, to gain much insight into her
own heart or the fears and needs of others makes for a narrative that seems at
times too tightly focused: we can't always see around Honey's obsessions to the
complex characters surrounding her.

Despite these flaws, "Sweet Eyes" has a genuine power. While it is often
melodramatic, there is great strength in the naturalist roots it shares with
work like Theodore Dreiser's (whose dialogue was also weak). Like Dreiser, Ms.
Agee gives us an urgent sense of the primitive force of life, of the oppression
of heredity and of the fundamentals of human nature: the animal core at its
heart of fear, sex and violence. The strength of Ms. Agee's narrative lies in
its portrayal of the struggle of the inhabitants of Divinity to survive within
the natural world. There is throughout "Sweet Eyes" the powerful presence of the
land, of which we are, in the Wordsworthean sense, an eternal part: "Rolled
round in earth's diurnal course, / With rocks, and stones, and trees."

In a vivid passage Ms. Agee describes Honey's awed discovery, as a child, of the
late-night voices spilling mysteriously from her radio from far-off towns, the
"sound pouring in from everywhere. Skipping out of beams and nets of cities, it
landed occasional as insects, as casual as moonlight, along the little bands of
numbers. . . . It was the smaller places that arrived with a peculiar clarity,
as if there weren't as much to hold them in place." And listening, she imagined
all the other small, lonely river towns up and down the Mississippi and the
Missouri, their lights "dotting the dark lushness so that at night the land
looked like a sky turned upside down." Ms. Agee is a gifted poet of that dark
lushness in the heart of the American landscape.




DIVINITY AND ENVIRONS

The characters who inhabit fictional Divinity, Iowa, may not know their Dante,
but Jonis Agee does. In college, she studied classics, and her doctoral
dissertation took the form of a book-length poem. She began her career as a
poet, but even as she turned to prose fiction, her love of the long narrative
poem remained. In "Sweet Eyes," she strived to create the sort of epic personal
journey of the classical heroes, but with a twist.

"What I wanted to do was to convey an archetypal female experience," Ms. Agee
said in a telephone interview from her home in St. Paul. "I wanted to show what
it was like for a woman to go on an inner journey that did not necessarily lead
to the domestic. What was true for male characters is also true for women."

Divinity continues to intrigue her. Raised in small Midwestern towns, she found
this union of the mythical and the natural worlds ideal. "I was always struck by
authors," like Sherwood Anderson and William Faulkner, "who could create a
universe. It's a way to express a moral geography without everyone getting mad
at you." -- PETER CATAPANO

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Gulf Veterans To Be Honored In May Parade

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 729 words


The men and women who endured the roar of battle and the swirling sandstorms of
the Persian Gulf war will return to the cheers of thousands and the cascading
ticker tape of a parade through the Canyon of Heroes, Mayor David N. Dinkins
announced yesterday.

"The biggest welcome of all and the greatest ticker-tape parade in this or any
city's history awaits the American and allied forces upon their return from the
gulf this spring," Mr. Dinkins said.

Reconciling New York City's financial debt with its debt of gratitude to the
returning veterans, Mr. Dinkins emphasized that the parade, through lower
Manhattan on part of Broadway known as the Canyon of Heroes, would be paid for
through donations collected by a committee of private citizens.

The group plans to raise $5 million for the parade, an ecumenical religious
service and a fireworks display during the week of May 11, which is Armed Forces
Week. By then, Mr. Dinkins explained, half of the troops mobilized for the war
are expected to have returned home.

To 'Extraordinary Contributions'

"In the coming months and weeks, our returning servicemen and women will be
celebrated and paraded in cities and towns all across our country," Mr. Dinkins
said at a news conference at Gracie Mansion. "But our celebration will be a very
special and unique one -- a daring display of New York's diverse troops and a
tribute to the extraordinary contributions that have been made by all of the
veterans in our city."

Representative delegations from the allied nations will be invited, Mr. Dinkins
said.

The group collecting donations is headed by Joseph H. Flom, a lawyer who was the
lead organizer of the city's Bicentennial celebration, and Michael Duval, an
investment banker and member of the Defense Policy Board of the Department of
Defense. Mr. Duval said the group already has pledges of up to $1.5 million.

Money raised beyond the cost of the festivites will go toward what organizers
called a living memorial, which will provide scholarships for the children of
veterans killed in the war and housing and employment assistance for returning
veterans, especially the wounded.

"For them to return to public assistance or to be warehoused and disposed of
would be an absolute war crime," said Borough President Fernando Ferrer of the
Bronx. "The city should also come in with money, and the Feds, too."

Late last week, the Mayor expressed doubt that the city could afford a
celebration when firehouses are being closed and city workers laid off. That
spurred Borough President Guy V. Molinari of Staten Island and Peter S. Kalikow,
publisher of The New York Post, to start their own fund-raising drive, which
they say brought in $250,000.

Mr. Molinari insisted yesterday that he was not trying to upstatge the Mayor,
but only to show that New Yorkers had the resolve to honor their heroes in a way
that Korean War veterans like himself and Vietnam veterans had dreamed of but
never enjoyed.

"I thought about my days in Korea, and said there was no question we can raise
enough money in New York City to fund a parade," he said.

Mr. Dinkins said he hoped that veterans of past wars would also be honored
during the week in May. "If this is able to rectify that, then all the better,"
he said.

Gen. Powell Expected to Attend

Details of the festivities are not set, and the Mayor was unable to estimate how
many veterans would march up Broadway in what he called "the mother of all
parades." But Mr. Molinari told him one Bronx native involved in the gulf
operation had already said he would attend: Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Mr. Flom estimated that the parade and other activities could cost as much as
$2.5 million, mostly in salaries for police and sanitation crews. He said
organizations and companies that had helped stage parades and celebrations in
the past had already told him that they were ready to forego their fees this
time.

Mr. Molinari said he had explored the possibility of donations from the Saudi
and Kuwaiti Governments, but had yet to receive a response, although he
acknowledged the legality of such a contribution was unclear.

Donations for the celebration can be made by calling (212) 374-6244number busy.
still checking., or by writing Operation Welcome Home, Room 819, 346 Broadway,
New York, N.Y. 10012.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mayor David N. Dinkins announced yesterday that a parade would
be held for troops returing from the gulf war. With him at a news conference
were Borough President Guy V. Molinari of Staten Island, center, and City
Councilman Herbert E. Berman. (Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR;
The Fires of Patriotism And Cold Necessity Put 13 in Harm's Way

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times; The following article is based on
reporting by Don Terry, Sam Howe Verhovek and Mary B. W. Tabor and was written
by Mr. Terry.

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2837 words

DATELINE: GREENSBURG, Pa., March 3


Sorrow rushes over the hills and swoops into the valleys across western
Pennsylvania like a bitter wind these days because soon the funerals will start.

Thirteen Army reservists from this close-knit region of small cities and farm
towns in the foothills of the Alleghenies were killed last Monday in one of the
final Scud attacks of the Persian Gulf war.

The loss has shaken and stunned this land of tough but friendly people who
despite the rugged terrain that separates their communities are tied together by
immigrant backgrounds, a love of high school sports and a faith in country as
strong as the steel they produced before the mills began to close and the hard
times set in.

Most of the reservists lived within a two-hour drive of the Greensburg Army
Reserve Center, a low-slung brick building at the top of a winding road, where
they gathered one weekend a month to train, listen to lectures and socialize.



Who They Were

They were 11 men and 2 women. They were black and they were white. They were
laborers and they were college students. "They were us," Gov. Robert Casey said
in a memorial service here Saturday. "The roll reads like a list of the family
next door."

They came from places called Latrobe and Monongahela and Monessen, where a
quarter will buy five hours on the parking meters downtown.

"The towns are so close together around here that everyone knows someone from
another town and everyone certainly feels this," said Jim Steeley, a teacher at
a local high school. "I don't know of any geographic part of the country that
was hit as hard as this immediate area was by the war."

President Bush agreed. "For the Greensburg community, I know the cost of freedom
has been particulary high," he said in a letter that was read at the memorial
service, which was attended by more than 1,000 people.

Kindness From Strangers

Other services are planned or have already been held throughout the area. But
not all the expressions of grief have come in the form of organized services.

In Monessen, where the parents of one of the reservists, Specialist Anthony
Madison, live, an old man climbed the steep porch steps and knocked on the door.
The man had tears in his eyes as he presented the family with a card and a $20
bill.

The old man was a stranger.

Counseling teams are being assembled to help family and friends deal with the
grief. That will not be easy.

"We are still stunned by the suddenness of the tragedy," Governor Casey said at
the memorial. "The shock is worse because we believed they were out of harm's
way."

The 13 reservists were members of the 14th Quartermaster Detachment, a 69-member
water purification unit housed in Saudi Arabia with several other reserve units
miles from the front. They had arrived in Saudi Arabia only a few days before
the attack and were staying in a barracks in Dhahran.

Their deaths, and the deaths of 15 other reservists living in the barracks, are
the largest concentration of United States casualties in a war that killed 95
Americans. And the fact that they all died so far from the front during a ground
war that had been expected to produce many front line casualties is one of the
cruelest ironies of the conflict.

Patriotism was a major reason most of them had joined the Reserves. Many were
the sons and daughters of soldiers and grew up waving flags on the Fourth of
July and listening to war stories around the dinner table.

But they were also pushed through the recruitment office door by the need to
earn money for college or to learn a new skill for a job market that threatened
to leave them standing in front of a closed steel mill.

Ordinary and Extraordinary

Reading the roll of the victims, Governor Casey called them "salt of the earth
people, who were extraordinary Americans." People like Specialist Beverly S.
Clark, 23 years old, of Armagh, a secretary and member of the Future Business
Leaders of America; Specialist Steven E. Atherton, 26, a forklift operator who
lived with his wife, Brenda, and 6-month-old son Aaron in Nu Mine, and dreamed
of the day they could buy a house;

Specialist Frank S. Keough, 22, of North Huntingdon, who wanted to become a
reading teacher and who joined the Reserves to earn money for college;
Specialist Frank J. Walls, 20, of Hawthorn, a college student who like thousands
of young people in a region that produced football greats like Joe Montana was a
devoted athlete; Specialist John A. Boliver Jr. of Monongahela, who followed his
grandfather and father into the military;

Sgt. Allan B. Craver, 32, of Penn Hills, who felt that the water purification
mission was socially responsible work; Specialist Richard V. Wolverton, 24, who
was born into a military family and settled in Latrobe 10 years ago; Stephen
Siko, 24, of Lloydsville, a 1984 graduate of Greater Latrobe High School who was
divorced and had a 5-year-old son named Stephen Jacob; Specialist Thomas G.
Stone, 20, of Jamestown, N.Y., a star on his high school wrestling team and the
father of a 17-month-old girl.

The Student
A Steady March Toward a Dream

Early in the morning of Memorial Day in 1987, Donald Reed sat on his porch swing
in Hickory, Pa., when a pickup truck rumbled past and pulled up at the cemetery
just down the road.

A young man in jeans got out and slowly walked amid the tombstones, a trumpet
under his arm. Raising it, he played taps, so softly that Mr. Reed had to strain
to hear the notes. Then he got in the truck and rumbled up the street in a cloud
of dust.

The solitary figure was Joseph P. Bongiorni 3d, then a high school junior, more
recently a specialist with the 14th Army Reserve Quartermaster Detachment.

A quiet, earnest boy who loved to play music and to hike and fish in the
Allegheny Mountains here in Western Pennsylvania, Mr. Bongiorni had another
passion in life: the military. "Ever since he was a little boy, Joey wanted to
be a soldier," said his mother, Rita Bongiorni.

Promise to Parents

That young Joey came to be in the Reserves was not of his own choice. He had
wanted to join the Army full time right out of high school, but Mrs. Bongiorni
and her husband, Joseph 2d, made him promise to go to college first. So at the
age of 17, he enrolled at West Virginia University in Morgantown as a civil
engineering major. The call for active duty came in January; within a month he
was in the Middle East.

"He wanted to go," said Mr. Bongiorni's 24-year-old sister, Jody. "Joey was a
little scared, like any normal person would be, but he wanted to go."

His eagerness was so great that he was a bit frustrated to learn that his main
duties would be with a water purification unit in Saudi Arabia, far from the
front lines.

"Hey Bro," he had written in a rambling letter to Timothy Gilbert, one of his
best friends, just days before he left for the gulf. "Who wants to be a water
boy, anyway?"

Mr. Bongiorni was an honor student who graduated from Fort Cherry High School in
1989. He played defensive end for the Fort Cherry Rangers football team and
played trumpet in the school band. At half time, when the other members marched
out in red uniforms, there was Mr. Bongiorni marching in his muddy jersey and
shoulder pads.

The school's principal, Jess King, recalled that he "never gave less than 110
percent in everything he did." His music teacher, Dick Burns, said that Mr.
Bongiorni "used to have a little trouble with the high notes," but would
practice for hours at a time in the band room.

"I think he liked music for the same reason he liked the military," Mr. Burns
said. "It was the discipline of the thing."

About 150 people turned out in a rattling wind on Thursday afternoon for a brief
memorial service at the high school. At the family's request, the service
concluded with Mr. Burns stepping to the school marquee and playing taps.

The Athlete
Talent Wasted In a Dying Town

When Specialist Anthony Madison was a boy growing up in Monessen, he dreamed of
becoming a professional boxer. He hoped to dance and slug his way to the top and
away from a life in the mills where his father had earned a decent living but
had also lost a leg.

Specialist Madison was 9 years old when his father, Norman, took his son into
the basement of the Taylor Funeral Home, where he worked part-time. There in the
dimness, Mr. Madison, a former Marine Corps boxing champion, began teaching the
skinny boy how to fight.

"He caught on real quick," Mr. Madison, 54, said last week. "But sometimes he
got a little hard headed. He'd drop his hands and I'd have to pop him one. He
thought he could box better than me. I said, 'Hey, I taught you what I know, but
not all I know.' Those were some good times. Real good times." He fell silent as
if the memory had stolen his voice.

A few minutes later the telephone rang in Mr. Madison's two-story house. It was
Taylor's calling to discuss arrangements for his son's funeral.

Anthony Madison was born in Monessen 27 years ago and graduated from Monessen
High School in 1983. A gifted athlete, he struggled in school, especially after
his parents' divorce and then his mother's death in 1982. He spent a year in the
job corps learning bricklaying, and loved playing music as a disk jockey around
town.

Specialist Madison played on the football team at Monessen and dated the girl he
later married, Leeann. They had two children, Dacarra, 3, and Anthony Jr., 5.

In this part of the country where football is both king and queen, Specialist
Madison could have been a prince if he had stuck with the sport and his studies,
said his former coach and counselor, Jack Scarvel. He played both defensive end
and running back.

"He was an impact player," Mr. Scarvel said. "He was a wiry, hard-hitting
football player. I asked one of the coaches about him once and he said, 'Tony is
the kind of kid that you want in the foxhole with you.' He'd do anything you
asked of him. He was quiet, loyal. He made this town proud."

Nothing Else But to Join

Like countless other communities in this part of Pennsylvania, time has not been
kind to Monessen or its young.

When Specialist Madison was a boy, jobs in the steel mills were almost as
plentiful as apples in an orchard. But as he grew into manhood, the mills began
to disappear and by the time he finished a three-year enlistment in the Army he
could not find work.

Less than a year ago, he joined the Reserves. "There was nothing else for him to
do," said his stepmother, Darla.

Shortly before shipping out to the desert, Specialist Madison pulled up a chair
and tried to reassure his father.

"He said, 'Don't worry about me,' " Mr. Madison recalled. "He said, 'I know you
will, but don't. I'm not going to be nowhere near the war. I'll be back.' "

The Sergeant
Faith in Army And Himself

John T. Boxler was one of the thousands of people in Western Pennsylvania who
lost their jobs in the 1970's when the steel mills were closing because of
competition overseas. But unlike many who gave up on the region and moved away,
he hung on, looked for work and eventually found it with the Postal Service in
Johnstown.

Such was the nature of Sergeant Boxler, a Vietnam veteran and Johnstown native
who at 44 years was the oldest member of the 14th Detachment to die in the Scud
attack.

Sergeant Boxler's family and friends described him as a gregarious man who had
"a zest to pitch in," as one colleague said, whether he was in the kitchen, at
the postal garage or at the Westmont Volunteer Fire Department in his
neighborhood.

"He wasn't the most polished guy in the world, but he'd give you the shirt off
his back," said his mother-in-law, Jane Crowley. "He must have given gallons and
gallons of blood to the Red Cross. Every eight weeks, he'd go down there."

Town Is a Shadow of Itself

Johnstown is a factory town, a place that literally grew up around steel and
iron and coal. While perhaps most famous as the scene of the calamitous flood in
1889 that killed more than 2,000 people in the Conemaugh Valley, Johnstown has
suffered quieter devastation in more recent times. There are 2,000 factory jobs
left, barely one-tenth the number here during World War I.

Sergeant Boxler lost his job in 1977, when Bethlehem Steel "downsized." He
struggled for a few years, but finally with the help of his experience as a
helicopter mechanic in Vietnam he landed a job with the post office as a vehicle
maintenance worker.

Although they both grew up in Johnstown, Elaine Boxler did not meet her future
husband until the day he came home from Vietnam, in July 1970. She said he was
proud to be in the Reserves, and when the call came to go to Saudi Arabia, he
was "raring to go."

Because of Sergeant Boxler's military experience, the Boxlers were not unduly
worried when he left. John Jr. told his mother, "Don't worry at all; Dad was in
Vietnam and he knows how to take care of himself." Mrs. Boxler remembered
thinking, "A water purification unit -- what could sound like a safer thing to
be a part of."

At 6 A.M. Wednesday, an official car pulled up with two Army reservists to the
Boxlers' tidy, two-story colonial house. One of the reservists could not stop
himself from crying when he stood at the doorway and read a statement of
condolence from the Army.

Now the Johnstown post office is draped with black bunting. But the Boxler home
is still hung with American flags and bright yellow ribbons. That was one thing,
Mrs. Boxler said with a sad smile as she walked a visitor through the house the
other night -- it had not occurred to her to take the ribbons down.

The Shy One
Seeing the World And Growing Up

For Specialist Christine L. Mayes, military service marked a coming of age.

As a teen-ager in this Pennsylvania's coal country, Ms. Mayes spent long
afternoons walking with friends down the lone street here, playing high school
softball or picking corn for spending money. She was "a good girl, but a shy
one," said neighbors and school friends. So shy that even in Rochester Mills, a
rural community of 65 families where most everyone is related by blood or
marriage, Ms. Mayes kept mostly to herself.

Until she joined the military. Like many other young people in this economically
depressed region, Ms. Mayes saw the Army as a way to help pay for the college
education that her father, a construction worker, could not afford. She enlisted
right after graduating from Marion Center Area High School in 1986 and was
shipped to Germany, where she served as a cook for three years.

When Specialist Mayes was discharged and arrived home last summer, the
honey-colored curls of a girl who had once belonged to the Future Homemakers of
America had given way to a bleached blond coiffure, triple-pierced ears and a
penchant for rap music.

"I didn't even know what rap music was," said Linda Winebark, a childhood friend
who said she did not recognize Specialist Mayes upon her return. "She went from
T-shirts and blue jeans to skirts and heels," she said. "Chris had really grown
up and become outgoing. It was like when she left here she was Christine. When
she came back, she was Chris."

Getting Ready to Settle Down

But the transition back to small-town living had been a good one, friends and
neighbors said. In June 1990, Specialist Mayes began dating David Fairbanks, of
nearby Punxsutawney, Pa., a drilling assistant whose father, Arnold, was an Army
reservist.

That fall, Specialist Mayes, her younger sister Pamela and her father, Franklin,
now unemployed, began courses at the Punxsutawney campus of Indiana University
of Pennsylvania. In October, hoping to pull in some extra family income,
Specialist Mayes joined the Reserves in Greensburg.

"She liked the service and she wanted to help Mom and Dad out," said Pamela, 19.

The weekend before she left for Saudi Arabia, Specialist Mayes, 22, and Mr.
Fairbanks became engaged, but she did not take her ring with her for fear she
would lose it.

The loss now, however, has been to Rochester Mills. Since last Wednesday, when
news of her death came, visitors loaded with food and gifts have worn a mud path
outside the modest one-story home, where a lone birch tied with tiny yellow
ribbons stands sentinel.

Pamela Mayes said the family had received cards or calls from everyone in town.
"We have even had calls from people on the answering machine who just say, 'God
bless you,' and then hang up," she said.

Sandy Pardee, the Mayeses' next door neighbor, said community members were
trying to build a memorial to Christine that would go in the village post
office.

"I'm sure this is hard for the Mayeses in their grieving, but Chris is part of
history now," said Mrs. Pardee, who offers $5 haircuts in her
garage-turned-beauty shop. "This is kind of a tribute. If Chris could look out
of the window, I know she would think it is such a gas that all of this could be
going on in such a tiny little place like Rochester Mills."

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Specialist Joseph P. Bongiorni (Associated Press); Specialist
Anthony Madison; Sgt. John T. Boxler (Associated Press); Specialist Christine L.
Mayes; A Johnstown, Pa., storefront. Thirteen reservists from the area were
killed last week in the final Scud attack of the Persian Gulf war.; A flag
flying in Rochester Mills, Pa., which, like other small cities and towns that
surround it, is mourning the deaths of residents. (Steve Kagan for The New York
Times)

Maps: Map of Pittsburgh showing location of Greensburg.; Map of Pennsylvania
showing the area of detail.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1185 words


After the War A8-12

Iraq accepted all of the allied terms, including the release of all prisoners.
After meeting with Iraq's military leaders, General Schwarzkopf said, "We are
well on our way to a lasting peace." Page A1

The generals were stark contrasts. Lieut. Gen. Sultan Hashim Ahmed wore an
unsettling grin, but General Schwarzkopf, who had just witnessed the devastation
in Kuwait, offered not even the hint of a smile. A1

Why Iraq's threat fizzled: allied strengths, enemy weaknesses A9

Global security effort thwarted terrorist attacks A11

Civil commotion is spreading in Iraq. Refugees said Iraq is facing a Shiite
Muslim uprising in Basra, and Syria and Iran reported that there had been
anti-Government protests in four southern provinces. A1

The U.N. authorizes the delivery of emergency food aid to Iraq A9

Egypt says Arabs are responsible for postwar security A10

Palestinians still praise Hussein for defying the West A10

Fighting broke out in Kuwait City as Kuwaiti soldiers blocked off Palestinian
neighborhoods. Several hundred Palestinians accused of collaborating with Iraq
were rounded up, and hundreds of weapons were seized. A9

The Emir has not yet returned, puzzling Kuwaitis A9

The long-term impact of the gulf war is far less certain than the short-term
euphoria. A victory that obliterates the lingering doubts of Vietnam may not
change the political landscape or resolve the problems at home. A1 The war has
devastated Greensburg, Pa., more than any other place in the country. Thirteen
Army reservists from the region in the foothills of the Alleghenies died in the
final Scud attack of the war. A12

New York City will hold a tickertape parade for the soldiers B1

Pilot from New Jersey is killed in noncombat crash B2

Political Memo: Dan Quayle is dwarfed by history A14

But can the U.S. make a good VCR? Although the weapons used in the war
demonstrated the nation's technical prowess, some people are asking why the
nation is falling behind Japan in cars and computer chips. A1

Retrenching after the war, the three networks must cut costs D1

International A3-7

Latvia and Estonia held plebiscites, voting overwhelmingly for independence. The
votes, similar to the one in Lithuania last month, heightened the Baltic
republics' year-old challenge to the Kremlin. A3

Yugoslavia appears to be unraveling as ethnic groups struggle for independence.
The clash between the military and Serbs in a Croatian village shows how
difficult it would be to divide the country into its parts. A3

Cambridge Journal: Who ought Oxbridge serve?  A4

More than 150 Somali refugees died when a boat carrying 700 people fleeing civil
war in Somalia ran aground off Kenya. Most of the dead were women and children
crammed into the hull of the vessel. A3

Killings of civilians by the Army is reported in Uganda A5

Lebanon warned P.L.O. guerrillas that they would no longer be allowed to mount
attacks on Israel from Lebanese territory. It was President Elias Hrawi's
strongest criticism of the Palestinians to date. A7

China's Communist drop official who fled and two ministers A6

Trade relations between the U.S. and China could worsen D1

National A13-14, B7-9

Sudafed capsules laced with cyanide have killed two people in Washington State.
A third became seriously ill. The maker of the popular 12-hour decongestant
capsules announced a nationwide recall. A1

A study of three heart attack drugs found that each is effective but that the
cheapest is the safest. The drug, streptokinase, costs $200 per treatment,
compared to $2,200 to $2,700 for T.P.A., which more doctors use. B9

A United Airlines 737 jet crashed into a neighborhood park near the airport in
Colorado Springs, killing all 25 people aboard. The plane just missed a 250-unit
apartment complex and a housing development. A14 The fight over civil rights
legislation has a different tone this year. The Bush Administration and Congress
are concentrating on discrimination against women, rather than against racial
minority members.  A14

Both of California's U.S. Senate seats will be open next year, and a full-scale,
$70 million fight for them has already begun. Democrats and Republicans hope for
what would be a poltical bonanza: a sweep. B7

A House panel questions the ability of the B-1 bomber A13

Greyhound's striking drivers say they have been forgotten B7

Regional B1-6

People are living longer with AIDS. With fewer than 30 percent of adults with
AIDS living longer than three years, survivors are constantly reminded of the
odds against them but say they can lead normal lives. A1

Donald Trump agreed to scale down his plans for a huge Upper West Side
development. If approved, the agreement would cut the project in half and
reroute the West Side Highway to allow for a waterfront park. B1

More than 40 development projects in New York City begun in the last decade are
now dead, delayed or mired.The emblems of the building boom of the 1980's are
now the emblems of today's recession.  B4

Facing the Inner Circle's satiric thrusts, Dinkins parries B3 The final fate of
The Daily News now seems to rest in the hands of a British publisher, Robert
Maxwell, who must decide in the next few days whether he can cut deals with both
the paper's owner and its unions. B1

The Daily News wouldn't cost a buyer a cent up front B2

Alexi Indris-Santana convinced many at Princeton University that he had taught
himself everything he needed to know while working as a ranch hand -- until he
was arrested on a fugitive warrant from Utah. B1

Suspect is arrested in series of rapes and robberies in Queens B3

Bronx girl is killed by gunfire in a drug disrupt B6

Crotona Journal: A priest offers a crucifix for every gun B3

Business Digest D1

SportsMonday

Baseball: Coleman ready to spark Mets C5

An inside look at Clemens C5

Yanks hope Sanderson will provide lift C5

Basketball: Syracuse tops Georgetown C1

Another twist to Knicks' season C3

Trail Blazers top Celtics C3

Duke takes A.C.C. title C4

DePaul stays in N.C.A.A. hunt C4

Column: Berkow on Lazzeri C5

Features: Sidelines C2

Question Box C4

On Your Own C9

Hockey: Rangers face choices C2

Horse Racing: Meadow Star wins races and hearts C1

Tennis: John McEnroe beats Patrick C1

Obituaries D9

Obituaries: Arthur Murray, dance teacher

Arts/Entertainment

A mask for the Madeleine C11

Theater: Tracey Ullman in "Big Love" C11

Music: "Elektra" as play and opera C11

Virtuosi Quintet C13

Dance: "Skating II" C12

Word and Image: Television's "winners" in the war C16

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

EditorialsA16

Reparations, without retribution

Schols are not families

Oliver North, overprotected?

Letters A16

William Safire: Riyadh to Jerusalem A17

Anthony Lewis: When news is a crime A17

Dov S. Zakheim: Vietnam syndrome -- it's buried in the gulf A17

Eric Alterman: No, Hussein was one of a kind A17

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: National Mood;
War Heals Wounds at Home, but Not All

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 2166 words


On the battlefield and at home, it was a victory of stunning decisiveness, like
a thunderbolt that had the potential to obliterate the two decades of doubt and
drift that began with Vietnam.

But with the fighting over, the real lessons and the long-term impact of the
Persian Gulf war -- what it says about Vietnam and about the nation itself --
are far less certain than the surge of exhilaration now surrounding it.

For the short term, the war has had a profound impact on the nation's psyche and
political landscape. To some, it culminated a struggle in which the cultural and
political ideology of the Ronald Reagan era routed its liberal critics as
decisively as the Allied forces routed Iraq's Republican Guard.

'End of the Decline'

"This is the end of the decline," said Michael Novak, director of social and
political studies for the conservative American Enterprise Institute. "This is
the decline of the declinists. The mother of all battles turned into the
daughter of disasters for the declinists. For years, people are going to cite
the lessons of the Persian Gulf."

In a radio address Saturday praising the American troops, President Bush said,
"The specter of Vietnam has been buried forever in the desert sands of the
Arabian Peninsula."

But amid such euphoria, there were warnings that a military victory, no matter
how overwhelming, against a country with an economic output the size of
Kentucky's and a population less than a third of Vietnam's does not necessarily
herald a new day.

Signs of Intolerance

There were some suggestions that the combination of jubilation over the war and
some signs of intolerance for dissent at home said as much about the
frustrations and divisions that preceded the war as the sense of power and unity
that came out of it.

"People in this country have been feeling profoundly demoralized and ovewhelmed
and if somebody presents something to them in a way that suggests this is
managable, we can do it, we can do it quick, it's a boost," said June Jordan, a
poet and professor of African-American studies at the University of California
at Berkeley. "I suggest to you it's a hit the same way that crack is, and it
doesn't last long,"

H. Ross Perot, the billionaire Texas electronics entrepreneur and investor, said
it would be tragic if the nation's pride in the success overseas diverted it
from the enormous problems at home.

"Let's put a turbine under all this euphoria and use it to clean up our problems
over here," Mr. Perot said.

"One success will not carry anybody very far," he added. "We need to put it
behind us and press forward. If we just sit around and high-five one another
over the fact that we blew the bejesus out of the Arab world, nothing but
arrogance can come out of it."

Vietnam's Lessons
How Much Might Is Right?

From the beginning of the military buildup, the confrontation in the gulf was
shadowed at every step by the ghosts of Vietnam.

For many Americans, the war banished the ghosts to a degree few people could
have hoped for. Instead of the television images of terrified American diplomats
fleeing as Saigon fell, the United States saw tearful Kuwaitis hailing Americans
as liberators.

Instead of ending in doubt and shame, this war finished with flags, yellow
ribbons and swaggering expressions of pride. The New York Post, for instance,
published a picture of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq at prayer and the
headline "ON HIS KNEES!" And radio station WRAL-FM in Raleigh, N.C., began
identifying itself as "broadcasting from the most powerful nation in the world."

For many Vietnam veterans, there was particular pride.

"A lot of people see this as a chance to right old wrongs," said Adrian
Cronauer, a communications lawyer in Washington who, as an Armed Forces Radio
announcer in Vietnam, provided the model for the Robin Williams character in the
movie "Good Morning, Vietnam."

"A lot of people are feeling vindicated," he said. "I think this will put all
the negative results of Vietnam behind us."

Which Lesson Is Right?

To Mr. Cronauer and others, the lesson of Iraq is that the nation must be
prepared to unleash whatever resources are available when it decides to take
military action.

But many experts wonder if that is the right lesson.

Gerald Linderman, a University of Michigan historian who specializes in the
effects of American wars at home, said Iraq may have shredded the mythology of
Vietnam more than the substance of Vietnam. The idea that the United States lost
in Vietnam because of a lack of will or undue restraint is simply false, he
said.

"It wasn't that power wasn't exerted in Vietnam, it was that it was unavailing,
in part because it was misdirected in that kind of war," he said. "I suspect
that no human power could have prevailed in that situation any more than it
could have prevailed in Afghanistan. To think this success renders unimportant a
previous failure, when in fact they're two entirely different species, could
lead us into serious mischief."

Many historians, including John Shy, a University of Michigan military
historian, said the peril in the war euphoria is that it could make the United
States more likely to use force again.

"Put together with Grenada, with Libya, with Panama, it seems to be the
triumphal culmination of a series of episodes in which military power was used
as an instrument of foreign policy," Professor Shy said. "I hope it does not
induce an arrogance or bully boy behavior in American foreign policy."

The World's Policeman

Others, however, say the success against Iraq will make wars less likely by
deterring aggession by others.

"When you carry a big stick, you can talk awfully quietly," said Mr. Novak. "You
can even smile."

But it is clear that if the lesson of Vietnam was a sense of the limits of
United States power, the lesson of this war is the opposite: that there are few
limits to the nation's military might. To war critics, and even to some backers
of this war, that is worrisome.

But especially after what most Americans saw as a moral war against a dangerous
despot, many are again talking about being the global enforcer.

"I'm not one of those people who believe the cliche we can't be the world's
policeman," said Richard Viguerie, the conservative direct-mail specialist.
"Well, somebody has to be the world's policeman, or else a lot of people are
going to be hurt."

Persian Gulf's Lessons
Unity Masks Deep Problems

Basking in victory, many conservatives see a transformed America, newly united
and with a new sense of confidence and resolve.

"Who can mount Desert Storm should be able to police Central Park, and who
created the Patriots should be able to handle Sony and Mercedes," said the
conservative columnist William F. Buckley Jr.

Representative Newt Gingrich, Republican of Georgia, added: "We've just seen a
21st-century army beat a 20th-century army, and I think the challenge to us is
to say, 'Let's get the rest of America into the 21st century.' "

But aside from the most ardent conservatives, there is little consensus that
victory over Iraq necessarily means improvement at home, in a country that
before the war was convulsed with self doubt, disgusted with its politicians and
unable to address gaping domestic needs.

"It's going to take more than good will to deal with our problems in education,
homelessesness, poverty, declining productivity, and we've never seen George
Bush much interested in domestic issues," said Barbara Ehrenreich, a liberal
writer and essayist. "Ticker tape isn't going to feed families. Yellow ribbons
aren't going to hold bridges up. You can't keep warm under a tent of flags."

Darker Side of Patriotism

And if the war produced expressions of unity and pride, it produced darker
undertones as well.

War opponents in many cities said they were subjected to harassment ranging from
threatening phone calls to physical abuse. Peg Mullen of Brownsville, Tex.,
whose search for the truth about her son's death in Vietnam was the subject of
the book and movie "Friendly Fire," said she received warnings her house would
burn down when she organized a busload of mothers protest in Washington. "I
didn't go through any of that in Vietnam," she said. "Then I was allowed to say
what I thought."

Others had similar experiences. The actress Margot Kidder was branded a "Baghdad
Betty" and subjected to abuse for remarks questioning the war. A Seton Hall
University basketball player, Marco Lokar, decided to return home to Italy after
being criticized for refusing to wear an American flag on his uniform.

Some say this undercurrent of unease and the still-sagging economy could
short-circuit a national celebration of the war.

Kevin Phillips, a political analyst who predicted the Republican surge over the
past two decades and who has recently begun predicting its decline, said that
without a genuine economic surge, the war euphoria may soon fade. "It's highly
unlikely you can have a genuine feel-good era coexisting with this degree of
economic concern," he said.

"If we get something else that churns up all those bad feelings again, after all
this hype, you could have some very frustrated people out there," he added. "I
think they'd be prey for politicians using some form of scapegoating. I can
imagine you could get some cultural form of that from the right and some
economic version of that from the left."

But for now, more people are struck by the political implications of the
positive mood.

The war has left President Bush with approval ratings hovering near 90 percent.
That gives him extraordinary leverage with Congress and makes him an
overwhelming re-election favorite.

Parties Gauge Their Chances

An economic reversal could alter the mood, but for now Republicans also see the
possibility of gains in the House and retaking control of the Senate.

"There's going to be a lot of Democrats, liberals, that are going to rue the day
they voted against the war and the Patriot missile," Mr. Viguerie said. "These
are recorded votes, and there are going to be a lot of 60-second commercials out
there."

Democrats see the risks too. "I think that this is the biggest event in post-
Vietnam America, and therefore we have to expect it will have a major effect on
the 1992 elections" said Michael Donilon, a poll taker for Democrats.

History's Lessons
Perils Facing The Powerful

If Vietnam was the emotional backdrop for judging the war, one book is playing
much the same role on an intellectual level.

It is "The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers" (Random House, 1987), the sweeping
study of international powers since 1500, by the Yale University historian Paul
Kennedy.

Its thesis is that throughout history, imperial powers have accelerated their
decline by diverting too much energy to military entanglements rather than
activities that are more productive economically.

In a short section at the close of the book, Professor Kennedy found the
potential for such a decline and what he termed "imperial overstretch" at work
in the United States.

Using the Wrong Measure

He said that historically, nations whose economic strength was ebbing have used
military victories, often against lesser foes, as misguided signs their power
was intact.

People who measure America's strength by the Persian Gulf War are "measuring the
wrong measure and shooting at the wrong target," he said in a telephone
interview.

"The U.S. has been pouring $300 billion a year into defense throughout the 80's,
so it was never a question of there being inadequate military power," he said.
"The argument was they were concentrating too much of their energy and resources
on defense and neglecting the state of American technical education,
infrastructure, indebtedness, high-tech competitiveness, erosion of the social
fabric and other problems. To say a swift battlefield victory proves the
declinists wrong is a total misinterpreation."

The Positive Signs

Mr. Novak and others argue that Professor Kennedy's thesis fails because he
underestimates the nation's economic strength and the broader signs of American
pre-eminence, like the collapse of Communism.

Mr. Gingrich said the military and domestic situations are not different at all;
rather, the Persian Gulf experience shows that the nation's domestic needs
require the same dramatic overhaul the military has received.

Mr. Perot, once thought of as a military hawk, now more of an iconoclast, hopes
there is humility as well as pride in the lessons of the war.

"We need to be very, very careful in how we use our power, and not get swept up
in going off to war every chance we get," he said. "We could end up with the
mind-set that says, 'Gee, we're going to see more Nintendo games on television.'
But don't count on that ever happening twice. The next one is going to be just
as much of a bloody mess as war always is close up."

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Charts: "Americans' Views of the War with Iraq" shows number of adults
who said they approved of President Bush's handling of Iraq's invasion of
Kuwait.; The percentage of people who though the war is worth the loss of life
and other costs, and whether the war would still be worth it if it cost several
thousand American troops.; The number of U.S. battle deaths the public foresaw.;
The percentage that thought involvements in Korea, Vietnam and Iraq were a
mistake or not.; "Views of Force And Sanctions" shows percentage of people who
favored military action, and favored waiting for sanctions to work. (pg. A11)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

DIALOGUE: The Gulf War's Aftermath
Is the Vietnam Syndrom Dead?;
Happily, It's Buried In the Gulf

BYLINE: By Dov S. Zakheim; Dov S. Zakheim was a Deputy Under Secretary of
Defense in both Reagan Administrations.

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 604 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va.


Not everyone is happy with the outcome of the war. One need not impugn their
patriotism or suggest they were rooting for Iraq to say that many
unreconstructed liberals regret the disappearance of the Vietnam syndrome -- a
reluctance to engage in any overseas military operations and to provide the
wherewithal to do so.

Those who espouse "political correctness" must feel beleaguered when reading
poll results that reflect President Bush's soaring popularity as well as hearty
support for Operation Desert Storm. These liberals have overlooked a decade of
increasing conservatism in the electorate's attitude toward the management of
national security affairs -- conservatism that presaged the exorcism of the
Vietnam syndrome.

One of the most noteworthy features of the Reagan revolution was its appeal to
young voters. They included members of the Woodstock generation, some of whom
had never strongly opposed the Vietnam War, and others who abandoned ideological
blinders on defense matters as they put college days behind them.

The Reagan Administration was hospitable to numerous officials who had not
reached the age of 40 when they held senior national security policy positions.
For them, the Vietnam syndrome already was anachronistic.

During the Reagan years, students began developing far more practical, less
jaundiced views of national security issues than those held by many of their
thirtysomething professors. Like all students at all times, they displayed a
healthy skepticism about the wisdom of certain programs and policies. But unlike
the preceding college generation, theirs balanced skepticism with a general
sense of support for strong national defense.

Then, as now, many academics bore an old grudge against the Pentagon, no doubt
largely nurtured by memories of their salad days in the antiwar movement. Their
automatic conjuring of old scores and scars in response to new issues eerily
reflected the authoritarian mindset they so vociferously said they opposed.

It is not surprising that they and others of a similar bent have had difficulty
coming to terms with the Bush Administration's successful policies in the gulf
and the public's approval of those policies.

Overwhelming support for the Administration's management of the war effort has
not merely been a matter of reflexive jingoism. The gulf war differed from the
Vietnam War in fundamental ways.

First, for Americans, Saddam Hussein is a clear-cut "bad guy." While many
applauded Ho Chi Minh as a nationalist leader who, even before the Americans
arrived, had fought to liberate his homeland, no responsible American considers
Mr. Hussein anything other than a thug.

Second, the troops in the gulf volunteered to serve; even reservists, whatever
their additional motives, recognized their duty to fight when they signed up. In
addition, there was no specter of a draft and of involuntary service in a
hostile far-off land to haunt young Americans.

Third, casualties were remarkably low, as a direct result of the Reagan and Bush
Administrations' trust in their military planners and in the performance of
high-tech weapons.

If liberals, who mistrust the military, had had their way wholly, they would
have killed most of the programs that developed weapons that were so successful
on the battlefield, including the Patriot missile, Stealth fighter and the
Apache helicopter.

Fortunately, the Vietnam syndrome lies buried in the Persian Gulf. And with
increased public awareness that the expression of our national values can take
military form, it is unlikely to rise from its grave in the foreseeable future.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

DIALOGUE: The Gulf War's Aftermath
Is the Vietnam Syndrome Dead?;
No, Hussein Was One of a Kind

BYLINE: By Eric Alterman; Eric Alterman, a senior fellow at the World Policy
Institute, is writing a book about political pundits.

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 759 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


All right, so the peaceniks were wrong about one thing. There will be no tens of
thousands of body bags coming home and thus no popular reaction of revulsion and
horror against the Persian Gulf war. President Bush's popularity ratings are off
the charts and even the most hawkish of "pro-sanctions" Democrats are running
for cover, musing about 1996. Politically and militarily, Operation Desert Storm
is a rout.

But does this mean, as many try to claim, that America has finally exorcised the
ghost of Vietnam? The question itself implies a misunderstanding of the
underlying factors that created the Vietnam syndrome.

Although neo-conservatives sneered at the "culture of appeasement" it allegedly
bespoke, the nation's reluctance to involve itself directly in the wars of the
1980's represented a lasting and significant confluence of thinking between
military leaders and the American citizenry.

Following Vietnam, the military saw itself nearly destroyed by fighting an
inconclusive, unpopular and probably illegal war. That trauma instilled in it an
unshakable respect for the Clausewitzian dictums that wars should be undertaken
only on behalf of what former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger called
"clearly defined objectives" and only "with the reasonable assurance" that they
would enjoy "the support of the American people and their elected
representatives in Congress."

Our brass learned to read polling data as effectively as they did battlefield
intelligence. They were hardly eager to see their precious resources, military
or political, squandered in a war that lacked overwhelming support, had no clear
definition of victory and offered plenty of jungles and mountains conducive to a
long drawn-out guerrilla campaign.

From Vietnam, Americans learned the cost of blind obeisance to their leaders.
Though "Nicaragua" may not be a perfect Spanish translation for "Vietnam," it
sounded sufficiently similar to American ears to prevent a rerun of our tragic
sideshow in that decidedly unvital part of the world. Ronald Reagan used every
trick in his great communicator's bag to convince Americans that the conflicts
in Central America merited a direct U.S. military response. But the opinion
polls always came back, "No thanks."

So, are we really ready to get back into the war fighting business?

To answer in the affirmative, one must be confident that the U.S. is likely to
find a villain as convincingly evil as Saddam Hussein; victims as unarguably
aggrieved as the Kuwaitis; threatened resources as "vital" to our way of life as
petroleum; an enemy as vulnerable to U.S. military doctrine as was the Iraqi
Army.

None of these conditions is likely to be reproduced anytime soon. It's not that
Saddam Hussein, as President Bush has tried to argue, is uniquely evil. Our
erstwhile gulf ally, Hafez al-Assad of Syria, gives him more than a run for his
money on that score. It's that Mr. Hussein provided a unique combination of evil
and stupidity.

He not only invaded a country that supplies oil to the entire Western world but
he threatened our regional allies as well. Moreover, he did so on a terrain that
left his soldiers no place to hide in exactly the kind of orthodox land war that
NATO has been planning for 40 years.

Is there anybody out there nasty and stupid enough to try that again?

In the Philippines, the New Peoples Army may be unpleasant fellows, but they are
smart enough to conduct their war on an island archipelago. In Peru, the Shining
Path guerrillas have jungles and mountains on their side. Neither one sits on
any oil. In China, Deng Xiaoping had the good sense to bond with George Bush
before conducting his terror campaign.

Most of the world's potential military conflicts, from Slovenia to East
Jerusalem, have their roots in ancient ethnic, political and economic legacies.
These are exactly the kinds of morally and militarily complicated interventions
that the nation has forsworn as unwinnable and unworth it.

The cold war is history, with the Soviets fighting exclusively among themselves.
The new world order is a pipe dream. So given all these caveats, just who is it
that Americans should prepare to fight? Vanessa Redgrave?

Despite the cheerleading of our armchair infantrymen, the Vietnam syndrome
remains in place. Saddam Hussein is a one-of-a-kind bad guy. Now, if only our
real long-term threats -- weakening productivity, a deteriorating environment,
collapsing infrastructure and third-rate education system -- provided such
spectacular television visuals.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 5, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Senior Vietnamese Criticizes Hanoi's Leaders

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 417 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 4


A second senior and widely admired Vietnamese intellectual has criticized the
leadership in Hanoi, calling for individual freedoms, younger leaders and
changes in the system.

Nguyen Khac Vien, 78 years old and one of Vietnam's best-known historians,
submitted a petition to a party meeting in January that described the current
leadership as "totally impotent, plunging the country into disorder and
preventing all development."

Mr. Vien's petition recently circulated in Paris, where a copy was obtained by
Agence France-Presse.

In the petition, Mr. Vien said that the Communist Party should loosen its hold
on the state, from which it is now inseparable, and should provide "freedom of
the press and of thought, and freedom of association," as well as the right to
demonstrate and strike.

The Politburo and party Secretariat "do not understand that many comrades are
too old, physically inept and incapable of following the changing times," Mr.
Vien wrote.

"Unless a set of broad-based rules for democracy are drawn up and implemented,
the country will never be able to stand alone and compete with its neighboring
countries," he wrote.

He did not, however, call for a multiparty system in Vietnam, which the
leadership has consistently rejected.

Educated in France, Mr. Vien was director of Hanoi's Foreign Languages
Publishing House and of Vietnamese Studies, a review founded in 1964 and
translated into English and French. He has written such books as "Contemporary
Vietnam" and "The History of Vietnam," as well as introductions to anthologies
of Vietnamese literature published for foreigners.

Now retired and living in Ho Chi Minh City, Mr. Vien's criticism is notable
because it comes while he is still living in Vietnam. In December, Bui Tin,
deputy editor of the official newspaper, Nhan Dan, made less precise criticisms
in a petition he issued after leaving Vietnam and taking up residence in Paris.

In his petition, Mr. Tin urged the Hanoi leadership to give up "great utopian
illusions" of an ill-defined socialist society and instead to concentrate on
national reconciliation and economic development. "It is time to build a
democratic system based on the people," Mr. Tin said.

Mr. Tin's petition created a stir, in part because it was he who accepted the
surrender of the South Vietnamese Government at the Presidential Palace in
Saigon on April 30, 1975. But his decision to criticize from abroad allowed the
Vietnamese leadership to dismiss it more easily.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 5, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: PENTAGON BRIEFER;
General Gives His Last Briefing for Reporters

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 540 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 4


After briefing the press and millions of Americans on the progress of wars in
Panama and the Persian Gulf, Lieut. Gen. Thomas William Kelly, director of
operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, announced at the Pentagon today that
he was making his last appearance before television cameras and reporters.

"I'd just like to say that believe it or not, I've enjoyed this little
interlude," the 58-year-old general said.

General Kelly, who is to retire on Friday after 33 years of military service,
was a key figure in carrying out a stringent information policy on the gulf war.
Pentagon officials defended the policy as necessary to protect American forces
in the field, but news executives criticized it as needlessly restrictive and
often self-serving.

Known for his jowly delivery of military dictums mixed with flashes of wit,
General Kelly presided over the Washington end of the daily information
briefings on the war to news representatives whose variety of background and
experience generated a debate of sorts on the quality of war coverage.

"I can tell you I got about 1,000 letters, and 95 percent of the people said 'We
feel we're being told everything we need to know.' " He added later, "None of
those letters was supportive of the press."

General Kelly said that while he has no complaint about news organizations over
all, he was at times surprised by the extent to which some reporters expected
him to reveal information that might affect the security of United States
forces.

"Some people who came to our briefings were not very experienced," he said,
recalling one reporter who asked "what our plan of maneuver was" on the
battlefield.

"I think the press needs to take a step back and reflect on how they cover
things," General Kelly said, adding that in World War II, "the security of the
force was absolutely accepted by all those correspondents covering the war,
including Ernie Pyle."

With a touch of hyberbole, General Kelly delivered a series of mini-lectures on
military doctrine that are not likely to show up in the kind of textbooks he
studied in stints at the Army War College and the General Staff College.

'Delightful Way to Kill a Fly'

Asked in one session whether sending B-52 bombers to attack a single Scud
missile site was not like killing a fly with a sledge hammer, he replied, "My
own personal opinion is that's a delightful way to kill a fly."

General Kelly said that he had not had time to look for a post-retirement
profession, but that he planned to stay in the Washington area. He ruled out
working for a defense contractor.

Though his last three tours have been in Washington, General Kelly is not
without combat experience. He trained as a tank commander at Fort Knox, Ky., and
served two tours in Vietnam, where one unit he commanded suffered 90 percent
casualties in the Tet offensive and where four helicopters he flew in were
forced down under enemy fire.

He chose the Army in a last-minute diversion from a career in journalism, in
which he holds a bachelor of science degree from Temple University. "I come from
a newspaper family," he said in an interview today. "My father, my grandfather,
my uncle and my mother all worked at The Philadelphia Inquirer."

NAME: Thomas W. Kelly

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Believe it or not, I've enjoyed this little interlude," said
Lieut. Gen. Thomas W. Kelly, who conducted press briefings at the Pentagon on
the Persian Gulf war. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A New Car for Malaysia, New Influence for Japan

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1776 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia


In the early 1980's, the Prime Minister of Malaysia set a goal that most
developing nations would never attempt: to build a national car that would put
Malaysians on the move and spur the industrialization of a country known mostly
for its rubber plantations and tin mines.

No one in Malaysia had ever built a car before, and the project nearly died.
Then, three years ago, the Malaysian managers were dismissed and the country
called in a team of Japanese led by a no-nonsense production engineer from
Mitsubishi.

Today, Japan's mark is hard to miss. At rush hour each morning, swarms of
identical models of Southeast Asia's first native car, the four-door compact
Proton Saga, jam Kuala Lumpur's streets. On the long road up to the Cameron
Highlands it is not uncommon to see Protons, with their signature Malaysian flag
on the hood ornament, being inspected by tribesmen who walk along the road with
the long blowguns they still use for hunting.

The Proton is a symbol not just of the speed with which countries like Malaysia
are trying to replicate the industrial booms of South Korea, Taiwan and
Singapore, but also of how Japan has gradually tranformed itself into the single
most important element in the region's economy. The strategy reaches well beyond
Malaysia and is part of Tokyo's industrial plan for turning much of Southeast
Asia into Japan's manufacturing backyard.

Indeed, Japan's economic embrace of this region has gone virtually unchallenged.
While American oil companies are active here and many American high-tech
companies run assembly operations in Singapore and on Malaysia's west coast,
most American companies that left the region during the Vietnam War never
returned.

Japanese executives hope the lure of Eastern Europe will distract their American
and European competitors. After five years of intense investments, Japan's
economic reach through the area is nearly all-encompassing, challenged only by a
recent investment spurt from other Asian countries, particularly Taiwan.

The Japanese strategy is to play an unobtrusive but commanding role, trying to
stay as inconspicuous as possible in a country that it invaded just 50 years
ago. The Proton is perhaps the best example of that effort -- and its success.

Biggest Industry in Malaysia

In return for their technology and expertise, Mitsubishi Motors and the leader
of its huge industrial group, the Mitsubishi Corporation, own nearly a third of
the Proton, which is now Malaysia's biggest industrial enterprise. They have
taken hundreds of eager workers who grew up amid Malaysia's lush hill country
and tea plantations, shipped them to Japan for six months and sent them back to
lecture on the wonders of quality circles and just-in-time manufacturing.

Taking a page from Japan's own post-World War II industrial history, Malaysian
officials have set up a series of tax incentives and trade barriers that make
buying a $10,000 Proton the most affordable choice for the top slice of
Malaysian consumers who buy cars. Mitsubishi's network of auto suppliers, who
know a sure bet when they see one, are setting up joint ventures with local
companies.

As a result, two of every three cars sold in Malaysia last year were Protons.
(The others tend to be small Japanese imports, primarily Toyotas and Nissans,
and a few Mercedes.) And in true Japanese fashion, Malaysia barely got the hang
of stamping body parts before it started exporting. Already, more than 20,000
Protons -- minus the flag on the hood -- have been sold in Britain, once
Malaysia's colonial ruler. The buyers are not attracted to the Proton by luxury
-- it is drawn from Mitsubishi designs that date from the mid-1980's, with seats
that are a bit cramped and a roof that is a little too low -- but rather by its
relatively low price and its Japanese quality.

'The Natural Choice'

"Obviously this is not the kind of industry we could build ourselves," said
Rafidah Aziz, Malaysia's Minister of International Trade and Industry. "Turning
to the Japanese was really the natural choice."

The Japanese presence is most evident here and in Thailand, Tokyo's main
manufacturing outposts. The outskirts of Bangkok and Kuala Lumpur are dotted
with factories producing Japanese-brand refrigerators, auto parts, television
tubes and computer components.

The factories free Japan's highly paid workers to concentrate on manufacturing
much higher-tech, higher-value-added goods, Japanese industrialists say, and
they serve a political purpose as well: goods shipped abroad from those foreign
factories are not counted in Japan's trade surplus.

Heavy Foreign Investment

Last year alone, Japan received approval from the Malaysian Government for $1.5
billion in manufacturing investments in Malaysia, seven times that of the United
States. Taiwan invested even more, $2.3 billion. The results are beginning to
show: Malaysia seems likely to overtake Japan soon as the world's No. 1 exporter
of room air-conditioners, chiefly because the Matsushita Electric Industrial
Company is producing 800,000 cars a year here and plans to increase that level
soon.

As Thai and Malaysian labor costs rise, Japanese businesses are scrambling for
access to Indochina, especially poverty-stricken countries like Vietnam. Like
the United States, the Japanese Government banned aid to Vietnam after its
occupation of Cambodia 12 years ago, but Japan never joined the American ban on
commercial ties.

Expecting 'More Thailands'

Though they complain that progress in Vietnam is often stop and go, Japanese
trading houses are already positioning themselves to swap consumer goods for
Vietnamese oil and timber, and they are dangling the lure of factories in front
of a Communist Government desperate for hard currency.

"These markets look small, so America decides they are not worth the trouble," a
senior executive of one of Japan's biggest trading houses said. "That's how you
missed Thailand. And 10 years from now, there will be more Thailands."

In part, Japan has been successful in Southeast Asia because its companies are
willing to tread lightly. Unlike many American competitors, the Japanese do not
insist on majority ownership. They seem less fazed by occasional political
instability, shrugging their shoulders at the bloodless military coup in
Thailand a week ago. In most cases they exert careful control by placing
Japanese in the top management posts and carefully doling out technology.

Difficulty in Proton's Beginning

The Proton is a prime example. When Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad first
approached Mitsubishi, he hoped the project would become an element of his
long-range plans for a steady industrial buildup led by the country's Malayan
majority. While the Malayans hold the political power in the country, the
economic scene has long been dominated by the ethnic Chinese, who account for a
third of the population. So at first Mitsubishi held back and let Mr. Mahathir
put Malayans in charge of the plant.

No sooner had Mitsubishi moved in the equipment -- giant presses and the
assembly line -- than the project began to run aground. Production began in the
middle of a recession, and for the first three years the plant turned out less
than a third of the 80,000 cars it was intended to build each year. Last year it
produced slightly more than 80,000, and in 1993 it hopes to turn out more than
120,000.

Thailand and Indonesia, highly protective of their own fledgling automobile
industries, refused to import the Proton. Quality was mediocre, at best. Crucial
parts had to be imported from Japan. And the factory itself was a mess. "It had
all the right equipment," said one Malaysian supervisor, "and no one in charge
who knew how to use it."

Eventually Mr. Mahathir did just what Mitsubishi expected: He turned to them to
provide management. "I think that even if we had been here from the start, we
would have had big problems," said Kenji Iwabuchi, Proton's managing director,
who is on loan from Mitsubishi Motors. "But the car was not yet of Japanese
quality."

Gathering at 8:30 A.M.

Mr. Iwabuchi and his team of Japanese managers started what he called the
"morning market," a gathering at the plant at 8:30 A.M. to pore over the
previous day's problems. Robots were installed to improve the quality of
welding. Malaysian employees started to show up for Japanese-language classes.
In a few months they will begin machining their own engine parts.

The car has already won some overseas awards, and the Proton has begun to make
money. Last year it introduced a peppier model with a bigger engine, and there
is talk about taking the company public.

And Mr. Mahathir, better known in Asia for his harsh dealings with political
opponents, is creating an image as a car designer and marketer. His sayings are
posted on the factory floor. Meetings on how to design the next model --
something a little more fashionable, a little faster, a little more Malayan --
are often held in his office.

"The Prime Minister has some strong views; a few weeks ago, he wanted a new
shape for the steering wheel," Mr. Iwabuchi said, in a tone that suggested that
the steering wheel was about to change shape.

Whether Mr. Mahathir is meeting his social goals, however, is an open question.
While 67 percent of the car is now domestically produced, only a fraction of
that work goes to the "bumiputera," the native Malays. The Government is giving
grants and other advantages to small bumiputeras -- increasing tension with the
Chinese community -- but success is slow.

Dependence and Good Will

And the company seems so dependent on its Japanese managers that many doubt they
can be replaced.

"Eventually, this has to be Malaysian-spearheaded," Mrs. Rafidah, the Trade
Minister, said. "It will not be run by Mitsubishi forever." The Government will
not extend tax breaks indefinitely, she said, and recently it decided to let
other makers sell cars that compete with the Proton.

But for now, the Proton has done exactly what Japanese officials hoped for: It
made Japanese industry an integral part of one of the world's fastest-growing
economies, with minimal risk. It is the first step, some Japanese say, to a de
facto trade grouping, in which different Southeast Asian nations specialize in
technologies that will feed Japan's biggest industrial giants.

And it is building up a lot of good will for the Japanese, who may need it next
winter. That is the 50th anniversary of Japan's invasion and occupation of
Malaysia during World War II, an anniversary neither Government is likely to
mark too loudly.

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kenji Iwabuchi, foreground, who was hired three years ago by
Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad of Malaysia to lead the team of Japanese who
developed Southeast Asia's first native car, the Proton Saga. (David E.
Sanger/The New York Times) (pg. D6)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Lemuel Tucker, TV Correspondent, 52

SECTION: Section B; Page 10; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 149 words


Lemuel Tucker, a radio and television reporter and correspondent who served with
all three major broadcast networks -- NBC, ABC and CBS -- died on Saturday at
the Washington Home and Hospice. He was 52 years old and lived in Washington.

He died of liver failure, said CBS News, where he had worked since 1977. Mr.
Tucker, who was known on air as Lem, had been on disability leave from the
network since November 1988.

Mr. Tucker, one of the first black journalists to become a correspondent for a
major television network, joined NBC as a page in 1965 and was an assistant
bureau chief in Vietnam. He moved to WOR-TV in New York in 1970 and was with ABC
News from 1972 to 1977. He won two Emmy Awards for excellence in television
reporting.

He was born in Saginaw, Mich., and was a gradaute of Central Michigan
University.

He is survived by his wife, the former Renay Rosenblum.


LOAD-DATE: March 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: THE WHITE HOUSE;
BUSH, URGING WIDER PEACE, HINTS AT PRESSURE ON ISRAEL TO YIELD LAND FOR SECURITY

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2284 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 6


President Bush said tonight that he would immediately begin bringing American
troops home from the Persian Gulf. But he pledged to maintain a strong
diplomatic presence in the Middle East and to redouble efforts to solve the
stubborn Arab-Israeli conflict.

"Our commitment to peace in the Middle East does not end with the liberation of
Kuwait," Mr. Bush told a joint session of Congress, adding to applause: "The
time has come to put an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict."

In remarks almost certain to be perceived by Israel as a signal that he intends
to seek important concessions from its Government, Mr. Bush re-emphasized
longstanding American policy that Israel must trade territory that it seized
during wars with its Arab neighbors in exchange for peace and secure borders.

3-Minute Ovation

The President was welcomed by a three-minute ovation from lawmakers, who wore
yellow ribbons in their lapels, waved small American flags and chanted his name.
The Speaker of the House, Representative Thomas S. Foley, Democrat of
Washington, introduced Mr. Bush by giving him "our warmest congratulations on
the brilliant victory of the Desert Storm operation."

Mr. Bush, looking quietly pleased and at moments emotional, basked in the
atmosphere of triumph, which produced cheers at his every mention of the
military.. The enthusiastic response seemed more typical of a political
convention than a joint session.

While the evening was not supposed to be a partisan occasion, many Republicans
wore yellow buttons that said "I voted with the President," referring to the
January vote in which Congress authorized the use of force in the Persian Gulf.

In his pledge to seek long-term solutions, the President said that efforts
should be made "to close the gap between Israel and the Arab states -- and
between Israel and Palestinians."

Mr. Bush said, "By now, it should be plain to all parties that peacemaking in
the Middle East requires compromise," [Transcript, page A8.]

Baker Mission to Mideast

Coming on the eve of the departure of Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d for
the Middle East, Mr. Bush's remarks seemed likely be viewed in Israel as an
appeal to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir to make territorial concessions to the
Palestinians.

But the address also clearly signaled to Arab leaders that Washington will
encourage them to deal directly with Israel, and to move toward formal
recognition of Israel and its sovereignty. Mr. Bush did not mention any specific
plans, and he left it unclear what solution he envisaged to the Palestinian
problem.

Palestinians have generally sought an independent nation carved out of the
occupied West Bank of the Jordan and the Gaza Strip, or at the minimum, an
autonomous homeland somehow linked to Jordan.

In calling for bolder steps to end the enmity in the Middle East, Mr. Bush's
comments seemed to mark a departure from the more incremental diplomacy the
Administration has pursued in the region.

U.N. Resolutions Cited

He cited United Nations Security Council Resolution 242 of November 1967, which
called on Israel to give up unspecified amounts of territory it had captured
during the June 1967 war in return for recognition by the Arab countries of its
borders.

He also cited Security Council Resolution 338 of October 1973, which was
approved after the war of that month and called for negotiations between Israel
and the Arabs.

Israel did return Sinai, which it had captured from Egypt, as part of the
Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty of 1979, but it has generally refused to give the
Golan Heights back to Syria or the West Bank to Jordan. Arab nations have
refused to sign peace treaties with Israel unless all the occupied land was
returned. The situation has been complicated by the Palestinian campaign for a
state or homeland.

In the nationally televised speech, Mr. Bush promised that he would not back
away from America's difficult new responsibilities in a region left roiling and
recast by the Persian Gulf war.

Savoring U.S. Victory

The speech, capping a half-year of extraordinary diplomatic and military
maneuvers that put the nation on an emotional roller-coaster, was a time for the
President to savor the nearly unanimous accolades for his skill in cementing a
disparate coalition and conducting a swift and victorious war.

After resisting the national ebullience that followed the cease-fire, saying he
wanted to stay apart from the heady mood until he could tell the American people
that the last "t" was crossed and "i" was dotted, Mr. Bush finally declared
victory.

"As Commander in Chief, I can report to you: Our armed forces fought with honor
and valor," he said. "As President, I can report to the nation: Aggression is
defeated. The war is over."

The applause was also fervid as the President thanked his commanders, Defense
Secretary Dick Cheney, Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, and Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the field commander of American forces.
Mr. Cheney and General Powell attended the session.

Mr. Bush said he had directed Mr. Cheney to begin the immediate return of
American combat units from the gulf.

'A Steady Flow' Homeward

"Less than two hours from now, the first planeload of American soldiers will
lift off from Saudi Arabia headed for the U.S.A.," he said. "It will carry men
and women of the 24th Mechanized Infantry Division bound for Fort Stewart, Ga.
This is just the beginning of a steady flow of American troops coming home."

Just after midnight Eastern time, the first troops boarded planes bound for the
United States, military officials in Saudi Arabia said. The infantry division
contains about 30,000 troops, about 700 of whom are scheduled to return this
week, they said.

The Administration's inclination seems to be to speed up the withdrawal of
American troops, because they could be a lightning rod for anti-American
sentiment in the region and because the President had promised to bring the
troops home as soon as he could.

Saudi Arabia and Kuwait have indicated that they would prefer to see a large
contingent of American ground forces remain in the region at least for the
better part of the year, but Mr. Bush is eager to fulfill his pledge that the
war was not an excuse to install a permanent, large American ground force in the
area.

He outlined his plan for "the world after war" that he will refine in a series
of meetings with allied leaders next week.

'Darker Side of Human Nature'

"Our uncommon coalition must now work in common purpose to forge a future that
should never again be held hostage to the darker side of human nature," he said.

Tonight, Mr. Bush allowed himself to gloat just a little, as he basked in the
bipartisan applause and the national joy at the outcome of the war.

Once again underscoring that the country has "kicked the Vietnam syndrome," as
he put it last week, the President even proposed a special holiday within a
holiday to thank the troops.

"I ask every community in this country to make this coming Fourth of July a day
of special celebration for our returning troops," he said. "They may have missed
Thanksgiving and Christmas, but I can tell you this: For them and for their
families, we can make this a holiday they'll never forget.

"In a very real sense, this victory belongs to them -- to the privates and the
pilots, to the sergeants and the supply officers, to the men and women in the
machines, and the men and women who made them work."

Mr. Bush had been invited to Capitol Hill tonight for a celebration; politicians
here wanted to capture and promote the feeling that the nation had moved beyond
the gloomy sense of America's decline as a world and economic power, as well as
years stained by political scandal and marred Presidencies.

"Tonight in Iraq, Saddam walks amidst ruin," Mr. Bush said, referring to Saddam
Hussein, the Iraqi President. "His war machine is crushed. His ability to
threaten mass destruction is itself destroyed. His people have been lied to,
denied the truth. And when his defeated legions come home, all Iraqis will see
and feel the havoc he has wrought."

The President made it clear that he had not yet finished his bout with Mr.
Hussein, when he said: "And this I promise you: For all that Saddam has done to
his own people, to the Kuwaitis, and to the entire world, Saddam and those
around him are accountable."

Mr. Bush seemed to acknowledge that, now that he had acted so decisively and
effectively abroad, he faced new expectations at home. He said he hoped that
same sense of "mission" and "duty" would help America deal with its domestic
problems.

"In the war just ended, there were clear-cut objectives, timetables and, above
all, an overriding imperative to achieve results," he said. "We must bring that
same sense of self-discipline, that same sense of urgency, to the way we meet
challenges here at home.

"Our first priority is to get this economy rolling again," Mr. Bush said. He
called on Congress to act quickly on proposals on transportation and crime.

"If our forces could win the ground war in 100 hours, then surely Congress can
pass this legislation in 100 days," Mr. Bush said, but the speech lacked any
specific new proposals.

Unease on Economy

The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll indicated strong public eagerness for
Mr. Bush to shift his focus to the domestic economy. Sixty-one percent said he
"should be paying more attention to the economy" now than he had been, while 32
percent said he had already been paying enough attention.

While Mr. Bush has been preoccupied with the Kuwait crisis, domestic problems
have worsened. The number of jobless workers has increased by 700,000, to 7.7
million, since Aug. 2. The number of people receiving welfare and food stamps
has risen sharply.

Republicans have been prodding President Bush to capitalize on his success in
the Persian Gulf war by moving boldly on domestic issues, but they fear he may
squander what they see as a rare opportunity.

Administration Domestic Agenda

The President emphasized the need for new attention to the domestic situation,
and recapitulated legislative proposals the Administration has already put
forth.

These included grants to local school boards to encourage programs that help
give parents the choice of sending their children to private or parochial
schools; an energy plan that focuses on the Administration's interest in
allowing additional oil exploration on Alaska's North Slope; a civil rights bill
that has been the center of an angry battle between the White House and civil
rights groups; a crime program that includes increased penalties for repeat
offenders who use guns, and a new highway bill.

Many members of Congress have argued that Mr. Bush's agenda is unimaginative and
meager. These legislators contend that civil rights and social welfare
legislation are needed in the nation to which members of the armed forces will
return. Often, they quote Lloyd George, the British Prime Minister at the end of
World War I, who said that he wanted to make Britain "a fit country for heroes
to live in."

'Four Key Challenges'

Mr. Bush outlined what he called "the four key challenges" that needed to be met
in the Middle East.

He said the allied coalition must work together "to create shared security
arrangements in the region."

"Our friends and allies in the Middle East recognize that they will bear the
bulk of the responsibility for regional security," he said.

Working to secure the peace in the region, he said, "does not mean stationing
U.S. ground forces on the Arabian Peninsula, but it does mean American
participation in joint exercises involving both air and ground forces. And it
means maintaining a capable U.S. naval presence in the region, just as we have
for over 40 years."

Second, he said, the allies must act to control the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and missiles in the region. "It would be tragic now, in the wake of war,
to embark on a new arms race," he said. "Until Iraq convinces the world of its
peaceful intentions -- that its leaders will not use new revenues to rearm and
rebuild its menacing war machine -- Iraq must not have access to the instruments
of war."

Arab-Israeli Conflict

Third, he said, America must pursue new opportunities for peace in the
Arab-Israeli conflict.

"All of us know the depth of bitterness that has made the dispute between Israel
and its neighbors so painful and intractable," he said. "Yet, in the conflict
just concluded, Israel and many of the Arab states have for the first time found
themselves confronting the same aggressor.

"By now, it should be plain to all parties that peacemaking in the Middle East
requires compromise," he said, adding that there must be "legitimate Palestinian
political rights."

Finally, Mr. Bush said, "We must foster economic development for the sake of
peace and progress."

                             --------------------


U.S. Withdrawal Plans

WASHINGTON, March 6 (AP) -- The Pentagon said tonight that 7,168 American
servicemen and women would begin the initial withdrawal of American forces from
the Persian Gulf, arriving at their home bases on Friday and Saturday.

Over all, the earliest redeployments will total more than 14,000 troops: 7,386
Army, the Air Force 1,854, the Navy 2,177 and the Marines 2,900.

In addition to the contingent from the 24th Mechanized Infantry Division, some
900 troops from the 82nd Airborne Division, and detachments from the 2d Armored
Division and the 197th Separate Brigade will be among the first soldiers coming
back to the United States, officials said.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush being applauded by members of Congress yesterday
after delivering a speech to a joint session of Congress (Paul Hosefros/The New
York Times) (pg. A1); President Bush receiving applause from Congress on the
floor of the House yesterday before his address. (Paul Hosefros/The New York
Times) (pg. A9)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

How Many Suicides by Vietnam Vets?

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 314 words


To the Editor:

Although the case Tom Brokaw cites in "Michael Creamer, a Casualty of Two Wars"
(Op-Ed, Feb. 18) is tragic, a study of suicides among Vietnam veterans would be
in order.

"Postservice Mortality Among Vietnam Veterans," a Centers for Disease Control
study (Journal of the American Medical Association, Feb. 13, 1987, pages
790-95), indicated 1.7 suicides among Vietnam veterans for every one suicide by
non-Vietnam veterans for the first five years after discharge. Beyond five
years, there were fewer suicides in the Vietnam veterans' group than in the non-
Vietnam veterans' group.

"Proportionate Mortality Study of U.S. Army and U.S. Marine Corps Veterans of
the Vietnam War" by Breslan, Kang, Lee and others (Journal of Occupational
Medicine, May 1988, pages 412-19) found that suicides were not higher among
Vietnam veterans compared with non-Vietnam veterans.

Suicides among Vietnam veterans have been said to be 50,000 to 100,000. At any
time during the Vietnam conflict, there were 37 million males aged 18 through
35. Of this group approximately 2.6 million served in Vietnam. Of the entire 37
million male population there have been approximately 152,000 suicides.

If 50,000 to 100,000 Vietnam veterans commited suicide, that would mean that
between one-third and two-thirds of all the suicides in the 37 million
population came from the 2.6 million subgroup. There is no factual evidence to
support this assertion.

The best estimate of suicide among Vietnam veterans, from the Centers for
Disease Control in 1988 Congressional testimony, is 9,000.

As a Vietnam veteran who regularly visits veterans' hospitals, I fully
understand how war wounds the mind as well as the body. However, the problem of
veterans of all wars should be considered without sensationalism, and not to
make political points.

BERNARD A. HEENEY
Bayonne, N.J., Feb. 20, 1991

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Nguyen Van Hieu, 68, A Founder of Vietcong

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 225 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, March 7


Nguyen Van Hieu, a founder of the Vietcong and a negotiator at the Paris peace
talks during the Vietnam War, died on Wednesday, the official Vietnam News
Agency reported today. He was 68 years old.

The press agency said Mr. Hieu died in Ho Chi Minh City, called Saigon when it
was the capital of the United States-backed South Vietnam. The cause of death
was not given.

At the time of his death, Mr. Hieu was president of the Vietnam-France
Friendship Association and a leading member of the Fatherland Front, sponsored
by the ruling Communist Party.

He was general secretary of the Central Committee of the National Front for
Liberation of South Vietnam in 1960, its founding year.

North Vietnam established the front, better known as the Vietcong, to gather
local opposition to the South Vietnamese Government and to buttress Hanoi's
claim that it was not violating a Geneva agreement by sending forces to the
south.

In 1973, Mr. Hieu was a minister in the Provisional Revolutionary Government
that the insurgents had set up four years earlier, and he headed the provisional
government's delegation to the Paris conference that negotiated an American
withdrawal from the conflict.

After Vietnam was reunited with the fall of the South Vietnamese Government, Mr.
Hieu was a deputy in the National Assembly and Minister of Culture.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: The Bombers;
B-52 Crews in England Tell of High-Altitude Strikes on Iraqi Targets

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 779 words

DATELINE: FAIRFORD, England, March 7


American B-52 pilots and crew members who flew combat missions from here during
the war with Iraq said today that their eight-engine planes had dodged
surface-to-air missiles and heavy anti-aircraft fire to strike nuclear plants,
Scud missile sites and Republican Guard units.

None of the planes flying from Fairford were hit by Iraqi fire, officers of the
806th Provisional Bombardment Wing said, partly because of a change in tactics
early in the war.

"We rediscovered high-level bombing," said Col. Randall E. Wooten, 40 years old,
who like many of the others came in early February from Eaker Air Force Base in
Arkansas to fly combat missions from Britain, eight hours and 2,750 miles away
from the theater of war.

"The threat was there, and it seemed like the safest thing," Colonel Wooten
said, explaining the decision to revert to high-level tactics that B-52's had
used in the Vietnam War. Since that war, the Strategic Air Command had
emphasized training in radar-evading, low-level operations for the bombers'
other conventional and nuclear missions, he said.

Col. George I. Conlan, 45, of Oceanside, Calif., the wing commander, said his
crews had struck targets assigned to them from headquarters in Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia, and flew into Iraq through Turkey or Saudi Arabia.

Among the targets his planes hit in northern Iraq, he said, were power plants,
nuclear research installations and Scud missile assembly plants. Later, as the
allied ground offensive drew closer, B-52's hit Republican Guard infantry and
armored units and their fortifications in the sands of Kuwait, he said.

The first of the big planes to go in when the air war started in January,
probably from bases in the Middle East and Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean, may
have hit targets from as low as 500 feet, Colonel Wooten and other officers here
said.

But by the time the crews here flew their first missions from Britain on Feb. 9,
all were flying over Iraq at 30,000 to 40,000 feet, above the range of all but
the heaviest anti-aircraft artillery fire and SAM-2 and SAM-3 surface-to-air
missiles. Those were rendered ineffective, the crews thought, by electronic
counter-measures and strikes by F-15 and F-16 aircraft that accompanied the
B-52's into action.

First Flew in 1954

The eight B-52's they flew from here, parked peacefully today on the tarmac of a
base that launched gliders for the Normandy landings in 1944, looked like huge
black pterodactyls, with 185-foot wingspans greater than their length. Seen up
close, with a full load of 51 750-pound bombs -- 12 tucked under each wing and
27 in the bomb bay -- the long-range planes look as awesome as when they first
started flying in 1954.

Colonel Conlan said the planes arrived in the first days of February from bases
in New York, Michigan, California and Louisiana, and would probably leave
"within the next several days." Other officers estimated that a total of 60 to
70 B-52's had taken part in the operation.

The officers chafed openly at restrictions that had prevented them from telling
reporters what they had been doing until today, when the press was invited to
talk to them for the first time after weeks of requests from various news
organizations.

"No B-52 was shot down," Colonel Wooten said. "There was no battle damage at our
base, and I don't know if any based elsewhere were damaged."

One of the planes was lost, apparently because of a malfunction, at sea on its
way back to Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean. Others are known to have operated
from bases in Spain and Saudi Arabia.

Base Reopned in February

The base at Fairford was reopened in February for the B-52's, and it will
probably close after they and the medical support workers living on the base
leave. They do not yet know when they will return home.

All B-52 missions from Fairford started in the late afternoon, so the planes
would arrive over hostile territory in the dark. Eight hours later, in a
two-to-five-second release, each of the three-plane "cells" would drop up to 57
tons of ordnance, including anti-personnel cluster bomb units, on targets below.
Eight hours of flying back to England followed, with refueling over the
Mediterranean.

"On our first couple of missions we had several SAM's come up against us," said
First Lieut. William H. Noble, 27, of Winston-Salem, N.C., the navigator of a
black-and-tan B-52. "The co-pilot would see them and tell us to bank left or
bank right, and we could see a lot of tracers and triple-A."

In 19 days in which the planes dropped more than 1,158 tons of bombs, only one
mission had to be canceled because of mechanical problems, officers said.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map: Map of England showing location of Fairford.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
The War in Military Ads? What War?

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1038 words


For all the glamour and accolades that came with the allied victory over Iraq,
overt references to the operation may never appear in advertising for the Army,
Navy, Air Force or Marines.

Military marketing and advertising officials say they fear depictions of combat
or even allusions to the reality of warfare could scare away more potential
recruits than they would attract.

"We don't plan to use it at all," said Lieut. Col. R. E. Wilson, the branch head
of marketing and advertising for the Marine Corps. "We're not going to exploit
and capitalize on it."

From an advertising standpoint, the armed services might seem to be in an
enviable position: a quick, decisive victory, relatively few people killed or
wounded and lots of flashy technology. It would appear to be a copywriter's
dream.

Maybe not this time.

"You've got to be careful how combat, or the potential for combat, is displayed
in your commercials," said Col. John Myers, director of advertising and public
affairs for the Army Recruiting Command. "We don't want to be misleading, but
too much combat footage interferes with the long-term attributes of Army service
that we want to portray: money for college, skills training and relevance to a
civilian career."

Until August, when the Army plans to resume using ads aimed specifically at
recruiting, it will use two 30-second television commercials that celebrate the
efforts of American soldiers throughout the nation's history, Colonel Myers
said. There is no mention of the war against Iraq.

One, which will be broadcast for the first time tomorrow, is a version of a
three-year-old public service announcement titled "Freedom isn't free." In it,
images of soldiers in training are interspersed with scenes of small-town
America.

Though the commercial has scenes of soldiers training in the California desert,
Colonel Myers said the footage was not intended to simulate conditions in the
Persian Gulf.

Since the all-volunteer force replaced the draft in 1973, advertising has been a
linchpin of the armed services' attempts to draw the best and the brightest to
their ranks. In recent years, Army jingles have urged young people to "be all
that you can be" while the Marines touted themselves as "the few, the proud."

Like major corporations, the four service branches have signed contracts with
Madison Avenue agencies, and their advertising budgets are considered lucrative:
In the late 1980's, the Army alone spent as much as $100 million a year to
promote itself.

Separate Pentagon Account

Last year, the Army spent $83 million with its agency, Young & Rubicam; the Navy
spent $25 million with BBDO; the Air Force spent $15 million with Bozell Inc.,
and the Marines spent $15 million with J. Walter Thompson.

In addition, the Department of Defense has its own advertising account that
promotes all four branches of the service, with an annual budget of about $10
million. The account, currently held by Grey Advertising, is under review.

The Pentagon responded to the dramatic changes in Eastern Europe by scaling back
its personnel needs, and its advertising budgets: the Army, for example, will
pare its advertising budget to $50 million this year. But advertising remains a
vital recruiting tool, said Robert Silberman, a Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense.

"The good people don't walk off the street and say they want to join," said Mr.
Silberman, who oversees ads for all the services. "You've got to go after them."

Military advertising officials say that even if they were inclined to exploit
the Persian Gulf victory, they are not convinced it would be their most
effective lure. The Army, for its part, plans research on how teen-agers, their
parents and their guidance counselors -- its principal recruiting targets --
would respond to commercials that refer to the Persian Gulf success.

'People Died Over There'

"If we're going to use Desert Storm as any kind of an example," Colonel Myers
said, using the military's term for the gulf offensive operation, "we need to
emphasize that because of high-quality forces, equipment and training, we
managed to perform with an astonishingly low number of casualties."

Dr. Carol Moog, a psychologist and consultant who specializes in the
psychological impact of advertising imagery, cautioned that the Army could
easily turn the war into a recruiting turnoff.

"You have to be very subtle," Dr. Moog said. "People died over there. People who
were in the Reserves, who didn't want to go over there, were yanked over there.
You don't want to use Desert Storm imagery that is so graphic that it evokes the
very negative downside of what went on."

On the other hand, the war has given the Army a treasure trove of patriotic
images, said Prof. Charles Moskos, a military sociologist at Northwestern
University.

"If you have people waving American flags and blowing kisses at American G.I.'s,
I think that is the ultimate high," Professor Moskos said. "They don't have to
show combat. They can show 'hail the conquering hero' stuff. That can't help but
be a plus."

Although the stunning success of the air war has received particular attention,
the Air Force has no intention of trying to capitalize on it in advertising,
said Glen Whiton, an Air Force spokesman.

A More Receptive Climate

"We plan to continue to present the Air Force as a high-technology service," he
said. "We're not going to mention Desert Storm, but we are going to talk about
personal commitment and service to country."

Like the Marines and the Air Force, the Navy has no immediate plans to
commission new advertising, said Tom Carey, president of BBDO New York, the
Navy's ad agency. The Navy's slogan, "You and the Navy: Full speed ahead," and
commercials, which routinely show pictures of naval personnel "in action,"
continue to be effective, he said.

Though the ads have not changed, the advertising climate is greatly more
receptive than it was in the years after the Vietnam War, military advertising
officials said.

"We are in the best of all possible situations now," Colonel Myers said. "We
have a quality force, quality equipment. The confidence of the American people
in the Army is indisputably high."

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A scene from a television commercial, created by Young & Rubicam
for the Army Recruiting Command, makes no mention of the Persian Gulf war,
although it uses images of soldiers in combat training situations. (Edward
Hausner/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Poll Finds Postwar Glow Dimmed by the Economy

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1466 words


The war in the Persian Gulf has given a striking boost to the nation's
confidence and morale, but Americans are now turning their attention to the
economy and other domestic concerns about which they are far less ebullient,
according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.

The poll found that President Bush was still on an extraordinary high with the
American public, with an overall approval rating of 88 percent. It showed
Americans setting a post-Vietnam record for confidence in the military and
voicing a new conviction that their country was not a declining world power.

Even as they began to fret about the economy, more than half seemed willing to
concede that Mr. Bush had other things on his mind in recent months.

But there are signs of vulnerability, too, or at least new challenges for the
President, as the troops begin returning home from the gulf and domestic issues
move up on the public's agenda.

Economy Is No. 1 Concern

The economy is now mentioned more than anything as the No. 1 problem facing the
country: 36 percent cited it this week, compared with 19 percent who gave that
answer in October, when the economy was tied, roughly speaking, with the deficit
and the Middle East as the top problems.

And Mr. Bush's grades on the economy are in stark contrast to his grades on
foreign policy, according to the nationwide telephone poll of 1,252 adults.
Forty-two percent approve of the way he is handling the economy, while 83
percent approve of his conduct of foreign policy.

This helps explain why the Democrats are so eager to turn the political debate
back to domestic issues. Some strategists consider this their only hope of
mounting a competitive challenge to Mr. Bush in the 1992 election. But the poll
showed that the Democrats hardly had a clear shot on these issues: 42 percent of
respondents said the Republican Party was "better able to insure a strong
economy," compared with 27 percent who gave the edge to the Democratic Party.

In addition, the public seems to blame Ronald Reagan more than Mr. Bush for the
current recession: 48 percent say they put a lot of the blame on the policies of
the Reagan Administration, compared with 15 percent who put the blame primarily
on the Bush Administration.

The survey, which has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three
percentage points, was conducted in telephone interviews Monday through
Wednesday. No interviews were conducted after the President's speech to a joint
session of Congress on Wednesday night, when he hailed the returning troops,
pledged to get the economy rolling again and called for action on pressing
domestic issues.

A Grace Period

Because of the war, Mr. Bush has been given something of a grace period on the
economy: 55 percent said the President paid as much attention as he could to the
economy during the war. But now, 61 percent say Mr. Bush should be paying more
attention to the economy than he is.

"Now it's time to concentrate on the home front, to help the American people and
build the economy back to where it should be," Stephen Miller, 45, an assistant
business manager in Clearwater, Fla., said in an interview after the poll was
completed.

Sixty-three percent of the respondents said they knew someone well who is out of
work and actively looking for a job. This is statistically equivalent to the 65
percent level registered in a January 1982 Times/CBS News Poll during the last
major recession, which occurred in the first Reagan Administration.

For all of that, the war in the gulf left a remarkable afterglow in public
attitudes. Confidence in the military stands at the highest level measured for
any institution since the Gallup Poll began such measurements in 1973. In the
Times/CBS Poll, 88 percent said they had "a great deal" or "quite a lot" of
confidence in the military. The low point in confidence in the military since
1973 was registered in a 1981 Gallup Poll, when the level was 50 percent.

Trust in Government seems to be on the rebound: 47 percent said they trust the
Government in Washington to do the right thing "just about always" or "most of
the time," compared with 25 percent who held that view last October in the
middle of the struggle over the budget between the White House and the Congress,


'Right Direction'

And in a closely watched measure of the public mood, 51 percent now say the
country is going in the "right direction," compared with 42 percent who felt the
country was "off on the wrong track." This is a significant change from the
polls last fall, when the pessimists outnumbered the optimists by a ratio of 2
or 3 to 1.

The gulf war has also transformed Americans' sense of their place in the world:
73 percent said they rejected the notion that the United States was in decline
as a world power. Last June, 44 percent rejected it.

Still, there are underlying concerns that were much less affected by the
post-war optimism. When asked to look ahead to the next century, 39 percent said
they saw the United States as likely to be the No. 1 economic power in the
world, while 43 percent said they saw Japan in that role.

Expectations about the long term remain tempered: 36 percent say life for the
next generation of Americans will be better than life today, while 26 percent
say it will be worse and 35 percent say it will be about the same.

War's Effect on Image

While Mr. Bush emerged with a glowing image from the war, Vice President Quayle
was not as fortunate: 19 percent gave him a favorable rating and 27 percent gave
him an unfavorable rating, close to the previous level, recorded in January.

The poll gave some inkling of post-war politics. A majority of Democrats voted
against the resolution in Congress to authorize the use of force in the gulf;
and Republicans seem eager to make it an issue. But the survey found that in the
view of 73 percent, both parties supported the war equally once it began.

Still, the poll suggested that the issue has potential for the Republicans: 52
percent said that if their congressional representatives voted against the
resolution, it would make a difference in how the respondents would vote in that
lawmaker's re-election. Moreover, by 4 to 1, these respondents said a vote
against the President's proposal would make them less likely to vote for their
lawmaker.

The effect of the gulf debate on party image was apparent in two other
questions. Asked which party was more likely to keep the country out of war, 45
percent said the Democrats, while 23 percent said the Republicans.

But Republicans had an enormous edge when people were asked which party was more
likely to "make sure U.S. military defenses are strong." Sixty-one percent said
the Republicans, 14 percent said the Democrats.

Mr. Bush's overall popularity has soared during the gulf war, but there has been
no major consistent change in his ratings on several domestic policy issues,
including drugs, the environment and education. Fewer than four in ten say his
Administration has made progress in dealing with those issues.

Still, he continues to match President Harry S. Truman's historic high for
Presidential popularity, which came in June 1945 after the surrender of Germany
and Mr. Truman's ascension to the White House.

But there is also an ominous precedent here for Mr. Bush: By 1951, Mr. Truman's
approval rating had sunk to 23 percent, one of the lowest ever recorded for a
President by the Gallup Poll.

How the Poll Was Taken

The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews
conducted Monday to Wednesday with 1,252 adults throughout the United States,
excluding Alaska and Hawaii.

No interviews were conducted after the President's televised speech to Congress
on Wednesday night.

The sample of telephone exchanges called was selected by a computer from a
complete list of exchanges in the country. The exchanges were chosen so as to
insure that each region of the country was represented in proportion to its
population. For each exchange, the telephone numbers were formed by random
digits, thus permitting access to listed and unlisted numbers. The numbers were
then screened to limit calls to residences.

The results have been weighted to take account of household size and number of
telephone lines into the residence and to adjust for variations in the sample
relating to region, race, sex, age and education.

In theory, in 19 of 20 cases the results based on such samples will differ by no
more than three percentage points in either direction from what would have been
obtained by seeking out all American adults.

The potential sampling error for smaller subgroups is larger. For example, for
either Democrats or Republicans it is plus or minus five percentage points.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Charts: "Mixed Support for the President" shows number of adults who
said they approved of Bush's handling of foreign policy and the economy from
April '89 - March '91.; "Differing Degrees of Optimism" shows percentage of
Democratic and Republican respondents to questions dealing with U.S. strength,
five-year future for the U.S., the state of the economy and Japan's economic
rise.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: Veterans;
Outpouring of Scholarships and Jobs Await Returning Heroes After the Ticker Tape

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1065 words


In a homecoming fit for conquering heroes, a grateful American public will
bestow more than ticker tape on troops returning from the Persian Gulf. There
are offers of college scholarships, carpenter jobs that pay $22 an hour, free
weekends in wine country, even promises to baby-sit the children.

In what one Congressman described as a "maddening drive to the floor of the
House," politicians in Washington and around the country are racing to outdo one
another with bills that would benefit the troops.

And job recruiters say they will be eager to court those men and women whom
President Bush described as "first-class talent."

"If we learn that an applicant has seen duty in the Persian Gulf," said Arnold
Silberman, vice president of the Rust-Oleum Corporation, "that's something we're
going to consider very, very highly."

Gratitude and Guilt

One of the career choices the veterans might consider is public office.
Representative Newt Gingrich, Republican of Georgia, is urging his party to
nominate gulf war veterans to run against Democrats.

The extraordinary show of support is "almost out of proportion," said Charles
Moskos, a Northwestern University sociologist who studies the military. The
outpouring, he said, reveals a great sense of appreciation among Americans, but
perhaps also some guilt.

"In some ways, I see this as a kind of moral payback for the short shrift we
gave to the Vietnam veterans," said Mr. Moskos, who noted that 500 times as many
troops died in Vietnam as in the Persian Gulf fighting. "I think there's also a
measure of collective guilt among the American elite who knew that it wasn't
their sons and daughters fighting over there."

The return of tens of thousands of troops from the Persian Gulf is not likely to
have a wrenching effect on the economy, as did the two million soldiers mustered
out of service in the year after the ending of World War II.

But ordinary Americans, too, have been lining up to do whatever they can to
demonstrate support for the troops.

A plumbing contractor in Pleasanton, Calif., Frank Capilla, has already rounded
up pledges of 30 jobs from businesses in his area. A suburban Minneapolis
insurance salesman, Kenneth Smith, has secured a host of pledges of blue-collar
and white-collar jobs for troops returning to Minnesota.

A Perfect Gift

"What better gift can you give a serviceman than a job?" Mr. Capilla asked.

In Chicago, a radio talk show host challenged his listeners to "put up"
something more tangible for the troops than yellow ribbons. The calls rushed in.
Dozens of people called with offers to give up their tickets for a Cubs game,
theater, a night at the symphony. One woman said she would donate her services
as a baby sitter. Another promised to watch the pets.

"They actually came through," said the host, Stacy Taylor. "They called the
station with pledges, and they left their names and telephone numbers."

In Congress, a dizzying array of proposals to help veterans are being
considered. One measure would waive the usual 10 percent penalty for withdrawals
from individual retirement accounts for the gulf troops. Another would raise the
tax exemption on commissioned officers' combat pay to $2,000 from $500.

The rush for veterans-related legislation is strikingly different from what
happened in the last Congress, when political maneuvering led to the blocking of
a bill to provide cost-of-living increases to disabled veterans.

It is difficult to know, of course, how long the support will last. A year from
now, when the euphoria over military victory has abated, will the troops be
forgotten? If the troops do get any breaks in the job market, will appreciation
turn to resentment among workers hurt by the recession?

"Next week, they're seen as conquering heroes," said Mr. Moskos. "But two years
from now, when some of the troops get laid off, as we expect to happen, will the
public simply view them as marginal?"

A note of skepticism was also sounded by Representative Leon E. Panetta, a
California Democrat, who cautioned against raising "false hopes" among the
veterans. "This maddening drive to the floor of the House is not a good way to
do business," he said. "How are we going to pay for some of these things?"

Since many troops will continue to serve in the armed forces, the private sector
will not be inundated with returning veterans. The thousands of troops, whose
terms were extended during the war, will soon be discharged.

For the first time since World War II, the troops will return together in units,
making it easier for communities to hold rallies and confer honors.

Ticker tape parades are scheduled in many cities, from New York to Jacksonville,
N.C., where confetti will be dropped from ladders, since there are no tall
buildings in the city.

When the time comes to enter the labor market, the troops will be coveted by
many companies, according to recruitment specialists.

"Action in the Persian Gulf is going to look very good on a resume," said Kent
Milius, the owner of Management Recruiters of Colorado. "They have demonstrated
that they can take the pressure, and employers like that."

A few days ago, Mr. Milius was discussing the attributes of a job candidate with
a prospective employer.

"When I mentioned that the man was a former Green Beret, my client really sat up
and took notice," Mr. Milius said. "Six months ago, I don't think it would have
worked that way."

The president of the American Federation of Teachers, Albert Shanker, has issued
an appeal for veterans to consider teaching, a field expected to experience many
vacancies in the next few years.

"We have a shortage of minority teachers in particular," he said, "and the
people who served would make very good role models in the classroom."

Gain for Minority Workers

Leaders of civil rights groups said they hoped the valor demonstrated by so many
black and Hispanic soldiers, along with the leadership of Gen. Colin L. Powell,
would convince corporations that minority workers could contribute mightily.

"The armed forces have proven that affirmative action and equal opportunity can
work," said Benjamin Hooks, director of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People. "If it can work in the biggest enterprise we
have, it is foolish to think that it can't work in corporate and civilian life."


LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "What better gift can you give a serviceman than a job?" asked
Frank Capilla, a plumbing contractor in Pleasanton, Calif., who has rounded up
pledges of 30 jobs from local businesses. (Janet Holden Ramos)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1195 words


After the War A8-11

The U.S. does not expect initiatives to rise immediately from President Bush's
call for Israel to give up occupied Arab lands in return for peace, but hopes to
secure modest good-will gestures, officials said. Page A1

News analysis: Most of Israel agrees that there has never been a more opportune
time for Israel to make peace with its Arab neighbors. But Israel has no
compromises to offer Syria, Jordan or the Palestinians. A1

Hundreds of Kuwaitis were released from Iraqi custody and crossed into Kuwait.
Thousands of others arrived at the border to be told that they could not cross
because they were not Kuwaiti citizens. A1

Crown Prince says martial law in Kuwait could be extended A9

Iraq acknowledged it faced a revolt but claimed victory in the war, saying
President Bush's pronouncements on the Middle East showed that Baghdad had
forced the U.S. to focus on the Arab-Israeli dispute. A8

Most of the journalists who vanished while traveling toward Basra to cover civil
unrest will be freed by Iraq along with Kuwaiti civilians who had been abducted
by the Iraqis, officials of the Red Cross said. A9

B-52 pilots and crews tell of high- altitude strikes on Iraq A9

Families prepared for troops' return. "The people coming home tomorrow are going
to get the hero's welcome that was denied those who came back from Vietnam," a
soldier at Langley Air Force Base said. A10

Troops will receive more than just a ticker tape parade A10

House approves $15 billion for war and warns allies to pay too A11

International A2-7

Albania's rulers imposed martial law in the country's largest port and barred
public assembly in three other cities, including Tirana. A youth was reportedly
killed as crowds stormed foreign embassies.  A2

Moscow accused its domestic critics of fomenting civil disorder and foreigners
of plotting against the referendum March 17 on protecting national unity from
dismemberment by sovereignty-minded republics. A3 Witness in Mandela trial says
he had to take part in killing A3

India's leader accuses Ghandi of pushing country to brink A7

The Thai military has eased fears by naming an interim Government of respected
and experienced civilians, diplomats and businessmen. But Western diplomats say
the junta's intentions are not entirely clear. A5

Psychiko Journal: Learning about the Greeks in Greece A4

National A12-20

White House Memo: President Bush is riding a wave, and while Republicans are
dreaming up campaign commercials for 1992, Democrats are desperately trying to
forget their early skepticism about the war. A1

Americans are far less ebullient about the economy and other domestic concerns
than about the war, a new poll has found. President Bush is still
extraordinarily popular, but there are signs of vulnerability. A14

Retail sales remain down in February as wariness persists D1

Congress moves closer to approving $30 billion for S.& L.'s D1

Nineteen cities eligible for U.S. grants to fight infant mortality have been
identified by Federal officials. But the cities will have to compete for the
money, and only 10 of them will ultimately win grants. A12

A new method of billing phone calls developed by long-distance companies
calculates the length of a call to the second or the nearest six seconds. The
method is only for businesses, not residential customers. A1

A settlement in the Exxon case was blocked by a Federal judge. Alaskan Indian
tribes sought the order, saying they had been locked out of negotiations to
settle civil litigation from the Exxon Valdez oil spill. A12

The Chief of Police of Los Angeles said he would seek felony charges against
three officers seen beating a suspect in an amateur videotape. He called the
incident an aberration in a "well-disciplined department." A12

The National Institutes of Health needs to improve management of its AIDS
research program to deal with a budget problem as the epidemic continues to
spread, a two-year study recommeded. A20

Senate panel approves Martinez as anti-drug director A16

The cost of nursing home rules fuel a revolt in California A20

Judge again orders Philadelphia to immunize youths A17

Regional B1-4

The State Financial Control Board issued new warnings about New York City's
handling of its long-term fiscal problems, saying Mayor Dinkins's $29 billion
plan "actually disguises" the city's budget gap. A1

Members of the City Council attacked Speaker Peter Vallone, accusing him of
cronyism, demagogy and even dullness. The attacks were a response to his
awarding of influential committee chairmanships. B1

Archdiocese is expected to close some parochial schools B2

Study blames dilapidation in schools on frugal city spending B3

The latest teen-age fad is the beeper. Once a sign of doctors and drug dealers,
beepers are popping up everywhere. While some adults disagree, teen-agers say
they have practical uses in a crime-ridden city. A1

The Daily News's unions must cut more than 800 jobs, said Robert Maxwell, the
British publisher who wants to buy the paper. But the tone of the opening day of
negotiations was reportedly encouraging. B1

St. Patrick's Day parade refuses to allow homosexual group B3

Park Aveune lawyer is indicted as a $3.5 million swindler B3

A woman's odyssey through Housing Court (and she won) B3

An emaciated 7-month-old baby is found dead in the Bronx B3

The M.T.A. postponed service cuts on the Long Island Rail Road, just days before
they were to take effect and one week after it was revealed that the authority
had a $93 million surplus fund. B1

Private clubs in Brooklyn Heights -- like the Rembrandt Club, Mrs. Field's
Literary Society and the Ihpetonga Club -- continue to keep alive the traditions
of the more genteel days of the Victorian era. B1

Two groups begin campaign against Weicker's tax plan B2

Lawmakers approve change to Florio's school-aid plan B2

Business Digest D1

Weekend

Etiquette for gallerygoers C1

Satire for a boring era C1

The New York Flower Show C5

Theater: "Road to Nirvana" C1

On Stage, and Off C2

Film: At the Movies C8

Dance: Trisha Brown anniversaryC5

Art: Selections from the 80's C26

Outdoor sculpture C30

Auctions C22

Restaurants C20

Word and Image: "An Awfully Big Adventure" C27

Law Page B5

Depositions can be ordeal as well as a protection

Obituaries A22

Gaylord A. Freeman Jr., led Chicago's First National Bank

Katinka Loeser, writer

Sports

Baseball: Howe impressive A27

Basketball: Villanova rallies past B.C.  A23

Death of coach's wife overshadows game A23

Column: Vecsey on odd ball parks A23

Hockey: Rangers lose to Nordiques A23

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

EditorialsA28

Fine, 100 days. But for what?

Level with labor, and the city

Hard passage in India

Summary injustice

Letters A28

Anthony Lewis: The poet judge A29

A. M. Rosenthal: Break the boycott A29

Raymond Learsy: How to get oil to $10 a barrel A29

Richard J. Margolis: Cost per life -- $22,000 A29

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Stage, and Off

BYLINE: By Alex Witchel

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1093 words


Behind-the-Scenes Complaints

You might think that starring in a Broadway show is a pretty glamorous job. But
to hear the cast of Neil Simon's "Lost in Yonkers" tell it, it's not even close.
Their problem is their work place, the backstage areas of the Richard Rodgers
Theater, which is owned by the Nederlander Organization.

According to the show's stage manager, Jim Woolley, and cast members who refused
to speak for attribution, the complaints are plentiful. For starters, the
building's antiquated wiring accommodates only 60-watt bulbs in the dressing
rooms, which makes it difficult for the actors to put on their makeup. Since
there is frequently no hot water, the men who need to shave have to use a hot
pot and consistently blow the lights. There are no toilet paper holders in the
bathrooms.

When the show, about two teen-age boys left to live with their grandmother and
aunt in 1942, arrived in early February, it was apparent that no cleaning crew
had been there first. The backstage area was so dirty that Mr. Woolley took a
bottle of Fantastik and scrubbed the walls himself. The actors washed the
windows in their dressing rooms, which are described by Mr. Woolley as "so dirty
you can't see across the street." At least most of them have windows. In
13-year-old Danny Gerard's dressing room, one window is missing altogether, and
is taped over with a piece of cardboard. It's freezing in there, and on one
whole side of the backstage area, where, Mr. Woolley says, there is no heat. "We
all sit there in our winter coats and use space heaters," he says.

The Nederlanders have never been known for spending as much time or money on
their theaters as the Shuberts or Jujamcyn. But did anyone think of complaining?
Well, not officially. What about complaints to Actors' Equity, or the show's
producer, Manny Azenberg?

None.

Why? Mr. Woolley says complaints about the Richard Rodgers were previously made
to Equity by the companies of "Accomplice" and "The Merchant of Venice," but
nothing was done. Alan Eisenberg, executive secretary of Actors' Equity, says,
"No one ever complained to me in any company that has played in that theater."

As for the Nederlanders, "Everyone is petrified of them," says one company
member. "The actors are afraid they'll get mad and complain to Manny, who could
make their lives miserable."

Nonsense, says Arthur Rubin, executive vice president of the Nederlander
Organization: "If I had a complaint, I'd follow it up, but no one has
complained. We're prepared to fix whatever's necessary. But I can't help them in
a vacuum."

The cast, which could benefit from a seminar in assertiveness training, did ask
the Nederlanders to fix up the backstage area a few weeks ago -- in a poem. The
theater was promptly painted. "I'm willing to meet with them," Mr. Rubin says.
"They asked for a new washing machine and got it. But somebody has to address
this directly to me."

How about Mr. Azenberg? "The cast showed me the poem and I was told it was
fixed," he says.

"It's really a wonderful old theater," Mr. Woolley concludes. "It just needs a
facelift."

'Earth and Sky' to Be a Film



The race to buy the film rights to "Earth and Sky," about a woman's
investigation of her lover's mysterious death, by the 33-year-old playwright
Douglas Post, recently at the Second Stage, has been won. Art Linson, the
producer of the Hollywood blockbuster "The Untouchables," has bought the play
for Warner Brothers, with a script to be written by Mr. Post. Robyn Goodman,
co-artistic director of the theater, says Mr. Post will be paid "between
$250,000 and $500,000."

Trying to Pick the Tony Winners

The slow theater season hasn't discouraged the traditional guessing game about
who will win the Tonys. The issue for some producers now is how to stack the
deck. When it comes to the acting awards, both leading and supporting, the
guideline has traditionally been that if an actor's name is billed above the
title in the opening-night program, he or she qualifies as a star and should
compete in the leading category. But billing aside, producers are allowed to
make recommendations to the Tony Administration Committee that an actor be
considered in a category that is not dictated by the billing. The reasoning, of
course, is to try to minimize the competition and maximize the chances of
winning. Two plays that are seeking this switch are "Lost in Yonkers" and "The
Speed of Darkness."

"Yonkers" bills Irene Worth, Mercedes Ruehl, and Kevin Spacey above the title.
But Mr. Azenberg, the show's producer, says that both he and Mr. Spacey agree
that he be considered in the supporting category. The producer says he and Ms.
Ruehl agree that she be submitted in the Best Actress category. But the
recommendation on Irene Worth is more difficult since the size of her role could
be considered supporting. By entering the Best Actress category, she's not only
splitting the vote with Ms. Ruehl, but also going up against the industry
favorite, Stockard Channing, in "Six Degrees of Separation."

Mr. Azenberg says that instead of trying to persuade Miss Worth, who is billed
first, above the title, to consider the supporting category, in which she would
have little competition, he left the decision to the committee. He said he did
not want to be accused of trying to manipulate her chances of winning. And
Harvey Sabinson, executive director of the League of New York Theaters and
Producers, which administers the Tonys, says that if a producer does not make a
recommendation within two weeks of the play's opening night, the billing stands.
That means Miss Worth will be considered in the Best Actress category.

"The smart thing to do is not compete with Stockard," says one producer who
insisted on anonymity. "But Irene Worth is above the title for what is
essentially a supporting role. That stems from dumb billing, which is a
reflection of agents. She could walk away with the supporting award."

In "The Speed of Darkness," Steve Tesich's drama about a Vietnam veteran
confronting his past, Len Cariou and Stephen Lang are billed above the title,
but Mr. Lang has agreed to a bid in the supporting category. In the Best Actor
category, there isn't a favorite as strong as Ms. Channing, but along with Mr.
Cariou, Nigel Hawthorne in "Shadowlands" and Courtney Vance in "Six Degrees" are
considered front-runners. And when "I Hate Hamlet" opens in April, Nicol
Williamson and Evan Handler may join them.

The Tony Administration Committee meets soon to judge the recommendations.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  Passports to Off Broadway Month begins April 1, when more than 50
theaters will offer discounts of up to 50 percent on tickets in a program
sponsored by A.R.T./New York and the I.T.T. Corporation. Among the participants
is the WPA's production of "Red Scare on Sunset," a new comedy by and starring
Charles Busch (above). For passports, call (212) 768-1818. (T.L. Boston)
Photo: Off Broadway Discounts

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR;
The Bunting Goes Up

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 812 words

DATELINE: LANGLEY AIR FORCE BASE, Va., March 7


Exactly seven months after rushing two squadrons of F-15 fighters to the Gulf --
the first land-based warplanes ordered to the war zone -- this Norfolk-area air
base made frantic plans today for a heroes' homecoming for the planes' and their
crews on Friday.

The Langley warplanes will be the first to return to home soil, just as they
were the first to depart for the gulf. The welcoming committee will include the
Secretary of the Air Force, Donald B. Rice, and the Air Force Chief of Staff,
Gen. Merrill A. McPeak.

Dozens of supply officers, mechanics, clerks and military dependents of all ages
turned out today to help prepare the welcome for the pilots and support crews,
members of the 71st and 27th Tactical Fighter Squadrons. They bent to their task
with pride that seemed to stem from the knowledge that the Air Force was the
service that hit the Iraqis first and hardest.

'It's About Time'

"The people coming home tomorrow are going to get the hero's welcome that was
denied those who came back from Vietnam, and I say it's about time," said Tech.
Sgt. Haver Phillips, a military cost analyst who took a break from work this
afternoon to help hang some bunting.

At other military bases across the country, service personnel and civilians did
much the same thing in anticipation of the arrivals of waves of returning
soldiers, pilots and marines.

Many arriving troops, like the pilots in the squadrons from Langley, will return
as victorious heroes. Others, like the members of the 14th Quartermaster
Detachment, a water-purification Reserve unit from western Pennsylvania, will
return as heroic survivors; 13 of their members were killed in the devastating
scud attack at a barracks in Saudi Arabia on Feb. 25, at the start of the ground
war.

The two air-to-air combat units from Langley, the "Eagle Keepers" and the "Iron
Men," flew to Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, on Aug. 7, just a few days after the Iraqi
invasion of Kuwait. Throughout the war the squadrons provided protective cover
for bombers, successfully dodging Iraqi anti-aircraft fire on all missions and
downing at least one Iraqi fighter.

Still, by nightfall, after a day of non-stop decorating, hangars the length of
the main runway here were festooned with patriotic bunting, and "Welcome Home!"
signs were hung from office windows, lampposts and barracks stoops.

The first of the 48 F-15's are expected to touch down about 1 P.M. Friday. Apart
from the dignitaries from Washington and a brass band, on hand to greet them
will be the military personnel who stayed behind and hundreds of dependents who
have spent most of the last seven months anxiously following news of the war.

Langley also sent more than 2,000 support personnel to the war zone. Many of
them will begin returning tomorrow, too, most in big transport planes.

Kathy Hostage, wife of Lieut. Col. Michael Hostage, the operations officer of
the 71st Squadron, plans to be out on the tarmac when her husband's plane taxis
in.

"I'm just so excited, I think I'll pop," she said tonight, ending a day of
frantic housecleaning and shopping.

About 20,000 troops from Fort Campbell are stationed in the Middle East, and the
first flights will bring home only a fraction of that contingent. Thus for the
vast majority of those families, there is uncertainty along with joy.

Ruth Ann Eyman has not received official word, but she is convinced her
25-year-old husband Tracy, a TOW missile repairman, will be on one of the
flights this weekend. It won't be a day too soon, she said.

"He's lost tons of weight," she said. "The last picture he sent, I didn't
recognize him."

Dancers and Army Band

In El Paso, 300 troops from the 11th Air Defense Artillery Brigade and 250
troops from the 3d Armored Cavalry will be greeted at Fort Bliss by a chorus
line from a volunteer dance troupe and patriotic songs played by the 62d United
States Army Band.

And in Fayetteville, N.C., home of Fort Bragg and the 82d Airborne Division,
residents and businesses are planning a parade to welcome about 900 soldiers who
are expected to arrive Friday afternoon. The parade will feature 4,000 people in
116 units, including soldiers, local public figures and high school bands.

By contrast no official homecoming celebrations are planned for the 200 marines
who are scheduled to return to Camp Pendleton at Oceanside, Calif., on Saturday.

"When the guys get off the bus, they want to be with their wives and families
and not go to a big party," said Staff Sgt. Vicki Purney, a spokeswoman at Camp
Pendleton. "We'll celebrate some time down the road."

The remaining 1,250 marines in the "first wave" of returning troops are expected
to arrive at Camp Pendleton throughout the week.

Instead of a celebration this weekend, Oceanside will honor the returning
marines with a parade and beach party on April 27.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: First Back;
Troops Return to a Tumult of Hurrahs

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1462 words

DATELINE: FORT STEWART, Ga., March 8


After all the remarkable sights and sounds from the Middle East, the most
amazing sight of all for many of the troops of the 24th Mechanized Infantry
Division was the homecoming -- the flag-waving, horn-honking crowd that turned
out to greet them in the early morning hours and again this afternoon.

"War is good and war is bad, but this war has brought out so much patriotism in
this country it's unbelievable," said Robert Teague, a 23-year-old
communications specialist with the 24th, who was one of 104 troops who returned
on the first plane back from the Middle East. "I don't think anyone expected
anything like this."

In a war that has been carried out in the shadow of the Vietnam conflict, the
sharpest contrast between the two may be in the homecoming. In celebrations here
and at bases like Plattsburgh Air Force Base in New York State, Fort Bragg in
North Carolina and Travis Air Force Base in California, jubilant Americans
turned out today to welcome American troops returning from the Persian Gulf war
as heroes.

For soldiers returning to Fort Stewart there were differing joys. Specialist
Teague and Lieut. Wayne Seal came home to see newborn babies for the first time.
Specialist Brian Oetting learned this morning that his wife had gone into labor
with their first child and left here for Hollister, Calif., to be with her.

Likewise, at Fort Bragg, N.C., Pfc. Anthony Moore of the 82d Airborne Division,
was greeted by a baby boy and a small orange sign reading, "Hi Dad, I'm
Matthew." Seven-month-old Matthew was born the day before Private Moore shipped
out.

Sgt. 1st Class Tommy Bloodworth, 45 years old, of the 24th found particular
pride in the celebration because he served in Vietnam and remembered coming home
with the feeling more of a pariah than a hero.

But it was a homecoming to remember for members of the 24th, who marched in
formation in their military fatigues before their tearful family reunions as Lee
Greenwood's "God Bless the U.S.A.," blared over a loudspeaker.

"You come home with your head held high and your chest out," said Sergeant
Bloodworth. "You have people honking their horns and waving their flags all
along the expressway. It's just a terrific feeling."

The warm feelings were shared both by the soldiers and those who welcomed them
home.

"It's great to see Americans proud to be Americans," exulted Arnold Axelberg,
50, of Stone Mountain, Ga., who dashed out to embrace his 26-year-old son, Mark,
when he returned this afternoon.

"When I grow up I want to be just like Norman Schwarzkopf," the elder Mr.
Axelberg said.

Many of the members of the 24th, who pierced deep into Iraq to spearhead the
Allied offensive, came back with indelible images of a ground war that
progressed with lightning speed and startling success once it finally began Feb.
23.

"I wasn't ever scared, but I'll always remember going down the road, and seeing
Iraqis on the side of the road who needed help and not being able to give it to
them," Specialist Teague said. "The war was moving so fast, if we stopped, it
would have left without us. A lot of them had no shoes, no warm clothes. You got
the feeling they didn't want to fight, they just wanted to find a way to
surrender."

Lieutenant Seal, cradling his 3-month-old son, Nathan, in his arms for the first
time, said he would always remember the odd exultation of punching a highway
through Iraq all the way to the Euphrates River.

"We had so much faith in our technology," he said. "Anything they tried we were
able to totally overwhelm them."

900 Arrive on 3 Planes

On a route that carried them past well-wishers waving flags and banners, members
of the 24th were driven here from Hunter Army Airfield in Savannah, 40 miles
away. Three planeloads with a total of 900 soldiers arrived today.

Many of the approximately 1,500 people who turned out to greet the troops at a
ceremony on Cottrell Field on this sprawling army base were not welcoming anyone
in particular.

"I cried when I watched on television as they arrived last night," said Ann
Jones of Hinesville, who attended the homecoming with two friends. "This time I
wanted to be there myself."

And some came away disappointed like Marilyn Dalton, of Madison, N.C., who drove
300 miles in the hopes of greeting her 20-year-old son. He was not on any of the
three planes that arrived today.

At Fort Bragg, N.C., Dawndee M. Norton, 20, was among the 2,200 people who
welcomed home 940 members of the 82d Airborne Division. But her husband Pfc.
Grover Norton, 19, was among the 13,000 troops from the division who have yet to
leave Saudi Arabia.

"I just keep wondering when my homecoming is going to be," said Mrs. Norton, a
former solder herself, who has yet to live with the man she married last May.
Mrs. Norton was in the Army at the time of her marriage and immediately
afterward returned to her base at Fort Campbell, Ky.

After her discharge she traveled to Fort Bragg to join her husband only to find
out that Private Norton had to leave immediately for the gulf.

Today, Mrs. Norton stood in the rain and said she had come out to support the
other families. "Grover and I have been married almost a year now, and we've
never been together, so I'm just waiting to hear when he will be sent home," she
said.

But while Mrs. Norton waited there were hundreds of reunions.

"It feels like so long. I'm glad to be back home," said Specialist Jamie R.
Dickens of Rocky Mount, N.C., as he huddled with his wife, Stacie, and their two
children. "This has brought us much closer."

As the troops arrived and moved toward the crowd, Sgt. Michael Hillison ran up
and swept his arms around his wife, Dawn, pushing his M-16 to the side and
kissing her softly.

"This is your baby," she said, crying and pointing to 4-month-old Zachary, who
sat in a stroller beside her. "What do you think?"

Sergeant Hillison picked up the small bundle and quietly whispered, "Hi,
Zachary."

At Langley Air Force Base near Newport News, Va., several thousand family
members and area residents gathered by the side of the 9,000-foot main runway to
welcome back the first Air Force fighter jets from the gulf. Their cheers were
loud enough to drown out the roar from the returning jets.

A few minutes before 1 P.M., the planes, six F-15 fighters from the 71st and
27th Tactical Fighter Squadrons, broke out of an overcast sky after a
nine-and-one-half-hour flight across the Atlantic and quickly settled one after
another on the end of the runway.

The planes taxied to the main terminal, and in unison, six canopies popped open
and six pilots emerged. Those in the joyful crowd, unable to restrain emotions
that had built in the seven-month absence of the planes and their crews, surged
forward, trampling rope barriers and relentlessly pushing back security guards.

"I can't believe this homecoming!" Lieut. Col. Howard L. Pope, commander of the
71st Squadron, said as he reached out to embrace his wife, Phyllis. The other
members of his family and several neighbors crowded in, some of them holding
aloft American flags so large that when they fluttered down they all but covered
the airman and his wife.

"I've got to pinch him to see if he's real," Mrs. Pope said.

"I'm real, believe it," the colonel countered.

In all, 48 F-15's from Langley went to the war zone, where they flew fighter
protection for bombers. Because the Iraqi Air Force chose mostly to avoid
air-to-air confrontation, the greatest threat was posed by antiaircraft fire.
But all 48 planes and their crewmen returned unscathed, and one pilot shot down
an Iraqi fighter.

"We went to the gulf and we fought a war and we won it and now we're all back,
safe and sound," Colonel Pope said. "That's what you're supposed to do. I'm very
thankful. I wish Vietnam vets could have gotten the support we got."

Shortly after the six F-15's landed, a huge C-5A transport flew in, bringing
home 500 squadron crew members and other support troops.

The Secretary of the Air Force, Donald B. Rice, and the Air Force Chief of
Staff, Gen. Merrill A. McPeak, were on hand to welcome the pilots and crews home
and to offer speeches of thanks. Virginia's two senators, John W. Warner, a
Republican, and Charles S. Robb, a Democrat, were also there to offer their
praise.

But many in the crowd paid more attention to the returning troops than to the
speeches. In fact, some troops headed off with their families and friends before
the speeches began.

Mr. Warner, a former Navy Secretary and a leading member of the Senate Armed
Services Committee, said the Langley ceremony also should be taken as a delayed
ceremony honoring those who fought in Vietnam.

"In every respect, we invite them to share the moment," he said.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sgt. Richard Muse being welcomed home by his daughter, Tabatha,
at Plattsburgh Air Base, N.Y. (Michael J. Okoniewski for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1177 words



After the War 4-6

The United States warned Iraq not to use chemical weapons to put down rebellions
after intelligence agencies intercepted orders from Baghdad authorizing chemical
bombardments in two cities, officials said. Page 1

Iran's President denounced Baghdad and called for President Hussein to "submit
to the will of the people" and resign. Dissident Iraqi political, religious and
Kurdish groups said the revolt in Iraq was spreading. 6

Iraqis are expected to face widespread food shortages 6

The first American troops returned to jubilant, flag-waving, horn-honking
crowds. In a war shadowed at each step by the cloud of Vietnam, the sharpest
contrast between the two wars may be the homecoming. 1

Culture shock aboard the Clipper Home Sweet Home 4

The bodies of 17 British soldiers return to England 4

Powell and Cheney will greet P.O.W.'s when they return 5

"It's a great day to be a soldier," Schwarzkopf says 5

Forty journalists held captive in Iraq for almost a week were turned over to the
International Red Cross in Baghdad. The journalists, including 11 Americans, are
expected to leave the country today. 5

Saudi Arabia said it would be active in pursuing Arab-Israeli peacemaking, an
Administration official said. Secretary of State Baker laid out plans for an
approach to peace in a meeting with King Fahd. 6

The P.L.O. weighs Baker's offer; Israel suggests Arab meeting 6

Kuwaitis returning from captivity in Iraq complained bitterly of the ragged
homecoming they received at the border. Many of the 1,200 freed so far said they
were enraged that no Government officials had met them. 5

International 2-3, 7

The influx of Soviet Jews into Israel has overwhelmed the state's limited
resources. The Government has cut the subsidy given to new immigrants three
times, leaving many of them unable to start a new life. 1

Ankara Journal: Turkey hears the whispers of dynasty 2

Thousands of Albanian refugees who sailed to Italy have been given temporary
shelter, but the Foreign Ministry said that those who did not meet requirements
for political asylum or have a visa would be sent back. 3 Germany's attempts to
rehabilitate the former Prime Minister of East Germany, Lothar de Maiziere,
despite evidence he was once a police informant has set off protests and led to
the dismissal of two officials. 3

The Conservative Party was routed in a special election in Britain. Prime
Minister John Major said the result was a protest against the Government's
unpopular "poll tax" and not an indication of no confidence. 3

Air Europe files for bankruptcy, stranding 25,000 29

National 8-10

The nation's unemployment rate rose to 6.5 percent, from 6.2 percent, an
indication of a worsening recession. The Federal Reserve responded to the news
by lowering a key interest rate another notch. 1

Thousands of government workers, whose jobs were long thought to be among the
most secure, have been dismissed across the country, as states and
municipalities try to eliminate growing budget deficits. 8

Huge budget deficit shuts down Rhode Island's government 8

A majority of the F.C.C. now favors continuing to limit the ability of the
networks to sell lucrative television reruns. The development comes after weeks
of intense lobbying by Hollywood studios and the networks. 1

Effort to keep Exxon Valdez agreement secret is rejected 9 Pan Am could be shut
down next week if negotiations fail 29

Utah's restrictive anti-abortion law that goes into effect next month could, at
least in theory, subject women who have abortions to first-degree murder charges
because of an apparent legislative oversight. 8

Senator Hatfield of Oregon failed to disclose $9,265 gift 9

Doctors infected with the AIDS virus should avoid operating except in
emergencies, the largest orthopedic surgeons' group recommended, saying surgeons
also had an obligation to inform patients of their status. 8

Chemical that improves circulation may harm some people 9

Sixth child of faith healers dies in Philadelphia 10

Leslie Wexner donates $250 million to charitable groups 10

Regional 25-27

Mayor Dinkins plans to rally support for measures needed to get New York City
through its escalating fiscal problems by calling together bankers, realtors and
labor and civic leaders, the first deputy mayor said. 1

Mayor Dinkins endorsed a proposal for an experimental public high school
stressing the education of young black and Hispanic men. He also said for the
first time that he plans to seek re-election in 1993. 25

Mayor would make St. Patrick's Parade long enough for all 27

New York's recycling program falls behind second-year goals 26

Critic of the city's contracting is selected to head agency 27 The school-based
management plan that is the core of Chancellor Fernandez's effort to reform city
schools has improved teacher morale but not academic performance in Miami, where
he first used the idea. 25 The parents of an infant who starved to death were
arrested and charged with manslaughter and abandonment. The 7-month-old baby had
been left alone in a Bronx apartment without food or water for five days. 25

Family of five in New Jersey asphyxiated in accident 26

Subway officials unveil new plans for fire-safety 26

The Daily News's prospective buyer, Robert Maxwell, made public for the first
time how much money he needs to save if he takes over the paper -- a figure that
works out to more than $70 million a year. 27

A Russian emigre in Brooklyn was reunited with her cousin Boris -- 34 years
after she last saw him in the Soviet Union. He was the driver of a medical van
giving her a ride home from the podiatrist. 25



 Business Digest 29

Arts/Entertainment

The life of a monolgue 13

Los Angeles center drops the Joffrey 13

Music: Paul Simon 13

Philharmonic guest conductor 14

Dance: Trisha Brown 17

Stuart Pimsler Dance and Theater 16

A book compares Roosevelt successors 16

Tchaikovsky concert from Leningrad 46

Consumer's World 28

Planning beyond Social Security

After latest scare, U.S. is reviewing use of drug capsules

Coping with building a birdhouse

Obituaries 11

James (Cool Papa) Bell, legendary star of Negro Leagues

William Lacy Brown, crops geneticist

Edward Stierle, a dancer with the Joffrey Ballet

Sports

Baseball: Strawberry has big day against Mets 43

Basketball: Villanova stuns Syracuse 43

Providence upsets St. John's 43

Column: Berkow on a Yankee hopeful 43

Track and Field: Johnson finishes fourth 45

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials 22

Give them more than parades

Troubled bridges

Journalists freed

Punitive damages, unpunished

Letters 22

Russell Baker: Doing the end zone boogie 23

Tom Wicker: Thinking about 1992 23

Arthur Hertzberg: The other Palestinians 23

Katharine Kyes Leab: My new post office, address unknown 23

Franz S. Leichter: Read Mario Bush's lips 23

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
How Roosevelt's Successors Compare

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 984 words


The Riddle of Power
Presidential Leadership From Truman to Bush
By Robert Shogan
352 pages. Dutton. $21.95.

Since Franklin D. Roosevelt, whom most historians rank among the handful of
greats in the history of the Republic, the United States has had nine
Presidents: Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, Ford, Carter, Reagan
and Bush. Have any of them approached Roosevelt in stature and public affection
or attained similar success in both foreign and domestic affairs?

The sad conclusion of Robert Shogan in "The Riddle of Power" is: No.

The author, a veteran political correspondent in Washington for The Los Angeles
Times, writes: "Our recent Presidents, of both parties, have led us down a road
pitted with broken promises and misguided endeavors. Their combined performances
have forced us to wonder what it takes to achieve success in the White House and
how we should go about choosing a chief executive to lead the nation through the
twilight years of this century and prepare it for the next millennium."


Mr. Shogan withholds judgment on George Bush's Presidency -- he finds it too
soon to call -- even though politicians and pollsters immediately linked the
successful war in the Persian Gulf to Mr. Bush's chance for re-election in 1992.
He does, however, comment on the last Presidential election:

"As the election of George Bush in 1988 demonstrated only too well, Presidential
campaigns have become a vicious, empty competition, dominated by mudslinging,
evasion and deceit. The substantive value of that election can be judged by what
is best remembered now: from the Republican side, Bush's mindless and ultimately
hollow injunction to read his lips, and from the Democratic side, Lloyd
Bentsen's disparaging suggestion to J. Danforth Quayle that he was not John
Kennedy."

Mr. Shogan writes that regardless of the outcome of the war in the Middle East
(his book went to press before Desert Shield turned into Desert Storm), the
success or failure of the 41st President will still depend on how he responds to
two major challenges. At home, he will need to reinvigorate the country's
economy; abroad, he will have to define a new role for the country in a changing
world. "In both instances," the author says, "if Bush is to rally public support
he must establish a strong identity for himself and a clear direction for his
Presidency, so that he can govern by actions, not reactions."


The author makes it easy for the reader to follow his standards of success or
failure for each of the Presidencies by setting up three criteria: ideology,
values and character. None of the Presidents since Roosevelt get top grades on
all three tests. Americans who retain a memory of several or all of them,
probably base their views on which lever they pulled in the voting booth. The
author passes around praise where due, but also notes that some of the nine did
nothing significant domestically, that others did too much militarily, and that
at least one (Richard Nixon, because of Watergate) came close to impeachment and
another (Ronald Reagan, because of Iran-Contra) became vulnerable to it.

"The Riddle of Power" is filled with Presidential anecdotes, many involving
exchanges with the author himself during his three decades of political
coverage.

Once during the Nixon Presidency, as former President Truman sat around with a
group of correspondents, he was asked to evaluate Richard Nixon. Truman
demurred, saying, "There is a lady present." Mr. Shogan asked him if he could
"clean up" his answer. Truman replied: "No. Every time anything is said about
him now it just means another headline for him. It gives him a chance to get out
on the front page."

During the Nixon-Kennedy race in 1960, Mr. Shogan was working for The Miami
News. Many voters found the idea of Kennedy as President difficult to accept
because his credentials were slim and because his age, 43, made him seem "callow
and opportunistic," the author says. When it finally became clear that Kennedy
"had indeed eked out a narrow victory," he writes, the news editor at the paper
"suggested a headline that would have summed up the widespread doubts about his
candidacy and Presidency: 'It's a Boy!' "


One of the merits of this book is that it turns our minds to a chunk of time in
this century, 1945-1990, when the postwar dream and the cold war terror collided
and fused. As one goes down the list of Presidents who succeeded Roosevelt, it's
interesting to note that almost every one of the nine was entangled in small or
large military conflicts -- some inherited, some of their own making. These
include Korea, Lebanon, Cuba, Vietnam, Grenada, Panama and the Persian Gulf, not
to mention covert and proxy wars like Iran-Contra during the Reagan
Administration.

In a preface to a revised edition of his classic study of the modern Presidency,
"Presidential Power," Richard E. Neustadt wrote that Presidential weakness was
the underlying theme of his book. One of the points Mr. Shogan makes is that the
Presidency has become so complex a job that even if a President isn't weak when
he enters the White House, he discovers that he cannot simply give orders to a
chief of staff or try to do the job himself and expect that results will follow.
Growth has made it harder to control the Federal bureaucracy and a President
must still answer to Congress.

As a respected newspaperman, Mr. Shogan tries not to abandon his objectivity,
but he admits that he allows his opinions to come out in this book. On the
evidence presented here and elsewhere, most of these Presidents were far too
ordinary to perform brilliantly in an extraordinary job. On balance, "The Riddle
of Power" is a lively and straightforward primer on leadership, but it still
leaves open the question why potentially great Presidents cannot be discovered,
nominated and elected. That's still a riddle.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Shogan (Al Stephenson/Dutton)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
Thinking About 1992

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 730 words


Here are two notable facts that conceivably might turn the fast-approaching
Presidential campaign into a serious contest:

* As yet, no likely Democratic candidates are shaking hands and soliciting funds
in Iowa and New Hampshire, or any other primary state.

* Republicans have been warned by Roger Ailes, their hard-nosed political
consultant, to stop gloating over the Persian Gulf war as if it were a party
victory, and to beware of hurling charges of appeasement at those who voted
against that war.

Democrats who so voted must expect, of course, to have their votes held against
them by opponents who voted differently and who can and will claim, in
hindsight, to have been right. That's a far different thing from smearing the
patriotism or courage of those who opposed the war.

In New York, for a scurrilous example, the Conservative Party sponsored a
full-page ad inquiring: "Where Was Pat Moynihan When America Needed Him?"
Senator Moynihan, the ad continued, had "shamefully" voted against the President
and "against a strong America."

Mr. Moynihan, with many other Democrats, was in the Senate when America needed
him, taking part in one of the most searching debates Washington has seen in
years, then voting his conscience and his honest belief against authorizing
military action in the Middle East.

If Republicans, like New York Conservatives, choose to smear those who did so,
fair-minded Americans might begin to wonder whether a war in which they take
pride was fought for partisan political bombast, and whether a victory for which
Americans died is to be cheapened for the same purpose.

President Bush, notably, has not engaged in cheap talk of appeasement and lack
of patriotism. His chief of staff, John Sununu, told a television audience,
however, that Democrats would be held responsible -- as they should be -- for
their votes on what Mr. Sununu ringingly overstated as "the most important issue
this country has had to deal with in about 40 years."

The arms race? The cold war? The end of the cold war? The wars in Korea and
Vietnam? Civil rights?  Watergate? The opening to China?  Hostages in Iran?
Rescuing Kuwait was more important than any of those? As patriotism is the last
refuge of a scoundrel, so hyperbole is the tendency of ignorant men.

Democrats cannot count on Republicans, however, to snatch defeat from the jaws
of victory by schoolboy taunting and gloating, though Mr. Ailes's warning was
well deserved. A Democratic candidate will have to be put up against Mr. Bush
next year, and right now it's hard to see how anyone could beat the victor of
the gulf war.

That's why the current absence of candidates in the early primary states may be
significant. It takes time, effort, organizational skills and lots of money to
mount a campaign through 30-odd state primaries, at the end of which -- if
recent history is a guide -- the Democratic survivor is not likely to be in good
position to win a national election.

In view of the Middle East victory and Mr. Bush's high poll standing, not as
many Democrats are likely to make such a huge effort as might otherwise have
been expected. Senator Nunn of Georgia, who voted against the war, perhaps for
that reason has said that he "cannot visualize any circumstances" under which he
would run. Those who do mount primary campaigns -- and some surely will,
probably including Representative Richard Gephardt of Missouri -- will be
getting such a late start that they may not be able to run in as many states or
as effectively as they would have in other years.

For both reasons, the door might be opened a crack next year for those who might
see an opportunity after inconclusive early primaries to enter a still-open
race; and opened, too, for new faces -- someone like Bill Moyers, the widely
known television journalist and former White House aide, who made an eloquent
and impassioned speech to a Democratic leadership group meeting yesterday in
Virginia.

Those possibilities could have the effect of keeping the race open until the
Democratic national convention, thus making it more significant than usual in
influencing the choice of a candidate. That, in turn, would create more national
interest; and it might result in a candidate who would be a fresher personality,
and more appealing nationally than a familiar figure chosen only in state
primaries.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Someone Must Have a Plan

BYLINE: By Dennis H. Wrong; Dennis H. Wrong, a professor of sociology at New
York University, is the author of "Power: Its Forms, Bases, and Uses."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1574 words



THE END OF LAISSEZ-FAIRE
National Purpose and the Global Economy
After the Cold War.
By Robert Kuttner.
304 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $22.95.

One wonders how many times Robert Kuttner's title, "The End of Laissez-Faire,"
has been used in the last century and a half for speeches, symposiums, articles,
books, even as a slogan. Mr. Kuttner has purposefully borrowed it from what is
perhaps its most famous previous use: as the title for an essay by John Maynard
Keynes, written in 1926.

Keynes's essay was not concerned with the condition of domestic market economies
but with international economics -- with trade balances and currency exchange
rates, tariffs and customs unions, the gold standard and world capital markets.
Keynes's theme was how to avoid the beggar-thy-neighbor excesses of
protectionism without succumbing to the utopianism of free trade, so beloved by
orthodox economists then and now. This is Mr. Kuttner's theme, too.

In 1984, in "The Economic Illusion," he argued the case against pure
laissez-faire in the management of a domestic economy. This volume amounts to a
sequel, extending the argument to the more complex world of the international
economy, "a realm in which the forces of private commerce are far more difficult
to tame, for the obvious reason that the reach of the nation-state ends at its
borders." Mr. Kuttner, an economics correspondent for The New Republic and a
columnist for Business Week, insists that his "quarrel . . . is not with
capitalism itself, only with its utopian variation, and I quarrel in the spirit
of Keynes." His book appears at a moment of transition in world politics and
economics that is comparable to the fateful period of postwar instability when
Keynes wrote his essay.

Mr. Kuttner observes that his subject is "the second end of laissez-faire." For
if Keynes's advice was not heeded in the 1920's, the Great Depression of the
30's and the Government interventions unleashed by World War II had the effect
of retrospectively elevating him to prophetic stature. Not only did he become
the virtual architect of the fiscal interventionism and, to a lesser extent, the
welfare-state policies adopted by the American and British Governments that came
after the war, but he also played a leading role at the 1944 Bretton Woods
conference. Intended to establish a new international economic order free of the
disastrous instabilities of the previous decade, the conference created a global
interventionist framework featuring fixed exchange rates and centered on two new
institutions, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.

Yet after these reforms, belief in laissez-faire made a steady comeback,
culminating in the antigovernment policies of the Reagan Administration. "The
intriguing question," Mr. Kuttner writes, "is why the utopian vision of a pure
market economy proved so potent -- why it came back to life, after being so
thoroughly discredited by events half a century ago and after most advanced
nations successfully built their postwar societies very much in the spirit of a
mixed economy rather than a laissez-faire one." Roughly half of "The End of
Laissez-Faire" tries to answer this question, focusing on the United States; the
other half advances prescriptions for a new regulated world economic order that,
far from challenging American national purpose, could, in Mr. Kuttner's view,
reinvigorate it.

The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank never became the genuinely
supranational authorities envisaged by Keynes. Essentially, they developed into
institutions that provided loans and economic advice, primarily to less
developed nations. They were not permitted to take the key step of establishing
an international unit of exchange, a standard by which national currencies could
be both measured and regulated. Instead, under Bretton Woods, the United States
dollar, the currency of the dominant political and economic power in the postwar
world, emerged as a kind of international unit of exchange, although
philosophically the United States was unprepared to play the role of world
banker that its currency's position seemed to require. Washington ardently
supported unrestricted free trade on ideological grounds. Moreover, given the
productive superiority of the American economy, free trade served American
interests just as it had those of Britain in the 19th century, when the British
were the major world power and a lack of trade restrictions assured their
economic dominance.

The United States, however, has clung to a belief in the unqualified virtues of
a free world market long after the loss of its postwar economic dominance, and
despite the manifest failure of Japan and Europe to practice laissez-faire,
either domestically or internationally. The combined effect of the Japanese and
European revival in the 1960's and the domestic American inflation resulting
from the war in Vietnam so weakened the dollar that its position as an
international unit of exchange became untenable. This led President Richard
Nixon to abandon the Bretton Woods exchange rates agreements in 1970. The United
States announced it would no longer defend the position of the dollar on
international markets and no longer exchange gold for dollars. Henceforth, the
American currency "floated."

The pressures on the dollar were due, Mr. Kuttner explains, to the
contradictions between the role of the United States as the leader of the
Western alliance and its persistent affirmation of international laissez-faire.
A good part of his story consists of pointing up those contradictions. Thus he
argues that a free market with floating exchange rates would have been
catastrophic for the European standard of living after the war, so Bretton Woods
and the Marshall Plan, hardly consonant with laissez-faire economics, were
adopted to strengthen the Western powers. Mr. Kuttner also devotes an entire
chapter to the export controls instituted by the Pentagon in the name of
military security. These, he maintains, have resulted in American companies
losing high-tech markets abroad to the Japanese and the Europeans.

After the collapse of the Bretton Woods system, though the United States
remained the geopolitical leader of the West, its domestic politics turned
increasingly away from the Keynesian-welfare state heritage of the New Deal.
Finally, Mr. Kuttner contends, "the policies of Reagan and Thatcher . . . all
but obliterated the political logic of the postwar mixed economy." The Reagan
years brought both an intensification of American militancy in waging the cold
war and a further downgrading of interventionist economics.

Mr. Kuttner thinks that the end of the cold war creates an opportune moment for
facing the realities of the world economy. (Most of his book was obviously
written before Iraq invaded Kuwait, although he briefly comments in the
introduction that "the Kuwait crisis underscored the United States' continuing
image of itself as a hegemonic power while its major allies retained the habit
of acting as free riders on the system.") His general argument is that the
United States no longer has a geopolitical-military excuse for turning a blind
eye on the partly managed trade policies of its allies, who are clearly not now
going to embrace the free-trade faith they rejected even when in need of
American military protection. The world, as the title of Mr. Kuttner's
penultimate chapter suggests, is "Slouching Toward Pluralism."

Nations can now be distributed along a continuum from mercantilism to free
trade, but none are situated at the extreme free-trade end -- not even the
United States. As Mr. Kuttner shows, it has never fully practiced what it
preaches, neither with regard to steel and semiconductors, sectors that affect
national security, nor even in so nonmilitary an industry as textiles. Japan
stands close to the mercantilist pole of the continuum, and Mr. Kuttner provides
an informed chapter on the Japanese pursuit of export markets, often at the
expense of domestic consumers.

Does he, then, urge a protectionist economic nationalism as recently advocated,
at least tacitly, by some commentators on both the right and the left? He
insists not, asserting that his goal is a global mixed economy that would create
the conditions for peace and prosperity: "After a detour of nearly fifty years,
we have cycled back to the agenda of 1944: pluralism, peace and planning." He
wants a world system that will "discourage individual nations from running
chronic trade surpluses" and suggests that European-Japanese trade relations
provide a model for such a system.

Critics will contend that in practice Mr. Kuttner's prescriptions would lead to
fierce economic competition among nations that would be devastating for the
losers, whose ranks might very well include the United States. Mr. Kuttner
himself recognizes as "two nagging political questions" the degree of
farsightedness of American voters and the relative competence of the American
public sector. Acknowledging the prevailing post-Reagan antigovernment mood
shared even by the Democrats, he nevertheless expresses a cautious optimism that
a new "planning coalition" including segments of business is forming. Whether
one agrees with this or not, the richly detailed evidence Mr. Kuttner has
assembled will have to be taken into account by anyone assessing the present
state of the world economy.

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SUNDAY VIEW;
At the Public, This Bud's for You, Bard

BYLINE: By David Richards

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2535 words


A lot will no doubt be made of the anachronisms that the director JoAnne
Akalaitis has sprinkled liberally throughout her staging of "Henry IV, Parts I
and II," the 16th and 17th productions in the Public Theater's continuing
Shakespeare marathon.

The epic is barely under way when Poins, that nimble-fingered rogue no less
nimble on his feet, bounds on stage -- a drumstick in his mouth, a bagel in his
pocket and a television set, presumably pilfered, under his arm. From there on
in, there is hardly a scene that doesn't bear the trace or the detritus of the
20th century. Sometimes it is as blatant as an automobile tire, hung around the
neck of an abject army conscript, or the clutter of empty Budweiser cans at the
foot of a tavern bed. Other times, it's no more intrusive than a chain of safety
pins dangling from the shoulder of a denim jacket or a paper parasol decorating
a drink.

You could almost make an evening of it (actually about six hours, if you catch
the two plays in tandem), tracking down violations in the basic medieval
landscape. Here, I am tempted to say, is the stage's answer to the Waldo books,
in which that mischievous little chap, about a quarter-inch high, is hidden away
in elaborate illustrations of other places and other ages. And yet, you'd be
surprised at how easy it is to accept a world of broadswords and Tommy guns,
princely robes and sunglasses.

There is only one condition, really. You've got to believe the actors.

It doesn't matter all that much whether Falstaff collapses into a wooden chair
or, as he does here, into an old automobile seat and then finds the force of so
much descending weight carrying him and the chair over backward, so that all we
see for a second are the soles of his immense boots. If the man's girth and
gourmandise are real to us, the ungainly somersault will be, too, whatever the
chair that's proved wanting.

Nor does it necessarily hurt that Prince Hal's wardrobe consists more or less of
the sort of leisure wear you could spot on any campus quad these days. Until he
undergoes a conversion to higher purposes, Prince Hal is his era's equivalent of
the fraternity hell-raiser. If we accept the rebelliousness in his soul, we'll
accept the clothes on his back. And there, as the man said, is the rub.

The vision that Ms. Akalaitis has put on the stage of the Newman Theater -- a
synthesis of High Gothic elegance, the brown and wintry squalor of Bruegel and
the pasty-white institutional madness codified by Peter Brook in "Marat/Sade" --
is often astonishing to behold. But it is almost totally unsupported by the
acting and therefore likely to strike many as maddeningly arbitrary. (Why an
automobile tire? Why not a steering wheel?) The natural reaction is to condemn
the director for tinkering -- it can't, after all, be the lines that are letting
us down -- and to dismiss these "Henrys" as one more misguided attempt to catch
Shakespeare up with our times.

In fact, it seems to me that the deficiencies lie primarily with the casting.
Put these very same actors in a more conventional production -- one in which the
character of Rumor, say, is not a little bleached chippy in a black plastic
raincoat decorated with wagging tongues -- and I suspect the experience would be
even less gratifying. This may not be designer Shakespeare, but the designers
are doing all the interesting work.

Within a crumbling brick cathedral, dusted with dead leaves and, later, the sad
downward drift of snow, the set designer George Tsypin evokes brawling inns,
drafty palace rooms and scorched battlefields. Jennifer Tipton's lighting ranges
boldly from the golden flicker of real on-stage fires to the flat, accusatory
glare of neon tubes, while you could say that Gabriel Berry's costumes are right
off the wrack -- torn as they are between the old world and the new.

The Boar's Head Tavern -- as they imagine it and Ms. Akalaitis populates it --
is a ghastly charnel house, with gutted piglets hanging from the rafters and
syphilitic customers entwined lewdly on the floor. Once the bacchanal has
subsided, the bodies, still writhing in tortured slumber, are blanketed in
half-light, while Henry IV appears above them to deliver his paean to the
"gentle sleep" cradling his poor subjects. The speech, culminating with the
observation that "uneasy lies the head that wears a crown," is rendered bitterly
ironic under the circumstances. A whole society lies uneasy.

This kind of texturing is characteristic of the productions as a whole. Ms.
Akalaitis thinks nothing of superimposing filmed images on slide projections on
live action and then, for good measure, adding a further layer of smoke. While
aspects of these "Henrys" are undeniably ugly and brutal, the panoramic
impression, curiously enough, is often one of autumnal beauty. Very nearly all
the enticements are visual, though. Ms. Akalaitis puts together one
extraordinary picture after another, but the scenes themselves have no momentum.
They chronicle flurries of activity, not forward motion. Were it not for Philip
Glass's lovely original score, suggesting time itself rushing and tumbling
toward the uncertain future, we would have little sense of events building to a
climax.

Narrow the focus to the individual performers and the productions lose their
interest completely. Louis Zorich is a Falstaff as tradition pictures him -- the
head of Father Christmas on the body of a giant squash -- but the lusty emotions
are perfunctorily rendered, and you can't say his friendship with Prince Hal
runs deep. As Hal, Thomas Gibson brings to the part great cheekbones and not
much else -- he's a small, naturalistic actor lost in the vastness of
Shakespeare. In that, he is not alone. Ruth Maleczech's squawking Mistress
Quickly would be more at home haggling in a bargain basement. With the exception
of Larry Bryggman, a forceful enough Henry IV, even in death's clutches, and
Rodney Scott Hudson, a coolly devious Archbishop of York, no one seems
comfortable speaking Elizabethan English.

In Jared Harris's case, the discomfort is intentional. Mr. Harris's Hotspur has
a speech defect that stops him dead in his feverish tracks. Whenever he hits a
word beginning with "b" -- like "buh . . . buh . . . buh . . . Bolingbroke" --
his eyes bug out and he threatens to explode from the buildup of internal
pressure. Mr. Harris returns later, tripped-out and reeling, as Pistol, a man
with a Vespa, if not a mission.

Few in the large cast are without tics of some kind or another. (Even fewer are
without lice.) Character, in Ms. Akalaitis's view, tends to boil down to
idiosyncrasy, and language is simply disturbance made audible.

It would be foolhardy, as a result, to go to these troubled "Henrys" to listen.
Your ears are sure to wander. Go to look. Your eyes will tell you all there is
to know.

'The Big Love'

I won't pretend that "The Big Love" (at the Plymouth Theater), the one-woman
show by Brooke Allen and Jay Presson Allen about the very marginal life of
Florence Aadland, is anything more than it is -- a curious slice of Hollywood
Gothic. But it is being performed under the best possible conditions: Tracey
Ullman is starring in it.

Without going overboard, let's just say that Ms. Ullman is terrific, playing a
not very bright woman whose notions of glamour, success and morality have been
entirely shaped by the movies. Florence Aadland's only claim to fame was that
she was the mother of Beverly Aadland, a starlet whose only claim to fame was
that at 15, she became the mistress of Errol Flynn. For the two years prior to
his death in 1959, Beverly led a semblance of the Hollywood high life and so,
vicariously at least, did Florence.

Since Beverly was a minor, Flynn was a legendary swordsman and the Eisenhowers
still stood as symbolic guardians of the public virtue, the affair earned a
measure of notoriety in the press, while Florence was branded by the less
gentlemanly supermarket tabloids as "the Mother Procuress." Beverly subsequently
went on to a brief nightclub career and obscurity. For her sins as an unfit
parent, Florence was sentenced to two months in jail and later wrote "The Big
Love," her rapturous account of days and nights with Beverly and Errol, on which
this script is based. Set in a tawdry L.A. bungalow in the hours before Florence
is to go into the slammer, it finds her packing her meager possessions, sipping
red wine and chatting up a confidential storm, as if the theater itself were one
big beauty shop.

Obviously, we're talking footnotes here. Ten years later, the Aadlands'
escapades probably would have passed unnoticed. But the Allens (mother and
daughter) have been right to sense that the tale, weird and pathetic as it is,
is also touched with surrealistic comedy. Ms. Ullman, looking like Tammy Faye
Bakker trying to look like Ginger Rogers, is brilliant at capturing all that is
cheap, vulgar and off-center about the woman without once condescending to her.
But there's a feisty gallantry to the portrait, too. "We're not exactly Beverly
Hills here," she says, casting a disparaging look about the surroundings. "Wanna
hear my new motto? 'So what!' " Apologies are not part of her style, which runs
to lacquered blond hair, harlequin glasses and naughty tales, even if they are
being told out of school.

Fate dealt her two miscarriages and she lost a foot in an automobile accident,
but the way she sees it -- mist momentarily clouding her eyes, heavy with
mascara -- Beverly is "my gift from the universe." No mother ever tended a
daughter's shrine more assiduously. She has the snapshots to back up the
glittery memories, Beverly's "Heidi" dress, and the menu from that fabulous
night at the Copacabana, signed by everyone who was present -- Beverly, Errol,
Frankie Laine and the headwaiter.

Eager to communicate the full measure of her daughter's talent, she puts "Let a
Smile Be Your Umbrella" on the phonograph and sings and dances the number, just
as Beverly does in her sensational nightclub act. She's a bush-league Mama Rose
and the overwrought routine is hilarious.  Ms. Ullman doesn't stop there,
though. Florence swells with all the breathless pride of a job well done. The
evidence is, to her mind, incontrovertible, however pitiful we may find it.

But then, she doesn't want our pity, merely our acknowledgment that a daughter
like Beverly would make any mother's existence worthwhile. In that respect, the
character is not unlike the washed-up Truman Capote, who spent the week before
Christmas in Jay Presson Allen's "Tru" repeatedly evoking his genius to excuse
the wreckage of his life. "Tru," of course, had the advantage of showing us the
underside of a celebrity. Florence Aadland was a nobody to begin with and a
nobody in the end. And you can't say she did much with the years in between. It
is Ms. Ullman's huge talent and brilliant intuitions that make her, against
considerable odds, a somebody.

'The Speed of Darkness'

As part of a high-school assignment designed to discourage teen-age pregnancy,
the young daughter in "The Speed of Darkness" (at the Belasco Theater) carries
with her at all times an 11-pound bag of dirt, her "baby." She is getting off
easy. The adult characters in Steve Tesich's drama about the legacy of the
Vietnam conflict are lugging around two-ton sacks of guilt.

This is what is generally called a "serious" play, which means that it addresses
issues of consequence with a gravity that can be easily taken for importance. It
certainly deserves no one's disrespect. But its ponderousness cannot be denied,
either. From the start, Mr. Tesich holds out the promise of a shocking
revelation at the play's end. When the long-awaited moment comes, revelation
proves a massive letdown. It's rather like having the covers whipped off a
sludge pile. The contours were more tantalizing under wraps.

Mr. Tesich is not the first to point out that the Vietnam veteran took a
psychological and physical battering on the battlefield, and that when he
returned home -- often to indifference or, worse, scorn -- he brought the war
with him. David Rabe's "Sticks and Bones," Tom Cole's "Medal of Honor Rag," the
Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company's "Tracers" have all spun variations
of the story. However, the spareness and formality of Mr. Tesich's dialogue
suggest that he is trying to move the tale beyond naturalism and at least nudge
it in the direction of Greek tragedy.

His pivotal character, a middle-aged veteran named Joe (Len Cariou), has
presumably got on with his life in South Dakota. He has a caring wife, a bright
daughter, a successful construction business and a home with a picture window
that affords him a spectacular view of the mesa in the distance. As the play
begins, he's about to be named South Dakota's "Man of the Year." But every
aspect of his life -- wife, daughter, business, award -- involves a lie and I
probably don't have to tell you that even the mesa hides a secret. When Lou
(Stephen Lang), his old battlefield buddy, shows up, the unravelling begins.

Mr. Lang, who played such a vivid martinet in "A Few Good Men," has a crazed
sweetness as a homeless veteran who once tried to scratch his name into the
Vietnam Memorial with a can opener and whose chief occupation these days is
following the touring version of the memorial ("son of wall," he calls it)
around the country. He's one of the M.I.A.'s -- "Missing in America" -- and no
one's bothering to look for him. At times, the performer is eerily reminiscent
of Art Carney in "The Honeymooners" -- almost goofily good-natured. Then, his
mind goes out of focus and he's scary as blazes. Simply having him around adds a
welcome level of ambiguity to "The Speed of Darkness," and when he produces a
gun from under his ragged fatigues, he jolts the play momentarily to life.

Mr. Cariou is hard put to top him. His portliness argues for a life of
comfortable self-indulgence, not gathering torment, and he attacks the final
monologue with the gluttony of a good burgher chomping into a roast leg of lamb.
The performance never transcends an inherent weightiness: Mr. Cariou gives us
all of the anguish of confession and little of the enlightenment.

The title refers, I would guess, to the rapidity with which lives can fall
apart, when they are rooted in falsehood. But the solemnity of Robert Falls's
direction lends it an unintended irony. Destruction comes slowly, although
hardly inexorably, to the empty heartland of Mr. Tesich's America. The
supporting cast -- Lisa Eichhorn, Kathryn Erbe and Robert Sean Leonard -- seems
trapped between a vague foreboding and a growing numbness.

"The Speed of Darkness" is the first production to be offered under the Broadway
Alliance, which aims to encourage the presentation of new plays in certain
under-used Broadway theaters by trimming costs across the board. In theory, the
top ticket price, $24, will be instrumental in luring audiences back to
Broadway. In reality, the plan's success rides entirely on the merits of the
plays in question. But hasn't that always been the case?

Cut-rate prices for cut-rate goods are no bargain, after all. They're just
another come-on.


LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Caris Corfman as Rumor in "Henry IV, Part II"--The panoramic
impression, curiously enough, is often of autumnal beauty (George E. Joseph/New
York Shakespeare Festival) (pg. 5); Mr. Lang as Lou in "The Speed of
Darkness"--scary as blazes (Martha Swope/"The Speed of Darkness"); Ms. Ullman as
Florence Aadland in "The Big Love"--I'm somebody. Who are you? (Martha
Swope/"The Big Love") (pg. 6)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'THE DOORS';
Of Heroes, Hippies and Hype

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4; Column 3; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 263 words


To the Editor:

Oliver Stone's belief that a positive response to his film "The Doors" will
confirm a "quickening of the American pulse" back up to its 1960's rate is
laughable ["Oliver Stone and 'The Doors': Obsession Meets the Obsessed," Feb.
24]. The hollowness of his claim that "the 60's are coming back" (apparently,
with the opening of his movie) is underscored only pages away in an article by
Jon Parales ["Caution: Now Entering the War Zone"], who gives a thoughtful and
informed comparison of popular music's response to the Persian Gulf war and its
very different role in the Vietnam era.

Saying that interest in Jim Morrison means a resurgence in 1960's political
values is like believing that the resurrected fashions of white lipstick and
suede fringe will lead college students to storm the administration building
next week. Mr. Stone has gone for the surface, not the substance, and has chosen
to tell the story of the 60's icon who could be most easily accepted today.

Morrison was, despite the lewdness, "acceptably" sexy, charismatic, mysterious;
he and the band were sarcastically referred to by one observer in 1969 as "the
No. 1 teeny-bopper group in America." Morrison was not so much an embodiment of
60's politics as one of the juiciest, if tragic, stories to come out of that
era.

The Doors made some great singles, and I will gladly go see Mr. Stone's film.
But the director should spare us the current-events lessons. There has been more
than enough hype surrounding Jim Morrison for the last 20 years.

ALISON M. POWER
New York City

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Campus Life: Berkeley;
Deal Is Struck on Fate Of Park and Protest Site

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 39; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 647 words

DATELINE: BERKELEY, Calif.


The University of California at Berkeley has agreed not to build dormitories on
People's Park, an open space that has gained international fame as the site of
recurring demonstrations, beginning with the Vietnam War.

More recently the park has served as the daytime home of more than 30 homeless
people.

The university, which bought the property in 1967 to build a recreation area,
parking lot and offices, has offered to lease half of the park to the City of
Berkeley for $1 a year for at least the next five years.

As part of this proposal, volleyball and basketball courts are planned for the
university-controlled areas -- the center, grassy part of the park -- and the
city would be responsible for the gardens and wooded area.

The Berkeley City Council recently approved the lease proposal, but it still
must be approved by the university's Board of Regents, which meets March 15 at
the University of California at Los Angeles.

At a Feb. 19 meeting, the City Council voted 6 to 3 in favor of the proposal,
but sought a series of amendments, including a provision to allow free meals for
the homeless to continue. In a letter to Mayor Loni Hancock, Chancellor
Chang-lin Tien urged the Council to reconsider and approve the lease without
modifications.

The original proposal was then approved at the next Council meeting, despite
angry protests from about 100 people in the audience who eventually took over
the Council chambers. Seven people were arrested.

Ready for a Fight

Those who want to keep People's Park as it is are ready to "fight the proposal
every step of the way," said Curtis Bray, a member of the Save the Park
coalition. "They are just trying to take the power away from the people," he
said. "The park should remain an open space and I will lay in front of the
bulldozers, tear down the fences, do anything to keep it that way."

A 1989 university development plan called for paving the 2.8-acre park and
replacing the scruffy grass and vegetable gardens with a 200-bed student
dormitory.

Those bent on keeping the park an open space took their concerns to the streets,
where a torchlight vigil on May 19, 1989, turned chaotic.

By August 1989, an accord between former Chancellor Ira Michael Heyman and Mayor
Hancock established the lease proposal outlining joint custody of the park.

'The Park Is Underutilized'

When the university acquired the property in 1967, its initial construction
plans were delayed, and protesters planted trees and vegetable gardens on the
plot for public use. Some community members have been struggling ever since to
keep the space open.

Under the latest plan, the university wants to build athletic courts to replace
courts that will be displaced by a new health services building on the edge of
the campus.

"The park is underutilized," said Milton Fujii, the university's community
affairs director. "Only a small group of people use the park and they are not
representative of the community,"

Homeless people use the park for sleeping and storing their belongings during
daytime hours. Until recently -- when the university police started patroling
the park on a regular basis -- it was a "hiding place for criminals," Mr. Fujii
said.

In 1972, a plan for the city to lease the entire park for $1 a year from the
university was rejected by the Board of Regents, which advised the university to
"expeditiously build student dormitories" on the site.

In May 1969, Gov. Ronald Reagan declared a state of emergency in Berkeley and
called out the National Guard after a protest turned into a bloody clash between
demonstrators and Alameda County sheriffs. One person died.

Every year, People's Park supporters commemorate the day the "people took over
the park" in April, and every May 15 there is a candlelight vigil to remember
the more than 40 people who were injured in the riot.

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

An Exception to Rule of War: Inflation Threat Is Receding

BYLINE: By SYLVIA NASAR

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1519 words


From the Revolution to Vietnam, virtually every American war has sparked a round
of inflation. But the Persian Gulf war looks as if it will be an exception. A
barrage of signals -- including cheaper oil and raw materials, softer prices at
factories, swelling cattle herds and shrinking bonuses for sales workers --
suggests that inflation may retreat.

The drop could be striking, and price increases could well stay low for years.
The most compelling reason for thinking so is the Federal Reserve's four-year
spell of stinginess in pumping cash and credit into the economy. Since 1987, the
money supply has grown, on average, at just half the rate of the early 80's.

"We've built the foundation for lower inflation," said W. Lee Hoskins, president
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, noting that the Federal Reserve Board
and its chairman, Alan Greenspan, have been committed to nudging inflation down
by gradually reducing money growth.

Economy Would Gain

If inflation stays low, the economy would benefit. The United States would fall
closer in line with such rich and powerful nations as Germany and Japan, whose
inflation rates have averaged half of the United States rate, or less, in the
last decade. And long-term interest rates could edge down as investors' fears of
future inflation eased.

What is more, future recessions would probably be milder than the harsh
downturns that ruptured the high-inflation years. One reason that most
economists expect the current recession to be shorter and shallower is that
inflation has not raced out of control.

Many forecasters, including those at the Federal Reserve, expect consumer price
inflation to average 3 to 4 percent this year, compared with an annual rate of
almost 7 percent in the second half of 1990. For the next few months, the rate
could hover around 2 percent, forecasters at DRI/McGraw-Hill said, as the lower
cost of a barrel of crude oil works its way into a broad spectrum of consumer
prices. Last fall, spot oil prices shot toward $40 a barrel; now, oil is trading
at about $18 a barrel.

That would give consumer buying power a welcome boost and help stabilize
spending. "It's like a $16 billion personal tax cut and is worth $170 per
household," said Roger E. Brinner, the chief economist at DRI/McGraw-Hill.

Among the reasons the Persian Gulf War seems not to have been inflationary are
that it lasted only 42 days, quickly contained the threat to oil supplies, was
financed in part by American allies and was fought with armstaken from
inventory. Ordinarily, military spending overheats the economy as production
surges to supply the war effort, leaving fewer goods available for civilian
consumption. As a result prices rise.

 More Room for the Fed



The lower oil prices now give the Federal Reserve more room to fight the
recession. "Because a lessening of cost pressures has improved the outlook for
prices, the easing of policy has been possible without raising new concerns in
the financial markets about inflation prospects." Mr. Greenspan testified before
Congress on Wednesday. And on Friday, the Federal Reserve once again pushed down
interest rates.

This low-inflation scenario could stumble if, for example, oil prices took off
again, the dollar suddenly plunged, or state and local governments jacked up
taxes sky high in an attempt to solve their budget problems. But the Federal
Reserve's semiannual monetary policy report, issued on Feb. 20, alludes to the
"downward tilt of the underlying inflation trend." That view is shared by
Administration and Congressional economists, as well as many private
forecasters.

There has already been a basic improvement in price trends -- as any driver who
has recently pulled up to a gasoline pump can attest -- but it has been largely
obscured in official inflation measures because of a rash of one-time events and
statistical flukes.

 One-Time Hits



To take just one example: Higher Federal excise taxes on gasoline, alcohol and
cigarettes will probably exaggerate this winter's inflation rate by more than
one-third, John F. Peterson, an economist at the Congressional Budget Office,
estimated. Other special factors were the 17 percent postal rate increase that
went into effect last month and the second installment of the minimum wage
increase. These onetime hits should be absorbed in a month or two.

Four forces are helping to beat down inflation, most economists agree: weaker
commodity prices, especially for energy and food, which together account for
about one-fifth of consumer spending; the recession, preceded by a year and a
half of extremely sluggish economic growth; slackening wage gains, and, finally,
signs that productivity outside manufacturing is holding up better than expected
during the downturn. A major factor in each, most analysts say, is the Federal
Reserve's monetary restraint in recent years.

The immediate source of relief is, of course, cheaper crude oil. At around $18,
oil prices are back where they were in the first half of 1990. They should
bobble around $20 in this year's second half, down from $24.40 in the comparable
period last year, said Adam E. Sieminski, an economist at the Washington
Analysis Group.

Richard D. Rippe, chief economist at Dean Witter Reynolds, commented,
"Indirectly, that's slowing prices charged by metals and paper manufacturers, on
the one hand, and airlines and hotels on the other."

And David D. Hale, chief economist at Kemper Financial Services, said, "The
prices of key industrial commodities are falling because the world economy is
much weaker now."

California's drought and recent freeze notwithstanding, food prices are also
moderating. Prices had been climbing at close to a 6 percent rate for the last
two years, faster than inflation. Now the Department of Agriculture's official
forecast calls for advances of 2 to 5 percent, with the department's chief
forecaster, Ralph Parlett, saying that "awful things would have to happen to hit
the upper forecast range."

Though the Fed has been loosening gradually since the spring of 1989 and more
aggressively this winter, money growth on average has been far lower in the last
four years than in the first half of the 80's. In particular, the Federal
Reserve did not react to last summer's oil price shock by flooding the economy
with money. "That was a very important decision," said Lynn Reaser, an economist
at First Interstate Bancorp. "Very few companies were able to pass on the rise
in energy costs."

Sluggish Growth

The consequence of monetary restraint was sluggish growth even before Saddam
Hussein toppled the economy into recession. "Spare capacity in factories and
looser labor markets make it harder for business and workers to push for price
and wage gains," Mr. Rippe of Dean Witter Reynolds said.

As a consequence, compensation costs are moderating. The Bureau of Labor
Statistics' employment cost index rose 4.6 percent in December from a year
earlier, down from an increase of 5.2 percent in June. Slow growth and recession
pushed unemployment up to 6.5 percent in February from its low of 5.3 percent
last June. As long as unemployment stays above what is considered full
employment -- which most economists put at 5.5 to 6 percent -- employment costs
should keep moderating.

The trend is especially evident among service companies that are squeezing some
of their highest-paid help, salespeople, real estate agents and stockbrokers.
"The upscale labor market is flabbier than it's ever been," said Stephen
Strongin of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Basic Change Seen

Smaller raises may reflect a fundamental change in the job market, suggested
Daniel J. B. Mitchell, a professor of management at the University of California
at Los Angeles.

Workers are less cushioned from market forces by union contracts or
paternalistic employers; union membership is down to 12 percent of private,
non-government workers. While small-business payrolls swelled by 15 million
during the 80's, Fortune 500 companies shed 2 million jobs. In deciding how much
to raise pay last year, Mr. Mitchell said, "employers looked to conditions in
the labor market, not to some notion of protecting workers' purchasing power."

But permanent progress on the inflation front ultimately depends on faster
productivity growth, almost everyone agrees. "The only way to have strong growth
without inflation is to increase productivity faster," said Mr. Hale of Kemper
Financial Services. Otherwise, he said, low inflation comes at the cost of
stagnating living standards.

There has been an early sign that the productivity trend might be improving.
Productivity rose slightly in the recession's first quarter, instead of
declining along with output as it usually does at the start of a downturn. At
the beginning of the 1981-82 slump, by contrast, productivity plunged at a 5.5
percent annual rate. Since companies laid off workers a lot sooner in the
current slump, some economists say, once output picks up in a recovery,
productivity gains could be sizable.


LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Table: "Wars and Prices"

Price increases during the period of inflation caused by war.
War                            % Prices Rose

Revolutionary War                        201
 1775-1783

War of 1812                               39
 1812-1815

Mexican War                                8
 1846-1848

Civil War                                117
 (Union)
 1861-1865

Civil War                              9,210
 (Confederacy)
 1861-1865

Spanish-American War                       8
 1898

World War I                              126
 1917-1918

World War II                             108
 1941-1945

Korean War                                 2
 1950-1953

Vietnam War                               69
 1964-1973


Source: Claudia D. Goldin, Harvard University (pg. 24)

Graph: "Declining Indicators," tracks inflation, 1988-1990 (Source: Center for
International Business Cycle Research); "The Cost of Labor is Declining," tracks
percent change in compensation for labor over pervious 12-month period,
March-Dec. 1990 (Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics) (pg. 24)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: Chemical Arms;
Navy Report Asserts Many Nations Seek Or Have Poison Gas

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 384 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 9


A Navy intelligence report has named at least 14 nations outside the Soviet
Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization that are believed to possess
chemical weapons, including American allies like Israel, Egypt, South Korea,
Taiwan and Pakistan. It says 10 other nations are believed to be seeking
chemical armaments.

The report says that Saudi Arabia, a most important United States ally in the
Persian Gulf crisis, may also have chemical weapons.

The Navy document also states publicly for the first time that Syria, another
critical member of the allied military coalition, possesses biological weapons
and may have chemical arms.

The analysis, prepared by the Director of Naval Intelligence, Adm. Thomas A.
Brooks, is the most detailed public accounting to date of chemical- and
biological-warfare programs outside the big-power blocs. The Navy estimate of
chemical-weapons programs suggests a continuing increase in the number of such
programs. Two years ago, the Director of Central Intelligence, William H.
Webster, said that 20 nations were believed to be developing chemical weapons.

Mr. Webster, who was among the first officials to underscore the
chemical-weapons threat, has not identified the countries that the C.I.A.
suspects of having a chemical-weapons capability.

Admiral Brooks said the spread of chemical weapons "continues with little or no
sign of abating, despite abortive international attempts to standardize export
controls on the necessary chemicals and equipment."

He called biological agents like anthrax an "increasingly attractive weapon" in
the third world.

The admiral gave a classified assessment of weapons proliferation and the global
military situation to the House Armed Services Committee on Thursday. The
Pentagon declassified a version of his statement and made it available Friday.
In it, he warned that the global spread of advanced armaments portends "a new
and ominous dimension" in future wars.

Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and a narrowly averted war last spring between India
and Pakistan are stark examples of the trend, the admiral said.

The Navy list of nations that "probably possess" chemical weapons includes
Burma, China, India, North Korea, Syria, Vietnam, Israel, Egypt, South Korea,
Taiwan, Pakistan, Libya, Iran and Iraq.

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: P.O.W.'s;
A Long Mental Voyage Back for Those Captured in War

BYLINE: By PHILIP J. HILTS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 912 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 9


For the American troops who were prisoners of war in the Persian Gulf, simply
coming home to jubilant families will almost certainly not be enough to overcome
their weeks-long immersion in fear, say military doctors who will treat their
damaged psyches.

Those 21 men and women will return to the United States on Sunday, flying into
Andrews Air Force Base near Washington and then quickly fanning out to Army,
Navy and Air Force hospitals in the area for medical and psychiatric evaluation.

All are expected to remain in the hospitals until next Friday, though some may
stay longer, depending on their needs. Their families have been flown to Andrews
to greet them and will stay in guest quarters near the hospitals in the next
week.

At least seven are physically wounded, with multiple shrapnel wounds and broken
bones. But all must take time to recover mentally from their weeks of fear
before they re-emerge into everyday life.

Mental Walk Through Events

The chief job during the week will be to begin that mental re-emergence, said
Col. Richard Fragala, a psychiatrist who is chief of medicine at Malcolm Grow
Medical Center at Andrews Air Force Base. He oversees the doctors who will treat
the former prisoners and will treat some of them himself.

The former prisoners will be mentally walked through the stunning series of
abnormal events that brought them to a state of disorientation: from the time
they were blown out of their cockpits, or crashed in their helicopters, or were
seized during ground operations, through the rough handling, threats,
confinement and even beatings at the hands of the Iraqis.

"We are not on a pathology hunt here," Dr. Fragala said. "We see this as
reintegration. We are doing basically a high-priced corporate physical and
psychiatric intervention to get people functioning again for the corporation,
just as a company might do if they sent people to Mayo Clinic."

With the former prisoners, he said: "People have knocked them around, beat them
up, and they are thinking every minute they are going to die. Abnormal things
are happening to them faster than they can integrate them."

'Overexposed, Overstimulated'

Fundamentally, the former prisoners will be suffering from a "disorder of
arousal," Dr. Fragala said.  "They have been on full alert for a long time. They
have been overexposed, overstimulated. If reading at home is a 2, they've been
operating at a 10 for weeks. So when they come home, they can jump from a 2 to a
5 or 6 with really minimal provocation."

The very moments of arrival home can add to the problem. Going from solitary
confinement, in which at least one prisoner was held, to ceremonies at an Air
Force base "is like going from a sardine can to Broadway," with family and
officials nearby and television cameras watching, said Dr. Fragala. "We don't
want to overstimulate them and become part of the problem."

As a result, there will be a minimum of ceremony at Andrews, and each returning
prisoner will be taken directly to one of three hospitals, depending on the
prisoner's service: Malcolm Grow for the Air Force, Bethesda Naval Medical
Center for the Navy and the Marines, and Walter Reed Army Medical Center for the
Army. Each will be interviewed by military intelligence specialists there, and
each will get a full day's physical examination and psychiatric assessment.

Time to Move On

"We are not intrusive in our approach," Dr. Fragala said. "What we do as a
beginning is a psycho-education. They have been through a lot. There are the
seeds of an emotional train wreck in their experiences. We know something about
how to help that, how to get the experience behind them and move on."

Col. Craig Lewellyn of the Army, who is chairman of the department of military
medicine at the armed services' medical school, the Uniformed Services
University of the Health Sciences, at Bethesda, said that when the former
prisoners return, "There will be enormous public pressure to quickly certify
them as fit and do the humane thing by getting them back into the bosom of the
family."

"But that may not be the most humane or wise thing in some cases," he said. "Any
assumption that decompression happens most readily in the family setting is
generally erroneous. No one can communicate all their fears and feelings at home
if they feel they have to put an appropriate face on for the family."

Short War Not a Factor

Experts say the short duration of the gulf war will not be a mitigating factor.
Indeed, after the Vietnam War those prisoners who had been held the shortest
time had the worst psychological problems, said Capt. Charles H. Bercier Jr.,
commanding officer of the Naval Aerospace Medical Institute in Pensacola, Fla.

"When a person is first captured," Captain Bercier said, "he goes through severe
mental gyrations. He believes he fouled up by getting himself captured. He
questions his abilities." In the early stage of captivity, the prisoner
generally remains disoriented.

In contrast, Captain Bercier said, prisoners who have time to adjust to their
situation may work out most of their problems.

Psychiatrists working with the former prisoners will listen for the experiences
that caused the most stress.

"We will talk through it, share it," said Dr. John M. Plewes, a psychiatrist in
the office of the Army Surgeon General. "Being blindfolded and beaten is a very
good way to make you forget how safe the world can be."

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Back to Reality;
U.S. Sets a Cautious Course on Mideast Peace

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1271 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


JUST as President Bush was about to go to Capitol Hill for his address to
Congress on the war last week, his advisers rushed up with a change for the
speech. It was only seven words, but for them it was the definition of the
postwar Middle East, the heralded "new world order."

In the original text, Mr. Bush cautioned that "even the new world order cannot
guarantee an era of perpetual peace." Some advisers felt that sounded too
pessimistic. So Mr. Bush added: "But enduring peace must be our mission."

As the United States begins the work of postwar diplomacy, the change in tone
seemed to make at least three things clear: The Administration is still sorting
out its approach to the long-intractable problems of the Middle East. It is
adjusting the vision that was needed to bring the country into war to suit the
realities of the region. And, at least for now, the President's plans seem to be
more modest than might have been suggested by his expansive wartime talk of
lasting peace rising from the flames in the Persian Gulf.

"It's very high tone and kind of limited," a senior official said, explaining
that Mr. Bush was not aiming for "some vision of universal peace with democracy
everywhere."

Just as the President's determination to stop Iraq's expansion reflected his
fear of being another Neville Chamberlain, he is now rejecting the mantle of
Woodrow Wilson. Indeed, Mr. Bush said last Wednesday night in Congress that his
war against Iraq "was not waged as a 'war to end all wars.' "

"What it means is really not a lot more than, 'You can't invade your neighbor,'
" an official said. "We're not going to intervene everywhere, force the Arabs to
recognize Israel and the Israelis to deal with the Palestinians. Progress of
democracy, yes, but in an incremental way, a la Eastern Europe."

This not to say that Mr. Bush is abandoning his promise that "no one will work
harder for a stable peace in the region than we will." He may be trying to
diminish expectations, but he is on record as saying that the best prospects in
decades for a broader peace now exist. What it does suggest is that the effort
will be conducted in classic George Bush fashion -- striking for the center, and
not committing to anything until the odds of failure are reduced as much as
possible. That is the reason Mr. Bush sent Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d
to the Middle East last week and it is the style in which he conducted the war,
making sure the coalition backed each step and that every weapon was cocked
before fighting started.

American officials are keeping much of what they intend for the Middle East
secret, but it is possible to discern some of what they are most eager to
accomplish and what they believe is feasible.

At the top of Washington's priorities is Saddam Hussein. Mr. Bush insists he is
not trying to overthrow Mr. Hussein, but seems prepared to use force again to
keep the pressure on. Administration officials said the Pentagon mapped possible
air strikes on Friday after intercepting an Iraqi order to use poison gas
against rebels in Iraq. "We can't live with him, period," an official said,
adding that the only question was how long he could stay in power.

More easily solved is the domestic and international political imperative of
bringing home American troops. "There have been two equally important parts to
the equation of Bush's credibility," a senior official said. "One is that he
said we would come to the aid of the Saudis and Kuwaitis. We did. The other is
that he said we would get out quickly. We will."

This conflicts with the desire to end the Arab-Israeli race to acquire the
biggest and most modern armies; if American troops are withdrawn, that makes it
militarily dangerous and politically impossible to seek to disarm friendly
countries. The United States argues that the war proved that territory and large
armies cannot guarantee security, but officials acknowledge that the Middle East
will not reduce its armies until it sees progress toward an Arab-Israeli peace.

So Washington suggests reducing the spread of ballistic missiles, and chemical
and biological weapons. This is a smaller problem that can be addressed outside
the region with the few countries, including the United States, France, Germany,
Britain, the Soviet Union and China, that have such weapons.

Similarly, the United States seems to be trying not to approach the Arab-Israeli
and Israeli-Palestinian conflicts head-on. Although Mr. Bush said he was
fighting Iraq to enforce the principles of national sovereignty, the rule of law
and peaceful coexistence, that does not mean the Administration is ready to
enforce them across the region.

The Administration is counting on its Arab allies, especially Saudi Arabia, to
repay the United States for its military aid by taking steps toward settling the
Arab-Israeli disputes.  But Administration officials say there will be no call
for a large international conference on the Palestinian question. "We're not
going to try to settle the question of who will represent the Palestinians and
we're not going to push the Arabs to recognize Israel," an official said.
Although Mr. Bush has suggested that Israel contemplate territorial concessions,
officials said he will not apply heavy pressure to do so.

Instead, the Administration will encourage smaller steps: notification of each
other by the Middle Eastern countries before conducting military maneuvers; an
exchange of Arab and Israeli prisoners; an easing of Israeli travel restrictions
in the occupied territories; water-sharing agreements between Israel and Jordan,
and Israel and Syria; a re-evaluation by Arab states of their financial support
for the Palestine Liberation Organization, and a lowering of voices on all
sides.

These are Mr. Baker's "confidence-building" measures.  At the same time, the end
of the war raises anew an apparent conflict between the American policy of
promoting democracy and the restoration of the Emir of Kuwait. But
Administration officials say there will be no push for rapid democratization in
the area. Instead, Mr. Baker is offering "suggestions" for reducing the gap
between rich and poor, hoping economic stability will lead to eventual reform.
In a region where the most organized political opposition is either
fundamentalist Muslim or radical Palestinian, it is not clear to the
Administration that speedy elections are in its best interests.

As it strives, again, for small steps in inter-Arab relations, the
Administration has been encouraged by evident improvement in Saudi Arabia's
relationships with Syria and Egypt, which symbolize divisions between rich and
poor. "The Saudi-Egypt relationship at this point is very, very good," a senior
official said. "The whole Camp David aspect is probably behind them."

Mr. Bush may have one major advantage as he confronts these issues. "He is the
first popular President ever to tackle the Middle East," said William Quandt,
who worked on the National Security Council under President Jimmy Carter.
"Lyndon Johnson was tied down with Vietnam and finally threw in the towel. Nixon
had Watergate. Carter's fortunes were going downhill before Camp David. Reagan
didn't bother."

But Zbigniew Brzezinski, who was Mr. Carter's national security adviser, said
Mr. Bush will have to risk his political fortunes in peace as he did in war.
"American leverage in the Middle East requires the President to put himself on
the line," he said. "I don't know if the Administration is ready to bite the
bullet, but if they don't, the question arises: What did the war accomplish?"

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Going home: Marines from the Third Battalion, Third Marine
Regiment, waiting last week behind barbed wire at a Saudi air base to board a
plane to the United States. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Good Morning, Vietnam

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 360 words


It was as if two wars, not just one, ended with the American-led coalition's
quick and decisive victory over Iraq. When the guns fell silent, President Bush
proudly proclaimed that "The specter of Vietnam has been buried forever in the
desert sands of the Arabian Peninsula."

Postwar diplomacy concerning the Middle East has already begun. But postwar
diplomacy concerning Vietnam has been mired in bitterness and recriminations for
16 years. Washington can make constructive use of America's revived
international pride by now moving to normalize relations with Vietnam.

Vietnam contributed to its long diplomatic isolation by sending troops into
Cambodia late in 1978 and keeping them there for almost 11 years. But Washington
is also to blame. The past four Administrations have refused to acknowledge the
1975 Communist triumph in Indochina as a fact of international life.

Hanoi prevailed against American power on the battlefield. Washington has
punished this affront by diplomatic ostracism, even to the point of winking at a
Chinese invasion of Vietnam and, until last year, aiding a Cambodian resistance
coalition incorporating the genocidal Khmer Rouge.

Victory in this new war offers an opportunity to bury the bitter legacy of an
old one. True, Vietnam is neither a model democracy nor a model international
citizen. Its human rights performance has recently been criticized by Asia Watch
and by brave voices from within. And while Hanoi has withdrawn its troops from
Cambodia, it still backs hard-liners in Phnom Penh who resist implementing the
United Nations peace plan.

Yet Vietnam's policies are no more offensive to Americans than those of many
other states. The U.S. rightly maintains ties with Syria, even though it
sponsors terrorism and occupies much of Lebanon. The U.S. deals with China
despite the massacres in Tiananmen Square and Tibet, and with the Soviet Union
despite the brutal crackdown in the Baltics.

Diplomatic relations give Washington the chance to raise vexing issues and exert
a moderating influence. The Vietnam War ended 16 years ago. Now it has been
officially buried. It's time to banish the ghost.

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
A Party Derided

BYLINE: By Leslie H. Gelb

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 747 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


There is only one question of any consequence in this city does the Persian Gulf
war prove that Democrats lack the toughness to protect America's security? It is
an important and unavoidable question. But the answers reflect record levels of
instant historical amnesia and analytic hogwash.

George Bush and his closest aides are the policy heroes for sure. But their
triumph is decidedly personal.

Who did what and why in the gulf has more to do with individual gut instincts
and party politics than with philosophies or Vietnam syndromes or party labels.

Mr. Bush's decision to use military power against Iraq was opposed by a
bewilderingly mixed bag of radical Democrats, moderate and conservative
Democrats, conservative Republicans and Republican right-wingers.

Yes, the overwhelming majority of Democrats voted to continue sanctions against
Saddam Hussein rather than go to war as Mr. Bush wanted. True, most of them were
radicals and liberals. A number, however, were like Sam Nunn and Lloyd Bentsen,
conservative idols whom no one has ever accused of suffering from Vietnam
-induced pacifism.

Three key and courageous supporters of Mr. Bush were Representatives Les Aspin
and Stephen Solarz and Senator Al Gore. All liberals.

Recall also that the strongest intellectual cases against going beyond sanctions
were made by Republocrats like Zbigniew Brzezinski, James Schlesinger and Paul
Nitze. All are staunch conservatives; all are renowned advocates of a muscular
U.S. national security policy.

Remember the leading Republican and conservative lights who fought fiercely,
especially in the beginning, against virtually any form of U.S. action against
Saddam. Never forget Patrick Buchanan's heroic stand for Iraqi rights. As for
the team of Evans and Novak, these hard-line mavens now say they were only being
good reporters and their sources misled them. Then there was Edward Luttwak, the
mother of all conservative strategists. Sadly, the list is too long to
congratulate all of them.

Eight of nine recent Secretaries of Defense favored staying with sanctions. This
group included none other than Caspar Weinberger, who cautioned: "I understand
people get impatient and all, but I do not believe in rushing in and attacking
early."

Two recent Chairmen of the Joint Chiefs of Staff -- Adm. William Crowe and Gen.
David Jones -- were even more reluctant to use force than Mr. Weinberger.

This unique brew of Bush critics was joined by probably 90 percent of American
and European experts on Arab affairs. These experts were convinced that force
would ignite fires of revolution against Arab moderates and terrorism against
the U.S. Their views had zero to do with conservatism or liberalism.

The picture is even muddier when behavior prior to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait is
factored in.

No one did more than the Reagan and Bush Administrations to build up Saddam's
legitimacy and power. They were not alone. The Arab moderates, the Europeans,
the Middle East experts in the State Department all turned a blind eye to his
relentless push toward a modern million-man army, his use of poison gas against
the Kurds, his vicious human rights abuses and his support of terrorism. Saddam,
however, made moderate noises and performed the noble task of keeping Iranian
radicals busy on the battlefield. That was good enough to quiet almost all.

But not sufficient for Democratic liberals (plus a few Republican conservatives)
who took the lead last year in trying to cut off the billion-dollar program of
U.S. farm credits to Iraq. Democratic Representative Dan Glickman's amendment
prompted rabid opposition from Mr. Bush and most Republicans in the House. Two
famous Republican tough guys, Newt Gingrich and Henry Hyde, voted to continue
aid to Saddam.

Hours before Iraq stormed into Kuwait, liberals on the House Foreign Affairs
Committee again tried to stop those credits, and prospective arms exports.
Again, most Republicans called out "nay" on orders from the White House.

Is it possible that if Mr. Bush had favored sanctions without force, the
Republican contingent in Congress would have gone along with that, too? Is it
also possible that most Congressional Democrats would have endorsed a war policy
if a Democrat had been in the White House? Is it not likely that the success
story of the Persian Gulf has very little to do with Republicans and Democrats
and almost everything to do with who is President of the United States?

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR;
3 Who Helped Execute the Air War

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 16; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 259 words



BRIG. GEN. BUSTER C. GLOSSON

The 48-year-old architect of the air campaign who directed the round-the-clock
bombing from the Air Force command room in Saudi Arabia.

In addition to guiding the 14th Air Division and its 1,200 American warplanes,
General Glosson picked the bridges, aircraft bunkers, oil refineries, entrenched
tanks and other priority targets.

A native of Greensboro, N.C., he has spent 25 years in the Air Force.

General Glosson (he said his "mother just liked the name" Buster) was an F-4
commander in the Vietnam War and continues to fly.

BRIG. GEN. GLENN A. PROFITT 2D

As commander of the 15th Air Division, the 48-year-old Kentucky native
coordinated the air headquarters here and the 150 command and electronic combat
aircraft in the gulf region.

General Profitt commanded the early-warning radar planes, known as Awacs, as
well as EC-130's, RF-4's and EF-111's, aircraft that track the movement of other
allied planes or scramble the Iraqi communications and air defense systems.
During peacetime, General Profitt heads all American electronic warfare planes
based in Europe.

He flew 496 combat missions in Vietnam.

BRIG. GEN. PATRICK P. CARUANA

Commanded the 50 B-52 bombers flying out of Saudi Arabia, England, Spain and the
Indian Ocean atoll of Diego Garcia, a fleet that pounded the Iraqis incessantly
and helped break their moral.

General Caruana, a 51-year-old native of St. Louis, commanded the 17th Air
Division and its fleet of bombers, refueling tankers and spy planes.

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Buster C. Clossen

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
New Editor For Magazine

SECTION: Section D; Page 12; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 130 words


Lynn Povich, a senior editor at Newsweek since 1975, has been named the editor
in chief of Working Woman, a Lang Communications magazine.

Ms. Povich, the first woman to be appointed a senior editor at Newsweek,
succeeds Kate White, who last month was appointed the editor in chief of
McCall's magazine.

At Newsweek, Ms. Povich edited many articles that focused on family, life
styles, marriage and working women. She created two spinoff magazines, Newsweek
on Campus and Newsweek on Health.

Ms. Povich, who is 47 years old, also developed several television programs from
articles in Newsweek, including "Charlie Company," a CBS documentary on Vietnam
veterans.

Working Woman has a circulaton of 939,000. It is aimed at women who are
professionals or managers.

NAME: Lynn Povich

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Elie Siegmeister, 82, a Composer Rooted in American Idiom, Dies

BYLINE: By ALLAN KOZINN

SECTION: Section B; Page 14; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 760 words


Elie Siegmeister, whose compositions formed part of the cornerstone of the
contemporary American symphonic school in the 1930's, died on Sunday at the
North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I. He was 82 years old and lived
in Great Neck, L.I.

He died of a brain tumor, said his daughter Mimi Koren-Zelvin.

Mr. Siegmeister, who once defined his occupation as "part poet, part structural
engineer," composed eight operas, eight symphonies and a large catalogue of
songs, choral settings, concertos, orchestral works and chamber pieces.

Throughout his career, Mr. Siegmeister was concerned with establishing and
nurturing an American idiom, and his "American Holiday" (1933) was one of the
first compositions to weave American work songs and street melodies into a
symphonic fabric. He continued on this path in a series of popular orchestral
works, exploring the sounds of the city in "Sunday in Brooklyn" (1946) and
taking a more rural view in "Ozark Set" (1943) and "Western Suite" (1945).

As contemporary musical language grew more angular and harmonically dense, so
did Mr. Siegmeister's music, although his deep-rooted lyricism, his fondness for
the rhythms and melodic turns of folk music and early jazz and his Romantic
orchestrational style were never fully submerged.

Social and Political Concerns

The composer's other principal concern was with what he saw as the artist's
responsibility to give voice, through his work, to the social and political
causes closest to his heart. In Mr. Siegmeister's case, these were racial
equality and pacifism, and he set forth his views in a series of choral works
and song cycles that began with "Created Equal" in 1937. In the 1950's, his
outspokenness landed him on Senator Joseph McCarthy's blacklist.

He continued to follow his musical and political agenda in the 1960's, with such
works as "I Had a Dream" (1967), a setting of the famous speech by the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., and "Faces of War" (1968), a work protesting the Vietnam
War, with poetry by Langston Hughes.

Mr. Siegmeister was born on Jan. 15, 1909, in Manhattan. He began his musical
studies with Seth Bingham in 1924 and worked with Wallingford Riegger in 1926.
After completing his undergraduate work at Columbia University in 1927, when he
was 18 years old, Mr. Siegmeister moved to Paris, where he studied for four
years with Nadia Boulanger.

In Paris and upon his return to New York in 1932, he became friendly with Aaron
Copland, Virgil Thomson and other young composers who were striving to establish
an American school.

Rooted in Time and Place

"I make a distinction," he told an interviewer in 1976, "between nationalism as
a political movement and nationalism as the root of art in each particular
people. The greatest art comes from a writer, painter, poet or composer who
responds to his own environment, people and tradition. This doesn't preclude an
artist from being universal, but I think he must be rooted to a time and place."

During the 1930's, Mr. Siegmeister also spent time with folk and blues
musicians, among them Woody Guthrie, Huddie (Leadbelly) Ledbetter and Cisco
Houston, and he toured the United States collecting and notating folk, popular
and rural melodies. In 1939, he formed the American Ballad Singers to perform
this material, and the following year he published music he had collected in "A
Treasury of American Song," on which he collaborated with the music critic Olin
Downes.

The main thrust of his work, however, was in classical genres. His operas
include "Darling Corie" (1952), "Miranda and the Dark Young Man" (1955), "The
Mermaid in Lock No. 7" (1958), "The Plough and the Stars" (1963), "Night of the
Moonspell" (1976), "The Marquesa of O" (1983), "The Lady of the Lake" (1985) and
"Angel Levine" (1985).

Mr. Siegmeister was composer in residence at Hofstra University from 1966 to
1976. He contributed articles on aspects of American music to several
publications, and in addition to the 1940 "Treasury," he published four books:
"Work and Sing" (1944), "Invitation to Music" (1961), "Harmony and Melody"
(1966) and "The New Music Lover's Handbook" (1973).

He is survived by his wife, Hannah, two daughters -- Mrs. Koren-Zelvin, of
Larchmont, N.Y., and Nancy Mandel of Los Angeles -- and two grandchildren,
Nathaniel Koren of Montpelier, Vt., and Sasha Koren of Providence, R.I. Mrs.
Koren-Zelvin said that a memorial concert of Mr. Siegmeister's music was being
arranged, and that a fund was being established in his memory by Ascap.


NAME: Elie Siegmeister

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Elie Siegmeister (1967)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: JORDAN;
Chafing Over Snub by Baker, Queen Noor Vows to Win Over Americans

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1377 words

DATELINE: AMMAN, Jordan, March 10


In a palace where light splinters through carved shutters and a fountain soothes
the stone of a courtyard, an American-born queen sat down to talk and seemed to
suggest that the Persian Gulf crisis had reinforced a mission: to persuade her
country of birth to understand her Arab land of adoption.

The challenge, Noor al-Hussein said, "is now greater than ever before -- and
it's been a challenge of my entire married life -- of trying to broaden
understanding between the Arab world and the Western world, particularly the
United States and the Arab world, and to correct stereotypes and misperceptions
of Arab culture in American eyes."

"We have certainly regressed," the Queen said in an interview on Saturday in a
marble-floored office at the palace. "And the entire Arab world is going to
suffer from what will have become a much more negative image of Arab culture and
Islamic culture in the Western world."

Now that the gulf war has ended, the challenge of reconciliation is being thrown
into relief as Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d embarks on Washington's
first effort at postwar diplomacy in the Middle East.

Couple on the Sidelines

King Hussein and his 39-year-old Queen, whose Arabic name means "light of
Hussein," live with their four children and conduct their business on a broad
estate in the heart of Amman.

They have become accustomed, at times of Middle East crisis, to receiving
American dignitaries anxious to embrace the Jordanian monarch as an important
regional leader.

Not this time.

As Mr. Baker crisscrosses the Middle East on visits to Saudi Arabia, Kuwait,
Egypt, Israel and Syria, Jordan is not on his itinerary. The reason, simple yet
complex, is the shadow of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, whom King Hussein
implicitly supported throughout the later stages of the gulf crisis.

For now, Jordan is pointedly being left out in the cold, and it seems to rankle.

"When did Secretary of State of State Baker last speak to my husband or any
high-ranking Jordanian official?" Queen Noor asked. "I pose that question. There
hasn't been any really meaningful, still to this day, high-level contact. And
Jordan is not on his intinerary."

Citing Jordan's longstanding friendship with the United States, she said she
found it "amazing and extraordinary" that such discussions had not taken place.

Bridging the Divide

The interview appeared to signal the role that Queen Noor seems likely to assume
as a high-voltage diplomat seeking to bridge the divide between Amman and
Washington. And her job, she said, is not getting any easier.

When the Queen visited New York in September and October, in part to plead
Jordan's cause at public meetings and in talks with congressional leaders, "it
came as quite a shock to me how serious and how profound the misunderstanding
was," she said. "And that was only at the beginning, I'm sad to say, though we
had stated our position before that."

At that point, Jordan had condemned the Iraqi invasion and annexation of Kuwait
and had agreed to enforce some United Nations sanctions. But the King, mindful
of pro-Iraqi sentiments among his people, had refused to allow foreign troops on
his territory or to distance himself further from Iraq, a stand that angered
Americans.

The chasm between Washington and Amman had already begun to open on Aug. 2, when
Iraq invaded Kuwait. While opposing the occupation, the Jordanian King refused
to associate himself with the American effort to build an Arab coalition against
Baghdad.

A Loser, Diplomatically

As the crisis deepened and the allies went to war, the Jordanian monarch seemed
to abandon political neutrality, describing the allied military effort as a war
against all Arabs and a crime against Islam.

When the war ended, Jordan emerged on the losing side diplomatically. But King
Hussein won one gamble: he has survived the challenge of the streets, in which a
population that is more than one-half Palestinian cheered Saddam Hussein of Iraq
as a champion and redeemer.

The Jordanian King has urged against "gloating and apportioning blame," but the
shadow has not lifted.

Queen Noor discussed her own status as the queen of an Arab country and as a
member of an Arab-American family who grew up in the United States.

She was born Lisa Halaby, the daughter of Najeeb Halaby, a businessman who
served as chairman of the Federal Aviation Administration in the early 1960's.
The future queen grew up mainly in Washington and New York, graduating from
Princeton in 1974.

On June 15, 1978, she married King Hussein, who had been divorced twice and lost
his third wife in a helicopter crash. He already had eight children.

Since her marriage, Queen Noor has assumed a number of public duties in a
kingdom increasingly drawn toward Islamic values that limit the woman to the
home.

As the confrontation mounted in the gulf, did she feel torn between the two
cultures that had framed her life and now seemed, in some ways, at war?

"Every imaginable emotion, I suppose, has come into play during this period,"
the Queen said.

"I don't think I've ever felt any contradiction or any struggle there," she
said. What she did feel, she said, was "an enhanced responsibility certainly to
contribute in whatever modest way I can to, well, on one hand, to neutralizing
and correcting misunderstanding and misperceptions and distortions of Jordan's
position and motives during this period."

Says Invasion Was a 'Shock'

The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait last August "came as a total shock to us," Queen
Noor said. King Fahd of Saudi Arabia called with the news at 5 A.M., she said,
adding that Saddam Hussein had not advised Jordan of his plans in advance.

"People who know him well describe him as someone who does not lie but is very
selective in the information he gives," she said of the Iraqi President. "He has
not informed us of all his intentions." She said she had met him only briefly,
before the war.

The next shock, the Queen said, was the beginning of the allied bombardment on
Jan. 17.

"We turned on the TV and listened to it, because that was all the output from
Baghdad available, " she said. "We were absolutely shattered. I remember my
husband and I looking at one another, speechless and broken-hearted."

She said the crisis stirred memories from her days as a student back in the
United States, wearing a black armband to protest the Vietnam War.

"Throughout this crisis, that time has come back to me so much more vividly"
than "it ever had in the intervening years," Queen Noor said.

"I couldn't help but notice similiarities in the way that I was feeling in
recent months and the way that I felt then," she added. "It seemed we did not
learn from experience to avoid tragedy and destruction."

Losing Arab Support

The crisis cost Jordan not only the financial support and friendship of the
United States, but of America's Arab allies. United States aid to Jordan has
been suspended, and the divide between Amman and the so-called moderate Arab
countries, notably Egypt, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, has widened.

The ruling house of Saud banished King Hussein's Hashemite dynastic forebears
from the Hejaz in the 1920's, a fact that has not been forgotten by either side.


Kingdom Defends Its Strengths

As it seeks to repair the damage to relations, Jordan is promoting itself in a
number of ways. It argues that it is more democratic and has a better human
rights record than most other Arab countries. It also points to its strategic
geographical position, bordering Israel, Syria, Iraq and Saudi Arabia, and its
close ties with Palestinians, a crucial asset in efforts toward an Arab-Israeli
settlement.

Queen Noor said the Jordanian monarchy was concerned over the issue of new
American arms sales to the Middle East, which she asserted would perpetuate
"vicious cycles of violence."

But she said the Bush Administration's talk of resolving Middle East problems on
the basis of resolutions adopted by the United Nations had stirred some hope.

"If we can implement those with the same determination and vigor that the
resolutions on Kuwait were addressed," she said, "then perhaps there's the
beginning of an opportunity to break this cycle."

NAME: Noor al-Hussein (Queen)

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Noor al-Hussein, the American-born Queen of Jordan. "Trying to
broaden understanding between the Arab world and the Western world" has been the
challenge of her entire married life, she said. (Bill Lyons for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 12, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Fayetteville Journal;
Children of Soldiers Relearning Childhood

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 687 words

DATELINE: FAYETTEVILLE, N.C., March 11


For months, pupils at the Benjamin J. Martin Elementary School here have been
talking to the school counselor about their nightmares: Scud missile attacks,
tanks out of control and fighter planes shot from the sky.

"The thing that has scared me most was when they started bombing," said Chelsea
Meyers, 11 years old. Her father, Capt. Gordon Gidumal, is serving with the 82d
Airborne Division in the Persian Gulf.

But today, the first day of school since American soldiers in the gulf began
returning home, school halls have been filled with smiling faces, cheers and
"welcome home" signs.

Of the 900 pupils at the school, a low-slung brick building a mile and a half
from Fort Bragg and Pope Air Force Base, 400 have a parent or close relative who
was sent to the gulf region after Iraq seized Kuwait on Aug. 2. At least 80
percent have one or both parents serving in the military.

For the schoolchildren here in Fayetteville, the tragedies have been minimal. Of
the 39,000 troops deployed from the fort and air base, 21 casualties have been
reported. School officials at Fort Bragg and in Fayetteville say only one child,
a kindergarten student, is known to have lost a parent in the war.

"We were all very frightened," said Alice M. Smith, the school principal. "So
now we are just relieved that so many are coming home."

The school counselor, Jimmie Cash, plans to continue the support sessions for
pupils he began last August. Although the students are excited about reunions
with their soldier parents, they are also facing a new set of uncertainties, far
less grim than death but worrisome nonetheless. Exactly when will their parents
come home? And what will happen when they do?

"I've been kind of scared about them flying home because Iraq could shoot down
the planes," said one boy. He was one of 20 pupils who attended Mr. Cash's
sessions today.

James Grant, 11, said: "I hate to bring this up, but I've read a few books on
Vietnam and about how people spit on the troops coming home, and that has
brought up a little fear with me. If they are going to treat people like that, I
don't want to participate."

School officials both on and off the military posts say the counseling sessions,
normally used to help mobile military families adjust to different schools, have
been essential during the gulf operations.

In several of the weekly sessions at Martin Elementary, which is in the
Cumberland County school system, some pupils drew pictures and wrote letters to
the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein, and to President Bush. Others wrote songs
and poems. Still others recorded a tape for Mr. Hussein, filled with curses and
pleas to send their parents home.

But now these pupils, who recite military rank and terminology with stunning
accuracy, have given up the tapes and are starting to add homecoming dates under
the names of soldiers listed on their bulletin boards.

"There's just been such a tremendous amount of tension in the schools up until
now," said Frank Cleary, Superintendent of the separate Fort Bragg school
system, where 60 percent of the 4,600 students have parents deployed in the
gulf. "We are certainly going to have to deal with issues of returning parents,
but we are just relieved that this is almost over."

More than 35,000 people turned out over the weekend for a parade to welcome home
the first 1,700 troops who returned to Fort Bragg and Pope Air Force Base. But
today, out of the 20 pupils at the support sessions, James was one of only two
children who has had a homecoming.

Chelsea Meyers is one of those who is still waiting for her father to return.
"Mom got real sick watching everyone hugging," she said, recalling her mother
watching the homecoming on television. Her father will not be home for several
weeks. "It makes her cry. She says it's not fair."

But even for those whose parents did return home, there was concern.

"It's a lot different having my dad there because we've gotten things the way we
want them," said James, with his cheek resting on the palm of his hand. "He was
used to having things the way he left them."

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I've read a few books on Vietnam and about how people spit on
the troops coming home, and that has brought up a little fear with me," said
James Grant, 11. He and many of the children at the Benjamin J. Martin
Elementary School in Fayetteville, N.C., near Fort Bragg, had a close relative
on duty in the Persian Gulf. (Duane Hall for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 12, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Morality's The Thing For This Playwright

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1140 words


Back in 1979, Steve Tesich won an Academy Award for "Breaking Away," a
delightful tale of youths and bicycles in the Indiana countryside. It was Mr.
Tesich's first movie, and he got the Oscar for best original screenplay. Now 12
years have passed, and nothing he has done on stage or screen has quite matched
that success. But if you ask the 48-year-old playwright and screen writer about
it, he'll say it doesn't much matter.

"I've had more than enough success for anybody," Mr. Tesich says, sitting in his
apartment on Riverside Drive with a panoramic view of the Hudson River that more
than validates his statement. "What was wonderful and ideal about doing a first
movie and getting the award was that you know what it's like to have one; you
know that it doesn't really transform life. What it does is make for a really
fabulous weekend."

Mr. Tesich will not turn his back on the possibility of another hit, however,
and his latest theatrical contender is "The Speed of Darkness," which opened
recently at the Belasco Theater to mixed-to-favorable reviews. The play tells of
two Vietnam veterans -- one a pillar of the community (Len Cariou), the other a
homeless drifter (Stephen Lang) -- who share a deep, dark secret and who meet
again in South Dakota 20 years after their tour of duty.

The play is the first to be presented as part of the Broadway Alliance, a plan
created last year by theater owners, unions and producers to offer serious drama
on Broadway at lower-than-usual prices. The top ticket price for "The Speed of
Darkness" is $24.

A Start Off Broadway

Mr. Tesich, who was born in Yugoslavia and came to the United States at age 13,
began his career as a playwright Off Broadway -- not terribly successfully. Six
of his plays were presented at the American Place Theater in the 1970's, and all
received fair-to-middling reviews. In those same years, he wrote five
screenplays, all unproduced. But then came "Breaking Away," and afterward he
changed his focus and began concentrating on the potentially lucrative world of
movies.

He wrote one other play, "Division Street," which had a brief Broadway run in
1980, and a novel, "Summer Crossing," in 1982. But most of his output was
screenplays: "The World According to Garp," "American Flyers," "Eyewitness,"
"Eleni," "Four Friends."

"The Speed of Darkness," in fact, is Mr. Tesich's first play in almost a decade.
It was first produced at the Goodman Theater in Chicago in 1989; his "Square
One," which ran Off Broadway last year at Second Stage, was actually written
later.

But Mr. Tesich says it was not Hollywood that kept him away from the stage.

"I was tired of the way I was writing for the theater," he says. "Until I could
feel I could approach it differently I didn't want to continue. Now the only
thing I will write for the theater is something that involves a moral issue.
Nothing else interests me."

A Societal Poison

A moral issue is certainly at the root of "The Speed of Darkness." It is the
Vietnam War, and Mr. Tesich makes it as clear in person as in the play that he
considers the war a stain on the United States, a poison that has seeped into
American society.

"For a long time, I wouldn't touch anything that had to do with Vietnam," he
says. "I was waiting for us to deal with it as a nation, in a social or
political way. And we just wouldn't."

In recent years, he says, he sensed that a kind of revisionism was taking place.
"There were hints in certain movies that it was a heroic war, and that somehow
we were betrayed by ourselves," he says. "That there was nothing wrong with the
war; what was wrong was how we did it. And I found that very upsetting."

The lesson that has come to the surface now, he says, "is that what was wrong
with the Vietnam War was that it was too long -- and I just find that
appalling."

"We couldn't face up to it in an honest way," he adds. "We couldn't accept that
we made horrible mistakes by going, we made horrible mistakes there, we made
horrible mistakes when it was over."

Mr. Tesich did not serve in the war. "I was one of the guys with the signs," he
says. But he says he felt a lingering grief that his best friend died in
Vietnam. "His name was Louie," Mr. Tesich says. "And that's how Stephen Lang's
character, Lou, got his name."

Optimism Has Diminished

As an immigrant to the United States, Mr. Tesich says, he was for a long time
very positive and very optimistic about this country. That optimism, he says,
has changed, and the change started with Vietnam.

"I didn't just love America," he says. "I was in love with America. I honestly
believed that it was going to be one of those nations that would take care of
everybody, that would try to make its rewards available to all. And now I feel
there is absolutely no agenda for helping those on the bottom in this country.
Nobody is really interested in them. And I don't know what the country stands
for."

Nor, he says, does he place much faith in President Bush's statement that the
war in the Persian Gulf has changed things, that what the President called the
specter of Vietnam has been buried forever in the desert sands.

"I think that had we handled Vietnam and what happened there as a mature nation,
the war in the Gulf never would have occurred," Mr. Tesich says. "I think we've
been looking for a war to win ever since Vietnam. This country was so desperate
for a victory that it is now madly celebrating the destruction of such an
inferior opponent."

A New Play, on Freedom

Mr. Tesich's focus on moral issues has led him to write another new play. It is
called "Commencement Exercises" and, he says, it deals with "the quest for
freedom, and what that means, and if anybody really wants it." He expects it to
be performed in the fall at the Goodman in Chicago.

Much of his writing is done not in his New York apartment, but in his other
home, a one-room, 640-square-foot log cabin in Colorado. He, his wife, Becky,
and their 2-year-old daughter, Amy, spend most of the year there. "We're
expanding the cabin," he says. "It was fine until now, but my daughter is
getting bigger."

He has also just finished another screenplay, based on the novel "Anywhere But
Here," by Mona Simpson, which was a best seller a few years ago. And then,
further along the line, he hopes to write about "certain things that are in the
back of my mind but that I don't dare yet approach."

Mr. Tesich hopes, of course, that "The Speed of Darkness" will have a long run.
But success or not, he says, he will keep on writing. "I'm in this for life. I
was in it for life when I honestly didn't think I would make a penny at it and
my wife would have to support me forever, as she did for the first four years."

The only thing that has changed, he adds, is that his wife no longer has to
support him.

NAME: Steve Tesich

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Steve Tesich, whose play "The Speed of Darkness" opened recently
at the Belasco Theater. (Jack Manning/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 14, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

The Joke's On Whittle For Losing Best Seller

BYLINE: By RANDALL ROTHENBERG

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 6; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1077 words


Whittle Communications roiled book publishing more than a year ago when it
introduced a line of advertiser-sponsored books. Now, the book industry's
worries have turned to derision. Whittle let a best seller slip from its grasp.

"The Next Century," a look at the future of the world's economy by David
Halberstam that now sits on several best-seller lists, was originally solicited
by and written for Whittle. But Mr. Halberstam, a Pulitzer Prize-winning
journalist and the author of several previous best sellers, said he withdrew the
book when Whittle executives objected to the book's tone, content and length.

Mr. Halberstam took the book to William Morrow & Company, which published the
book with what he and editors there described as minor revisions, three weeks
ago. "The Next Century," which has 140,000 copies in print, is No. 4 on The New
York Times Book Review best-seller list for March 17.

"David Halberstam is one of the most distinguished figures in American
journalism, and it is amazing to me that Whittle Communications or the editor of
this book would say that in some way his work doesn't meet their standards,"
said Peter Osnos, an associate publisher of Random House. "But these things
happen."

Brings Advertising to Schools

Whittle, which is based in Knoxville, Tenn., specializes in the development of
media that bring advertising into unconventional venues like schools, doctors'
offices and health clubs. Several of its projects, notably "Channel One," a
sponsored television news program for high school classrooms, have become
controversial among educators and communications professionals who believe that
such forums should be free from advertising.

In late 1989, Whittle upset many in the publishing industry by announcing the
creation of a book division and the publication of a series of short nonfiction
works by well-known authors that would carry advertising from the Federal
Express Corporation . Many in publishing worried that advertiser sponsorship
opened the way for marketers to manipulate the content of books.

Among the writers signed by Whittle in addition to Mr. Halberstam were William
Greider, the political editor of Rolling Stone, George Gilder, a conservative
economic theorist, and Michael Lewis, the author of "Liar's Poker," a
best-selling chronicle of Wall Street in the 1980's.

At the time the project, called the Larger Agenda Series, was announced, Whittle
said the authors would be paid about $60,000 each for books of about 20,000
words. One author, who spoke only on condition of anonymity, said that some
writers received more than $100,000. The books are distributed free by Federal
Express to a list of about 150,000 people prominent in business and Government,
but have also been available for purchase in a few Waldenbooks stores around the
country.

One Whittle author, James Atlas, an editor at The New York Times Magazine,
praised the Tennessee company's handling of his book. "I got the kind of great,
professional editing and meticulous line editing you rarely get with trade
editors these days," said Mr. Atlas, whose work "The Book Wars," explored the
current academic debate over what books should be taught in university
curriculums. He said his only disappointment was in the lack of bookstore
distribution and the paucity of reviews.

No Influence From Sponsor

Both Mr. Halberstam and Whittle officials said that Federal Express did not
influence the media company's desire for changes in "The Next Century" or Mr.
Halberstam's decision to withdraw the book.

"My sense is that they didn't know what they wanted," said Mr. Halberstam, whose
earlier best sellers have included "The Best and the Brightest," a history of
the Vietnam War, and more recently, "The Reckoning," a book about the
development of the Japanese and American automobile industries. "I had a sense
of almost amorphous objections." He said his Whittle editors told him that the
book needed more reporting, and that it was about 5,000 words too long. Mr.
Halberstam said he was paid "a small kill fee" for his efforts, but declined to
specify the amount.

Tony Kiser, the executive editor of Whittle Books, said: "You shouldn't think of
this as an outright rejection. It wasn't. The book had tremendous potential. We
felt some revisions were in order and he did not want to do them. It was just
not ready for publication by our standards."

Mr. Kiser said he could not recall the exact objections to Mr. Halberstam's
manuscript, but said the book did not contain enough reporting to satisfy
Whittle. Another Whittle executive, who spoke only on condition that he not be
identified, said the company also did not like the work's "preachiness."

After withdrawing the book from Whittle, Mr. Halberstam said he hesitated to
take it to Morrow, his regular publisher, fearing that there was no commercial
market for such a short essay. But Douglas A. Stumpf, his editor at Morrow, said
he considered the book exciting and marketable, requiring only some expansion.
"I thought there should be more personal anecdotes based on his experience as a
reporter," he said. The final version is about 35,000 words.

Expanded Publishing Division

The revelation that Whittle passed on a work of such popularity comes at an
embarrasing time for the company. It recently announced an expansion of its
publishing division, and named Hamilton Jordan, the White House chief of staff
in the Carter Administration, as its president and chief operating officer.
Today, the company is expected to announce the introduction of a new series of
sponsored books in the field of health.

But several publishing professionals said that Whittle may have performed a
service to their industry, by showing, however inadvertently, that there is a
market for serious, non-fiction books substantially shorter than the
60,000-to-100,000-word trade hard cover.

"This could prove that there is a market for what we used to call broadsides,"
said Thomas McCormack, the chairman of St. Martin's Press, who said he was
considering publishing a line of short paperbacks on current issues. "When I
first heard the Whittle notion two years ago, I was too slow-witted to infer
from it this lesson."

Despite their differences, Mr. Halberstam also praised Whittle. "The idea is a
very good one," he said. "I feel badly that there must be something between a
5,000-word magazine article and a book of 60,000 words or more."

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 15, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: P.O.W.'S;
Ex-P.O.W.'s Offer Accounts Of Terror and Torture in Iraq

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1168 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


In their first extensive public comments since being released two weeks ago,
Americans taken prisoner in the Persian Gulf war today recounted tales of
terror, torture and, occasionally, compassion at the hands of their Iraqi
military captors.

Almost all the former prisoners who spoke today recalled feeling confident that
the United States would extract them from prison, either by force or by a quick
victory in the war, if they could merely survive their ordeals. And they
expressed delight at the patriotic greeting they received on their release.

Although several said they endured beatings severe enough to dislodge teeth, and
one told of being shocked with electric wires wrapped around his face, none of
the former prisoners said the mistreatment was life-threatening. But some said
the prospect of dying, either by execution or by strikes from allied warplanes,
was ever-present.

Brief News Conferences

More than a dozen of the 21 American prisoners freed from Iraq held brief news
conferences today to describe their experiences. All those who spoke were men.

"About 90 percent of the time you felt you were in danger of losing your life,"
said Lieut. Jeffrey N. Zaun of the Navy, from Cherry Hill, N.J., whose swollen
and wounded face, displayed in an antiwar videotape in which he was forced to
take part, brought national outrage over Iraqi treatment of American P.O.W.'s.

Lieutenant Zaun said that 90 percent of his facial injuries occurred when he
ejected from his damaged A-6 Intruder attack jet over Iraq 36 hours after the
air war began in January, and most of the rest came from "getting slapped
around."

Seven Cite Reasonable Treatment

He said he also "banged my nose" in a failed effort to appear so badly beaten
that his captors would decide not to place him on television.

Outwardly, the former prisoners looked none the worse for their abuse. Seven Air
Force pilots who appeared at Andrews Air Force Base near Washington looked fit
in crisp flight suits, bore no marks of beatings, and displayed broad smiles.

At their news conference, the seven Air Force pilots generally maintained that
that they had been reasonably treated by Iraqi officials, with the exception of
physical beatings during interrogations. But they refused to recount their lives
in captivity in any detail, apparently because some worried that their remarks
could affect the fates of Americans still in Iraq.

Evaded Capture for 2 Days

Iraq has insisted that it has freed all allied prisoners of war, and the
highest-ranking Air Force P.O.W., Col. David W. Eberly, said that he and his
fellow pilots believed "that everyone is either present or accounted for."

"Beyond that, we know there are still people missing," he said, "and our prayers
still go out to the families of those people to say that we hope there is a
chance that maybe others who are still listed as missing may turn up."

Colonel Eberly and a fellow Air Force pilot, Maj. Thomas E. Griffith Jr., evaded
capture for two days after a surface-to-air missile downed their jet in western
Iraq the night of Jan. 19, Major Griffith said today. They were later moved to a
central holding pen in Baghdad for interrogation.

He gave a typical account of conditions endured by the seven Air Force pilots,
who stayed for all but a few hours in individual solitary-confinement cells near
other prisoners from Kuwait and Britain.

Pilot Tells of Hospital Care

"We were captured near the Iraq-Syrian border by an army border patrol,
basically," he said. "The initial treatment under the hands of the army was
pretty fair. They treated us basically as soldiers doing our duty and in
accordance with the Geneva Convention.

"Later on, during the longest stay we had in one particular prison, the
conditions were pretty harsh. We had, obviously -- I guess this is standard in
their prisons -- we had no beds. They gave us a couple of blankets so we had to
sleep on the floor. And we got very little food, which is the reason most of us
were able to lose a little bit of weight. But again, nothing as severe or harsh
as what you read about during the Vietnam War."

A third Air Force pilot, Capt. William F. Andrews of Mechanicsburg, Pa., said he
broke his leg in two places while parachuting from his damaged plane Feb. 27. He
described his treatment on the ground and in a military hospital in Basra as
"pretty good."

"The soldiers that captured me did a pretty good job, showed a lot of -- it
seemed like compassion," he said. "They gave me their food and helped take care
of my leg.

"In Basra, a military doctor took an X-ray, saw it had some broken bones, and
put half a cast on it and wrapped it up. And that pretty much held my leg in
place until I was able to come back to freedom."

Others said they were treated far less charitably. The most terrifying account
came from Maj. Jeffrey S. Tice of the Air Force, from Sellersburg, Pa., who was
hit near Baghdad and glided his jet south for 150 miles before bailing out. He
said he was captured by Bedouins who turned him over to Iraqi soldiers for the
trip to Baghdad.

Thought to Be an Arab

Major Tice, who has dark hair and a mustache, said his captors might have
punished him more severely because they suspected him of being an Arab and a
traitor, not an American.

"I was subjected to a form of electrical shock therapy that I called the 'talk
man,' " he said, "and basically had some wires wrapped around my ears and under
my chin and was shocked periodically during early captivity, when they were
trying to coerce me into making a videotape.

Major Tice said he "lost a few pieces of teeth and other things like that"
during this interrogation, but never feared for his life.

'Numb After the First Shocks'

"You got kind of numb after the first few shocks. You know, it wasn't that
terrible," he said. "It sounds bad but, it wasn't that terrible. It was more
physically tiring than it was physically damaging."

Some servicemen who appeared in Iraqi propaganda broadcasts said they had been
coerced into making the videotapes. Lieutenant Zaun, whose appearance included a
monotone statement that the allied coalition had "wrongly attacked the peaceful
people of Iraq," said he had deliberately tried to "screw up" the tape to
indicate that he had spoken under duress.

"They took me to a TV studio and sat me next to the big guy and then told me
what questions they were going to ask and they told me what my answers were
going to be," he said. "I had enough faith in Americans to know that anybody who
saw this was going to say, 'This is ridiculous.' "

For Colonel Eberly of the Air Force, the low point came days after his capture
when he realized that his family did not know he was alive.

"I suddenly realized that somebody had to notify my family," he said. "And that
realization, that for a period of time my family had to go through somebody
telling them that I might be dead, that was the toughest night of all of it."

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Former prisoners of war appeared yesterday at Andrews Air Force
Base, Md., at their first news conference since their release. From left were,
Col. David W. Eberly, Maj. Thomas E. Griffith Jr., Capt. Harry M. Roberts, Capt.
Richard Storr and Capt. William F. Andrews. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)
(pg. A14)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 15, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

In Coal Country, a Home-Grown Clinic

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1978 words

DATELINE: GRETHEL, Ky.


Near the Appalachian village of Harold, Mud Creek divides into Little Mud and
Big Mud. From there, Big Mud runs along Route 979, a twisting, shoulderless
two-lane road that carries 22-wheel Mack trucks with tarpaulins stretched over
immense cargoes of coal. Every square foot of Big Mud's damp banks seems
cluttered with trash, like the lungs of many patients at Eula Hall's Mud Creek
Clinic, about seven miles along Big Mud.

Mrs. Hall is the founder and de facto boss of the Mud Creek Clinic in the dingy
hamlet of Grethel, although her title is simply "social director." A
slow-talking, soft-talking woman, she is an example of how a person with modest
credentials, modest means and a home-grown vision keeps a distressed community
afloat.

This is black lung country. And in this remote coal-mining community of junked
terrain, junked jobs and junked bodies, Mrs. Hall is a local legend who cuts red
tape and badgers bureaucrats. She is social worker, jobs counselor and benefits
coordinator for men in their 40's and 50's, many illiterate, who sleep with
breathing machines and have heart ailments from straining to breathe and who
bring their privation and ailing bodies to the single-story brick command post
of one woman's lifelong war on poverty and disease.

Mrs. Hall, 63 years old, is of this soil. She stopped school after completing
the eighth grade. Her first husband. whom she divorced and who has since died,
was a miner, and her second husband has retired from mining with various
ailments. Three of her four sons cannot work because of illnesses and accidents
incurred in the mines. She earns $22,000 a year and lives in a cabin that a
now-defunct coal company built for miners.

"I was raised poor," Mrs. Hall said, "and I've never gotten above my raisin'."

With the help of charitable contributions and an $800,000 subsidy from the
United States Public Health Service, the clinic treats the physical and
emotional complaints of about 8,000 patients, handling 50 to 75 a day. The
clinic charges patients in line with their incomes. The 53 percent who do not
qualify for Medicare or who have incomes below the poverty level but still do
not meet Kentucky's standards for Medicaid pay just $5 for a doctor's visit and
$4 for a prescription.

The Federal health service supports about 1,500 such clinics for the poor, 60
percent of them in rural areas.

From one room of a trailer behind the clinic, Mrs. Hall also runs the Mud Creek
Water District, which she helped organize two decades ago. It pipes potable
water to 800 homes, 90 percent of which had contaminated wells when the district
was organized in the 1960's. From another room she distributes free food at the
end of the month, when people's food stamps run down. From a third room she
gives away clothes collected by churches.

Mrs. Hall works from 8 in the morning until 7 or 8 at night, takes no vacations
and pays for the gas she uses on her rounds in her four-wheel-drive Chevrolet
Suburban, a gift of the Kentucky Department of Human Resources. She ferries
medicine, food, clothing and counsel to the housebound and brings them to the
clinic, to the hospital and to government offices to apply for health and
welfare benefits.

If people reproach her, it is for selflessness in the extreme. "She's a heroic
figure," said Dr. Ellen Joyce, who came to Grethel from Watertown, Mass., to
spend a decade as the clinic's principal doctor, leaving three years ago when
her husband entered law school in Louisville.

'Works Till She's Sick'

"But it's hard to work with a saint sometimes," Dr. Joyce said. "She works till
she's sick, which she is, with heart disease and arthritis."

Jim Stewart, executive director of the Big Sandy Health Care Corporation, a
nonprofit organization that processes grants for the clinic and manages its
accounts and pays its workers, said the staff, however dedicated, drew a line at
working Mrs. Hall's hours. "But because of that drive," he said, "people have
that clinic. The clinic would not be there if not for her."

Mrs. Hall got the clinic off the ground in 1973 with a private donation of
$1,400 and a commitment from two doctors from a nearby hospital to work two days
a week. The clinic now has two doctors on the staff of about 10.

Like similar outposts in rural communities and urban ghettos, the Mud Creek
clinic lends credence to pressures in Congress to check soaring health care
costs and overhaul a national health care system that leaves 30 million to 40
million people uninsured. Mr. Stewart said the clinic's cost has been climbing
about 8 percent annually while the Federal subsidy this year is up just 1.5
percent. "Right now our pharmacy is running out of medicine," he said.

Helping men with black lung disease inflates the clinic's costs, both in
treating them and in helping them qualify for disability pay. Many tests and
procedures are required to prove the presence of this progressive condition in
which an accumulation of coal dust ravages the lungs and breathing passages.
Miners who can prove that they have the debilitating, sometimes fatal disease,
as well as that it incapacitates them and that they contracted it mining coal
can tap their former employers, if they can be found, or, if not, the Department
of Labor's Black Lung Disability Trust Fund. Either way, monthly benefits range
from $387.10 for a miner with no dependents to $774.10 for a miner with three or
more.

But nationwide, only 4 percent of the applicants last year qualified, compared
with a peak of 48 percent in 1979, when standards were looser. And some have to
spend years appealing for the benefits after rejections while the disease keeps
wearing them down.

"You have to be near dead to get it," Mrs. Hall said.

Among the patients in Mrs. Hall's clinic one day in February was Omery Compton,
59. He worked for several mining companies for about 12 years, then worked for
the state as a heavy equipment operator before being laid off. He was back in
the mines in 1980 and 1981, despite evidence of black lung, because other jobs
were scarce. His lungs forced him to quit.

Rejection Despite Findings

Mr. Compton was first denied black lung benefits in 1973 and said he had been
rejected repeatedly at various levels of the Governmet since, despite the
positive findings of eight doctors. "I got a breathing machine now," he said. "I
take oxygen on it. They want me to sleep with that oxygen, but you can't."

Roy Lawson came in the same day for painkillers. "I started work at 18 in the
coal mines, worked in them 21 years," he said. At 51, he has black lung disease,
ulcers, has suffered two heart attacks and lost the fourth and fifth fingers of
his left hand in a mine accident.

"Your lungs work on your walking and at night," Mr. Lawson said. "I couldn't
walk 500 foot without resting. I sleep on three pillows. I got a breathing
machine."

Thanks to Mrs. Hall, Mr. Lawson said he now gets black lung benefits -- $528 a
month -- after a 10-year struggle, plus about $224 in workers' compensation
insurance benefits. "Eula's my lawyer," he said.

The clinic also has two mental health workers. One, Don Laferty, explains that
after retiring from the mines and being freed of the fear of accidents, men here
routinely suffer the same post-traumatic stress disorder that afflicted Vietnam
veterans. The clinic provides other services as well, like refuges for
physically abused wives, which Mrs. Hall once was.

She Learned From Congressman

People here say Mrs. Hall's forte is cutting red tape and badgering bureaucrats.
She learned bureaucracy through her Congressman, Carl D. Perkins, a Democrat,
who died in 1984 and was succeeded by his son, Carl C. A legend around here, the
elder Mr. Perkins was the father of the first black lung legislation in 1969,
and he would go to bat for Mrs. Hall in wresting assistance from Federal
agencies.

John Rosenberg, head of the Appalachian Research and Defense Fund in the Floyd
County seat of Prestonsburg, about 20 minutes north of Grethel, said many Floyd
County people are illiterate and intimidated by officialdom, so Mrs. Hall helps
them file and negotiate claims for workers' compensation, black lung disability
benefits, food stamps and other forms of aid.

Jim Kelly, the Social Security Administration's director for a five-county
district of easternmost Kentucky, said she is at least as competent as the
lawyers who come to his office representing clients who are seeking Federal
benefits. He said she is able to establish the fact that disabled miners are
unemployable and have limited education and skills, which is essential to
qualifying for disability aid.

Idea Formed in Her Youth

Mrs. Hall said her efforts to help the poor began in her youth. She was the
second child and first daughter of the seven surviving children of L.D. and
Nanny Elizabeth Riley. The Rileys lived in Pike County, the turf of the
Hatfields and McCoys, without electricity, running water or an automoble. She
walked to the nearby grade school but did not go to high school because it was
several miles away.

"My daddy was a saw logger and a farmer," she said, cutting trees for timber as
well as to make furniture. The family's circumstances made Mrs. Hall realize
early the importance of health care.

"I saw mommy almost bleed to death when she had a baby because there was no
doctor," she said. "I got typhoid fever as a child. I was 11. All of my hair
come out from the high temperature. I had a little brother and sister. I always
worried because there was no doctor to take them to. My dream from the time I
was a child was a health facility where nobody would be turned away."

Married at the Age of 17

At 17, she married a miner. "He brutalized her," Dr. Joyce said. Mrs. Hall
divorced him after 33 years and married Oliver Hall, a retired miner who has
heart and lung ailments.

Mrs. Hall's small house became her clinic after the first year when it outgrew
the original site. She and her husband and her five children moved into a
trailer. An arsonist looking for drugs burned the clinic in 1982.

Mrs. Hall's response has become Floyd County folklore. Patients and a doctor,
unaware of the fire, arrived the next morning. Mrs. Hall and a doctor set up
shop on a picnic table, under a willow tree. They needed a telephone to order
prescriptions, so Mrs. Hall called the telephone company and asked for a phone
on the tree. Dr. Joyce told the rest of the story this way:

" 'We don't put phones on trees,' they told Mrs. Hall.  'You put them on poles
at coal mines,' Mrs. Hall told them.  'You can put a phone on a tree. I got to
stay in contact with these people.' She got the phone."

They worked that way for three days. Since school was out for the summer, the
school board let her move the clinic into the elementary school. Then the State
Department of Health and Human Services bought a second-hand trailer for her,
the one that is now the water district office.

$400,000 for a New Clinic

To build a new clinic, she needed $400,000. The Appalachian Regional Commission,
a Federal development agency, agreed to put up $320,000 if she raised $80,000.
With quilt raffles, radiothons and reaching for donors far beyond Kentucky, she
raised $120,000. The new clinic opened in late 1984.

Now that clinic, too, is overtaxed, and so is Mrs. Hall, who has clients parked
in her tiny office, with books for children on one wall, waiting to see her for
help with their foods stamps, Medicaid, or other government benefits.

Their waits can stretch for hours, particularly when Mrs. Hall gets a call from
someone sick or an abused woman, and she darts off to her car. "But they'll wait
on me," Mrs. Hall said. Except for emergencies, she said, "They know I don't
want to put anybody in front of anybody."

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Eula Hall, founder and de facto boss of the Mud Creek Clinic in
the Appalachian village of Grethel, Ky., from where she coordinates distribution
of medicine, food, clothing and counsel to the housebound. (Stanley E. McCleave
for The New York Times) (pg. A22)

Map of Kentucky highlighting Grethel (pg. A22)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 15, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

So Few Died, but How It Hurt Those Back Home: 11 Stories

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ with E. R. SHIPP

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2352 words


Two giant flags -- one Ecuadorean, the other American -- hang side by side in
Nicolas Fajardo's living room in Flushing, Queens. The banners dwarf a snapshot,
taken back home in Ecuador, of an 11-year-old honor student standing
ramrod-straight with a tiny gold medal pinned to his jacket.

Years later, that same young man, Mr. Fajardo's son Mario, stood just as erect
when he received his commission in the United States Army. Befitting a youth who
grew up tinkering around the house, he thrived as a military engineer and was
captivated by the barrage of high-tech gadgets.

On Feb. 26, Capt. Mario Fajardo and five men under his command were killed when
a mine they were defusing exploded in the Kuwaiti desert. Military coroners have
told the family the blast dismembered their son.

Now, groping for meaning in the aftermath, Mr. Fajardo holds the childhood
snapshot and glances at the flags.

"He was born under one, but he adored the other."

While the nation welcomes home the men and women who served in the Persian Gulf
with cheers and ticker-tape parades. Captain Fajardo had his homecoming this
week amid the weeping strains of taps and the sharp echoes of rifle salutes. He
was one of 326 Americans who have died in the Persian Gulf since August, one of
at least 32 for whom the word "hometown" meant somewhere in New York, New Jersey
or Connecticut.

Most of those 32 died in accidents, away from the battlefield. But 11 died in
the combat zone: killed in the flash of an exploding Scud missile, cut down by
Iraqi troops or mistakenly fired upon by allied forces.

Their stories are a snapshot of the 540,000 Americans who served in the Persian
Gulf in the first major test of the all-volunteer military. Many of them had
joined up with dreams of escaping the stifling confines of tiny rural towns or
the wearying blight of ghettos. For some, life was inconceivable out of uniform;
for others it was merely a way station on the route to college and a job.

Six percent of the troops in the gulf were women, and never before had they
played so significant a military role. Often they were so close to battle that
the prohibition against women in combat seemed to exist only in the rule books.
Army Specialist Cindy M. Beaudoin of Plainfield, Conn., killed when she stepped
on a mine in southern Iraq, was one of them.

Thoughts of death -- even thoughts of war -- seemed as distant as Vietnam when
these young people joined the military. But today, whenever others boast of a
dizzingly fast allied rout of Iraqi forces with few deaths, the families of
these 11 have a quiet ache that reminds them otherwise.

Specialist Beaudoin's parents, Paul and Phyllis Beaudoin, received their
19-year-old daughter's last letter the day after they learned she had been
killed.

"Pray for the young guys. They really need it," Specialist Beaudoin, a medical
technician, wrote. "Sometimes I wonder if all these imminent deaths are worth
what we are fighting for. I can't wait to get home and see everyone."

They Enlist

Escape, Tradition, Money for College

Becoming a Marine was Lance Cpl. David T. Snyder's way of being someone special.
Growing up in Kenmore, N.Y., a village north of Buffalo, he was an easygoing boy
who did not excel in any sport or subject. But he never stopped trying.

"If he was playing baseball or street hockey, he may not have been the best
player out there," his mother, Theresa, recalled. "But you knew he played with
every ounce of strength he had."

His fellow Marine, Lance Cpl. Ismael Cotto Jr., was no stranger to struggle,
either. He came of age on the hard-scrabble streets of the South Bronx.

Eager for brighter and broader horizons, he left college for the Marines when he
turned 21, fulfilling an ambition that began as a child, when he and his brother
fought mock battles with toy soldiers in the living room.

Army Staff Sgt. William (Tom) Butts grew up in Stonington, Conn., joined the
service and left the area shortly after high school.

The "Hounds of Hell"

"Tom was from a poor background," said Thomas W. Texeira 2d, a Hartford lawyer
who served in the Army with Sergeant Butts. "His family was not well-educated
and he saw the military as the best opportunity to provide for himself and his
family."

Staff Sgt. Harold P. Witzke 3d enlisted when he was a junior in high school,
encouraged by a stepfather who had preceded him in the "Hounds of Hell"
Battalion of the Second Armored Division and had been a member of the honor
guard at the funeral of Gen. George S. Patton. He lived with his mother and
stepfather in a cabin he helped build in Caroga Lake, N.Y., a tourist spot hard
by factory towns in the Adirondacks.

Army Pvt. Robert D. Talley had been a quietly ambitious youth who grew up in a
working class Newark neighborhood. He followed a family tradition when he joined
the Army last August, months after graduating from high school. But he was also
determined to use the Army's educational benefits to reach his goal of becoming
a doctor.

A Kennedy Namesake

Army Sgt. Patbouvier E. (Bobby) Ortiz -- born on the same day as his namesake,
Patrick Bouvier Kennedy, President John F. Kennedy's son who died in infancy --
had more immediate concerns when he enlisted eight years ago. During his
childhood, his mother, Hilda, was a battered wife who left her husband and wound
up on the welfare rolls in Richmond Hill, Queens. When he enlisted, he did so to
help the family, and he often taped $20 bills to his letters.

He also vowed to restore honor to the family name. When he was named
non-commissioned officer of the month by his regiment last summer, he reminded
his mother of her suffering during her first marriage.

"Mama, look, I made it," he said to her. "I told you I'm going to honor that
name as much as you hated it for 20 years."

His achievements fueled an intense pride. His brother Enrique recalled how while
on home leave last year, Bobby confronted a pack of youths harassing people at
an East New York subway station. "Stop bothering people," he said, flashing his
military identification card. "If you need help, come to me. I came from the
ghetto, like you, but I made it. I'm a military man."

They Ship Out

So Few Expected To Go to War

The military's recuitment ads tout school, skills and benefits. They never
mention war. But for the soldiers and their families the bottom line of military
life became inescapably clear last summer with the buildup of troops in the
Persian Gulf.

"It's a funny thing, but he told us that never in all his years of service did
it occur to him there'd be a war," said Robert Miller, Sergeant Witzke's
stepfather. "But we all definitely agreed that Saddam Hussein was a bad guy."

When word of the buildup reached Corporal Cotto's family, they tried to talk him
out of going overseas. One family member even suggested he go to Canada. But
that was something he would not consider.

"He couldn't run away from his job," his wife said. "He didn't want to go, but
he thought he was doing the right thing."

For reservists, whose military life is lived in weekend installments, the
buildup was a jarring shock. Army Specialist Thomas G. Stone, of Jamestown,
N.Y., joined to help make ends meet. He and his wife and daughter moved to
Austin, Tex., last year for a job in a warehouse sales outlet.

Fearful of leaving his family alone in Texas if he was called up, they moved
back to Jamestown. He left an artillery battalion for a water-purification unit
that would presumably be stationed in the rear.

"He never dreamed he'd have to go to war," said Sandra Miller, his mother in
law. "Tom was very nervous and upset by it."

Specialist Beaudoin admitted to a reporter from her local paper that she was
also frightened. She had joined for money for college.

But military service was also a way to make a point. "She was for the war," said
her uncle, David Beaudoin. "She was for women in the service."

'No One Can Beat Us'

Captain Fajardo was confident when he called his parents in August. "Don't
worry, Papa," he told his father. "There is no one who can beat us."

His mother, Sonia Santiago, pleaded with him: "Please don't come home a hero.
Come home as my son. This country forgets its heroes."

Army Pfc. Robert Curtis Wade of Hackensack may have had a premonition of his
death. Before leaving, he called a cousin and asked for the numbers of all his
relatives.

His father, also named Robert, was uneasy, especially after hearing reports
about the battle-hardened Iraqi Army.

"I was afraid, I guess a lot more than he was," Mr. Wade said. "I figured they
really had a job ahead of them."

Their Letters

Fear Creeps Up In the Long Wait

What many found once they got to the Gulf were days and weeks of anxious waiting
for combat. When their units weren't practicing maneuvers or washing their
clothes, they filled the time with volleyball, phone calls and letters home.

"We've moved a little closer," Sergeant Witzke wrote his parents in February.
"You can see the oil field fires and hear the bombs. Other than that, we are
just sitting here."

He was more direct in a letter to a fifth grader who had been his pen pal. "Even
though we are not fighting yet, I do get scared," he wrote to Kim Roblee. "I
know it's only a temporary thing, though."

Private Wade, who arrived in mid-February, called home several times,
complaining that he had yet to be assigned to a unit. Life in the desert, he
said, "was like being out in the middle of the ocean, except all you could see
was sand," his father, a World War II veteran, recalled. At the end of one phone
call, he joked that he would "walk down this hill here and take a swim."

'Never Say Goodbye'

But as time dragged on, the inevitability of a ground war became apparent.

"Things here are very serious and going to get worse," Sergeant Ortiz wrote.

In Saudi Arabia, Captain Fajardo reached the high point of his career when he
was named company commander. Soon afterwards, he wrote to his sister about his
men.

"When I see those kids, I see my brother," he wrote. "They are not ready to
die."

Those faces haunted him. "I know my men are scared, and me too," he wrote. "But
I am the commander and I can't show them that.

"Whatever happens, I have no regrets and would do it all over again," he wrote
home. "Because I am proud to serve the country that has given me, an immigrant,
so much opportunity."

Private Talley wrote that the war had "strengthened his determination to become
a doctor, to help ease other people's suffering," his grandmother Lou Ann Monroe
said. He had been in Saudi Arabia only a week when he called to say goodbye.

"They're sending me to the battlefront."

"Never say goodbye," his grandmother told him. "Say so long."

Her voice cracked at the memory. "But it was goodbye. We never heard from him
again."

Their Deaths

Everyone Else Got a Hero Home

The news reports now are filled with images of soldiers stepping off planes and
into the arms of loved ones. And for Sandra Miller, Specialist Stone's
mother-in-law, those images elicit a strong reflex.

"I find myself looking for Tom," she said.

For families and friends of those killed this is a time for funerals, for
relishing memories -- and for raising questions. Those who were opposed to the
war wonder why their loved ones had to die. Others remain perplexed about how
their relatives did.

Families of the three marines who were killed near Khafji, Saudi Arabia -- Sgt.
Garett A. Mongrella of Belvidere, N.J., Corporal Snyder and Corporal Cotto --
still do not know if they were killed by the Iraqis or by "friendly fire" from
allied forces.

Corporal Cotto's wife, Maria Christina, does not believe she will ever know the
truth.

"I think they'll probably try to cover up what really happened," she said.

But Corporal Snyder's family is not preoccupied with how it happened.

"He died a hero and we're proud of what we stood for," his mother said. "He died
in the line of duty. Whether it was friendly fire or hostile fire, it doesn't
matter. He would have been proud, and that's what counts."

'We Need Peace Right Here'

Private Talley, the youngest American to die in the war, was also the victim of
"friendly fire" when the commander of a helicopter battalion mistakenly fired
into two U.S. armored vehicles. And even as his grandmother demands a full
account of his death, she is hoping that the nation will focus on domestic
problems driving blacks into the military in disproportionate numbers.

"We have a crisis in homelessness, in crime, in drugs," Mrs. Monroe said. "We
need peace right here in America."

To some families the talk of parades and celebrations is upsetting.

"I feel the city is throwing this in our face with this party," Corporal Cotto's
brother, Carlos, said of New York's plans for a parade. "It's like a slap in the
face."

But others are happy for the families who are being reunited with their
soldier-heroes.

"I'm glad that they have something to celebrate," Private Wade's mother, Doris,
said. "We all knew that in this war somebody wasn't coming back."

For many families, the letters from the front continue to arrive even after they
have buried their loved ones. John Mongrella has four unopened letters from his
son, Sergeant Mongrella. "I'll get around to them, but I need time, just a
little time," he said, his voice trailing to a whisper. "I'd like to open them
on Memorial Day."

After the funeral, Sergeant Mongrella's wife, Kimberly, returned to Iowa to find
a letter he had written to her and their 18-month-old son Anthony four days
before he died.

"If my time should come, I just want it to be quick, short and sweet," he wrote.

"Kim, if something should happen I understand after a while you will probably
meet someone and marry again (maybe).

"Kim, any man would want you. You are a good woman. I understand the world keeps
turning, but please teach Anthony about me and what I was like. Don't let him
forget about his father. Teach him to please be proud of me."

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: ARMY SPECIALIST CINDY MARIE BEAUDOIN, 19, Plainfield, Conn.,
Killed Feb. 28 by a mine as she approached Iraqis surrendering.; ARMY STAFF SGT.
WILLIAM T. BUTTS, 30, Waterford, Conn., Killed Feb. 27 rescuing a pilot downed
in Iraq.; MARINE CPL. ISMAEL COTTO, 27, Bronx, Killed Jan. 29 in battle of
Khafji, Saudi Arabia.; ARMY CAPT. MARIO FAJARDO, 29, Queens, Killed Feb. 26 as
his unit defused a mine.; MARINE SGT. GARETT A. MONGRELLA, 25, Belvidere, N.J.,
Killed Jan. 29 in battle of Khafji, Saudi Arabia.; ARMY SGT. PATBOUVIER E.
ORTIZ, 27, Queens, Killed Feb. 27 in a helicopter rescuing a pilot downed in
Iraq.; MARINE LANCE CPL. DAVID T. SNYDER, 21, Kenmore, N.Y., Killed Jan. 29 in
battle of Khafji, Saudi Arabia.; ARMY SPECIALIST THOMAS G. STONE, 20, Jamestown,
N.Y., Killed Feb. 25 in Scud attack in Saudi Arabia.; ARMY PVT. ROBERT D.
TALLEY, 18, Newark, Killed Feb. 17 by "friendly fire" in Saudi Arabia.; ARMY
PFC. ROBERT C. WADE, 31, Hackensack, N.J., Killed Feb. 25 in Scud attack in
Saudi Arabia.; ARMY STAFF SGT. HAROLD P. WITKE 3d, 28, Caroga Lake, N.Y., Killed
Feb. 26 by sniper fire in Kuwait.; Rhonda Wade, front row at left, during the
funeral service for her husband, Army Pfc. Robert Curtis Wade. (Jim Bounds for
The New York Times); The funeral of Army Capt. Mario Fajardo, whose photograph
was placed near the altar for the service. (Vic DeLucia/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 15, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Stage, and Off

BYLINE: By Alex Witchel

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1083 words


Adding Up 'Miss Saigon's' Advance

"Miss Saigon's" $35 million advance is reported so often it could be mistaken
for the show's subtitle. But does the figure really mean the show is sold out
for months to come? Especially since recent ads for the musical have announced
that "good seats are available beginning Monday, April 1," only 10 days after
the first preview?

The show's producer, Cameron Mackintosh, says this is how the $35 million figure
was arrived at: The actual cash in hand totals $19 million. Thirteen million
dollars is owed from theater-party reservations. These groups, which usually buy
tickets for a charity, are contractually obligated to pay in full but not until
eight weeks before the performance date. When advances are announced, this is
standard practice -- the money promised is counted as money paid. That brings
the total to $32 million. The remaining $3 million, Mr. Mackintosh says, comes
from the projected sale of house seats for the first year of the run.

The Shubert Organization, which owns the Broadway Theater where "Miss Saigon," a
love story set in Vietnam, will be playing, initially put the show on sale
through March 1992. Mr. Mackintosh cut it back so individual tickets could not
be purchased past December to bunch up the seats sold and increase demand by
reducing the supply. He says he's happy with the volume of individual sales.
"Before playing a single performance, we are taking in between $70,000 and
$90,000 a day," Mr. Mackintosh says. As musicals go, this is a respectable, if
not a remarkable, figure.

Yet a peek at a weekday in September, for example, shows that out of roughly 900
orchestra seats, one-third are still unsold. Of the 250 front-mezzanine seats,
which go for $100, three-quarters are still unsold. Weekends around the same
time are almost sold out.

Which, the producer says, is fine with him. "The advance sales for 'Miss Saigon'
are far ahead of what 'Phantom' opened with," he contends of the hit musical he
also produced. It had a $19 million advance, albeit with lower ticket prices.
"What turns a show into a success is how much it is enjoyed," Mr. Mackintosh
says. "If people don't like it, you can have a $50 million advance and it
wouldn't matter." He's right. "Aspects of Love," which was produced by the
Really Useful Company, opened with a highly publicized $11 million advance in a
small theater and closed this month after an 11-month run and an $8 million
loss, believed to be the largest in Broadway history.

Reports of a Mosher-Zaks Battle

Everyone in the theater is still talking about the real reason Gregory Mosher
resigned last week as artistic director of Lincoln Center Theater. Mr. Mosher
has said that six years is enough and he wants to direct films and plays without
the administrative responsibilities -- and headaches -- that go with the
front-office job. Fair enough.

But the chat among Lincoln Center board members and theater executives who deal
with Lincoln Center regularly is that the beginning of the end of Mr. Mosher's
tenure came with the theater's biggest hit, John Guare's "Six Degrees of
Separation." Both Mr. Mosher and Jerry Zaks, who was the theater's resident
director, wanted to direct the play, and by all accounts, a bitter rivalry
ensued. To make matters worse, Bernard Gersten, the executive producer of
Lincoln Center, endorsed Mr. Zaks, and before Mr. Mosher backed down, the
dispute almost made it to a formal meeting of the board of directors for its
resolution. That turned out to be unnecessary. Mr. Zaks won, and shortly after
"Six Degrees" opened last June, he left Lincoln Center to set up shop at
Jujamcyn Theaters as an untitled director-at-large. Since then, he has also
fulfilled a long-term commitment to direct Stephen Sondheim's "Assassins."

Mr. Mosher says: "Any attempt to boil down a complicated decision to one thing
doesn't work." Mr. Mosher would not comment on the "Six Degrees" dispute, but
did say that he bears Jerry Zaks no ill will. Mr. Zaks had no comment.

A Change for 'Bergman on Stage'

There's a change of plan at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, which will present
"Bergman on Stage," three plays directed by Ingmar Bergman, as part of the New
York International Festival of the Arts in June. " Long Day's Journey Into
Night," "A Doll's House," and "Mme. de Sade" were announced. But the last has
just been canceled because of the Swedish actress Stina Ekblad's pregnancy. It
has been replaced with "Miss Julie," starring Lena Olin, who was nominated for
an Oscar in Paul Mazursky's "Enemies, a Love Story." Ms. Olin will be making her
New York stage debut in the Strindberg drama, co-starring with Peter Stormare
and Bibi Anderssen.

Long Wharf's Coming Attractions

The Long Wharf Theater in New Haven wins first prize for getting its act
together for the 1991-92 season. The artistic director, Arvin Brown, has quite
an agenda, beginning with "Booth Is Back in Town," the first play by the actor
and director Austin Pendleton. Frank Langella will star as the 19th-century
Shakespearean actor Junius Brutus Booth. The critically acclaimed Royal
Shakespeare Company production of "Hamlet," directed by Ron Daniels, starring
Mark Rylance in the title role, follows.

John Tillinger and James Hammerstein, the son of the lyricist Oscar Hammerstein
2d, have adapted Dylan Thomas's unfinished novel, "Adventures in the Skin
Trade," as the book of a new musical, with a score by Tom Fay. Mr. Tillinger
will also direct a revival of Arthur Miller's "Enemy of the People." The season
will end with the world premiere of "Fanny Hackabout Jones," a musical based on
Erica Jong's novel "Fanny," about a bawdy heroine's life in the 18th century.
Lucy Simon ("The Secret Garden") will write the score, with lyrics by Susan
Birkenhead, who will co-write the book with Ms. Jong. Arvin Brown will direct.

Instead of a Funeral, a Party

LuEsther Mertz loved a party. The arts patron, who died on Feb. 5 at the age of
85, wanted one instead of a funeral, preferably in LuEsther Hall, the theater
named for her at the Public Theater, and definitely with Champagne. So, on
Thursday the many beneficiaries of her generosity (she and her husband founded
Publishers Clearing House) will gather in her memory. In the theater alone, Mrs.
Mertz was a major supporter of the New York Shakespeare Festival, Lincoln Center
Theater, the American Place Theater, Circle in the Square and the Negro Ensemble
Company.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: John Malkovich (above) will star in "States of Shock," a new play by
Sam Shepard, scheduled to start performances at the American Place Theater on
April 26. The only information available on the five-character drama, to be
directed by Bill Hart, is that it is set in a small family restaurant. This is
Mr. Shepard's first play since "A Lie of the Mind" in 1985. (Benno Friedman)
Photo: Malkovich in Shepard's Latest

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 15, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: WASHINGTON AT WORK;
The Powell-Cheney Relationship: Blunt Give-and-Take Early in Crisis

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1401 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


The low point of the relationship between Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin L. Powell
came in the first hours after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2, as the two
men and their aides faced a giant map of the Arabian Peninsula in the Defense
Secretary's cavernous office on the Pentagon's outer ring.

The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff had privately confided to an associate
that he believed that if the military was asked to intervene, it should not go
in halfway. General Powell believed he would have to go in big. But because he
was skeptical that the White House was willing to commit the kind of force that
would be required to remove President Saddam Hussein's army from Kuwait, the
general presented limited military options, like bombing Iraq's oil pipeline
through Saudi Arabia.

The Defense Secretary dismissed the limited options as inadequate, insisting
that President Bush have a full range of options, including the maximum use of
force.

Mr. Cheney was blunt in criticizing the plans. There was a lot of "thrashing
around," and the atmosphere was "testy," a senior Administration official said.

Associates say the conflict lasted no more than 24 to 36 hours. Mr. Cheney says
he will not discuss it, because that would intrude on the heart of the
confidentiality in his "good close relationship" with General Powell. There was
a lot of "intense interaction that was even more intense during the period when
our forces were engaged in combat," was all he would say in an interview this
week.

Bush's Inner Circle

"It gets to be very close," he said. "We each see more of the other guy than we
do of our families."

"He called me today and we grabbed lunch together," Mr. Cheney said," adding "no
specific agenda, just a bull session."

Steeped just last summer in the drudgery of managing the decline of the American
defense establishment, on the defensive against Congressional attacks for
timidity and lack of vision in the face of the collapse of the Soviet empire,
Secretary Cheney and General Powell have emerged as two of the most visible
members of President Bush's inner circle. For the Republican Party, they are
emerging as factors in Presidential speculation.

Mr. Cheney, the career Republican Party political operative who spent a decade
in the House of Representatives, seems at times easily outshone by General
Powell, the Bronx-born son of Jamaican immigrants.

After the military victory in the Persian Gulf, General Powell addressed the
Veterans of Foreign Wars, who were meeting in Washington. Here is how he
reminded them of the time when he told them that Saddam Hussein's threats would
never shake American resolve.

'Powell Is a Politician'

"Was I right?" the General said, standing before an American flag the size of
the one Hollywood put behind George C. Scott in the film "Patton." The crowd
erupted.

"Powell is a politician in the old-fashioned, buy-you-a-hot-dog style, that's
true," said an Administration official who has worked with both men. "Colin gets
a big charge out of getting down with the guys, of cheering and rooting them
on," the official said. "They probably react more viscerally to him than to
Cheney, who is a little shy in getting in and working the crowd."

Mr. Cheney's is more self-effacing image, a hands-shoved-into-the-pockets
Westerner who is ready to tell a joke about his former career in Congress and
then, with his head sinking between hunched shoulders, say something sincere.
But there also is a hard edge -- some opponents in Congress call it a mean
streak -- that can flare in dealing with an adversary.

This is the rebuke he delivered to his former colleague, Representative Peter H.
Kostmayer, Democrat of Pennsylvania, after a challenge to his spending plans:
"When the Soviets were oppressing Eastern Europe, invading Afghanista, building
and deploying massive armaments, engaging in the largest military buildup,
peacetime, in the history of the world, supporting third-world revolution in
Central America and southern Africa, I don't recall that you supported the
defense budget then, either."

Cheney's Senior Post

General Powell's instincts seem disciplined by his military training. From Army
fatigues and getting down with the troops, he can change effortlessly to
spit-polish and dress-greens to discuss international affairs with diplomats,
statesmen and royalty.

It is that political-military combination in General Powell's resume, the
four-star warrior who also served as President Reagan's last national security
adviser, that gives him special status. In an interview in August, just two
weeks after he had clashed with Mr. Cheney, General Powell reinforced the
restraint he had felt in those opening hours of the crisis.

"The use of the armed forces of the United States is a political matter, not a
military matter," he said. "There has to be a political objective when we use
the armed forces. We tend to get in trouble when we forget that."

But Mr. Cheney, almost stately at 50 -- nearly four years younger than General
Powell -- is the senior partner by virtue of his seat in the President's
Cabinet.

Staff Members Clash

"They are not equals, and Colin understands that," said one associate.

And though they frequently pay tribute to each other -- Mr. Cheney refers to the
general as "my compatriot" and tutor -- each man vigorously guards the
prerogatives of his office.

Mr. Cheney runs the huge Pentagon staff through a small circle of trusted aides,
many of whom have been with him since his Congressional or White House days.
That inner staff has clashed from time to time with General Powell's over Mr.
Cheney's information-gathering forays into the military.

"Powell is very concerned with making sure that he is the adviser to the
Secretary and the President," an official said.

Powell's Political Allure

Because he held office, ran President Ford's White House staff at the age of 34
and understands party machinery intimately, Mr. Cheney has become the darling of
the Republican right wing. He has strong ties to the West, a perfect
conservative voting record as a Congressman, skepticism about Soviet intentions,
devotion to Israel's security and unfailing support for "Star Wars."

"Cheney is probably the conservatives' favorite right now," said Richard A.
Viguerie, the conservative Republican fund raiser. "He is one of us. We have
known him for many years and fought many battles together."

But a Republican media consultant, Robert Goodman, disagreed, arguing that
General Powell and his field commander, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, have intense
political allure for the Republican Party.

"In a nation starved for heros, with politicians generally in low repute, with
incumbency in some kind of turmoil right now, a fresh heroic face can be very
very appealing," Mr. Goodman said.

A New Republican Image

Mr. Cheney "is the only real politician in the crowd," Mr. Goodman said. But he
said that General Powell, if he were to replace Dan Quayle on the 1992
Republican ticket "could create a sea change in national politics," not only by
virtue of the racial coup such a draft would represent but also because General
Powell might be able to rid the party of its four-decade shutout on projecting a
humane domestic agenda.

The biggest problem for Republicans who lust for a Powell candidacy is the
General's persistance in not declaring his party while in uniform.

In midwar, weeks ago, the General called Vice President Quayle and assured him
that any talk of a Bush-Powell ticket was nonsense from his perspective.

Availability for Interviews

Both men have the relatively thick hides that only come from years of Washington
experience.

"Cheney is a little more patient than Powell in dealing with Congress and the
press," a senior official said.

General Powell carefully screens requests for access, and his distance has
become all the more acute as his political future -- and his relative
attractiveness as a Bush running mate in 1992 -- are more frequently discussed.

"In our free time he likes to fix old cars and I like to fly-fish," Mr. Cheney
said. "I'm from the wide-open spaces of Wyoming, and he's a big-city boy from
New York, so we are very different in that respect. His background is primarily
military and mine is political, but they mesh nicely where they need to mesh."

NAME: Dick Cheney; Colin L. Powell

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, left, and Gen. Colin L. Powell,
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, have emerged from the gulf crisis as the
two most visible members of President Bush's inner circle. (Andrea Mohin for The
New York Times)

Chart: "Colin Luther Powell"

Born: April 5, 1937.
Hometown: New York City.
Education: B.S., City College, New York; M.B.A., George Washington University.
Career Highlights: Commissioned Army second lieutenant, 1958; Vietnam tours of
duty, 1962 and 1968; commander, Second Brigade, 101st Airborne Division, Fort
Campbell, Ky., 1976 -77; military assistant to Secretary of Defense , 1983-86;
commander, V Corps, Europe, 1986; Reagan White House, deputy national security
adviser, national security adviser 1987- 1989; appointed Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs, October 1989.
Hobbies: Restoring Volvos.

Chart: "Dick Cheney"

Born: Jan. 30, 1941.
Hometown: Casper, Wy.
Education: B.A. and M.A., University of Wyoming.
Career Highlights: 1969-70, Special Assistant to the Director of the Office of
Economic Opportunity; 1971-73, Assistant Director of Operations, White House
Cost of Living Council; 1973-74, Vice President, Bradley, Woods & Company Inc.,
an investment firm; Ford White House 1974-77, Deputy Assistant to the President,
Chief of Staff; House of Representatives, Republican of Wyoming, 1979-89;
appointed Secretary of Defense, March 1989.
Hobbies: Fly-fishing; horseback riding.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 15, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
Katharine Graham's Son To Head Washington Post

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section D; Page 5; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 556 words


The Washington Post Company announced yesterday that on May 9 Donald E. Graham
would replace his mother, Katharine Graham, as chief executive. Mrs. Graham will
continue as chairman.

Mr. Graham, who is 45 years old, will also become president of the company and
will remain as publisher of The Washington Post, a position he has held since
1979.

"I suppose I'm the ultimate authority, but I feel very strongly that Don is
going to run the company and I'm not going to be hanging over his shoulder,"
said Mrs. Graham, who is 73 and has been chairman and chief executive since
1973.

Alan G. Spoon, the president of Newsweek, which is owned by the company, is to
become Mr. Graham's top lieutenant and will assume the title of chief operating
officer.

Mr. Spoon will replace Richard D. Simmons, who has been president and chief
operating officer and served as Mrs. Graham's principal aide since 1981. Mr.
Simmons, who is 56, will remain a director and will become president of The
International Herald Tribune, which is owned by The Washington Post, The New
York Times and Whitney Communications.

'Sort of a Whiz Kid'

Though it was not announced, a company executive who insisted on anonymity said
Richard M. Smith, editor in chief of Newsweek, would also become the magazine's
president, and shift day-to-day responsibility to the editor, Maynard Parker.

Mr. Spoon, 39, has worked throughout the company since joining it in 1982,
including bearing responsibility for marketing and finance at The Washington
Post and supervision of the company's television stations.

"He's sort of a whiz kid, really brilliant and driven," Mrs. Graham said.
Neither Mr. Graham nor Mr. Spoon responded to requests for comment.

Mrs. Graham said that she considered her son and Mr. Spoon a complementary team
similar to the partnership that she has shared with Mr. Simmons for a decade.

In that arrangement, she was primarily responsible for giving overall direction,
and focused much of her attention on editorial matters while Mr. Simmons
attended to business and operational concerns.

"We're the odd couple, but we've had a hell of a run," Mr. Simmons said.

During Mr. Simmons's tenure at the business helm, the price of the company's
stock has increased to $245 a share, from $27 in 1981. In 1990, the company
earned $175 million on revenues of $1.4 billion, compared with net profit of $33
million from revenues of $750 million when he arrived.

Mr. Graham joined the company in 1971 as a reporter and became a director in
1974. After graduating from Harvard in 1966, he served in the Army in Vietnam
and worked as a police officer in Washington.

By selecting Mr. Spoon, Mr. Graham has completed the process of designating the
two top aides who presumably will work most closely with him. He had already
named Leonard Downie Jr. managing editor of The Post, and Mr. Downie is widely
expected to succeed Benjamin C. Bradlee, the executive editor. Mr. Bradlee, who
turns 70 this year, has not announced any retirement plans.

Mr. Spoon is a graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and
received a master of science degree from the Sloan School of Management at
M.I.T. He also has a law degree from Harvard. Before joining the company he was
a partner in the Boston Consulting Group, a management consulting firm.

NAME: Donald E. Graham; Alan G. Spoon

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 16, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Not Violating Refugee Rights

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 499 words


To the Editor:

In "Camps Victimize Vietnamese Boat People" (letter, Feb. 23), Arthur C. Helton,
director of the refugee project of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights,
accuses the Hong Kong Government of intentionally maintaining "woefully
inadequate living conditions" in the detention centers for Vietnamese asylum
seekers to deprive them of basic dignity.

The Hong Kong Government rejects this distortion. It has scrupulously observed
the obligations laid down by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the world community.

Since 1975 about 185,000 Vietnamese have come to Hong Kong in hopes of
resettlement in the West, particularly the United States. None have been turned
away. All are given refuge, food, clothing, medical care and, where possible,
education and training. Hong Kong has spent $450 million caring for the
Vietnamese. Scarce land and government resources needed for Hong Kong's own use
have been given over, though Hong Kong is one of the most densely populated
places on earth, with 5.8 million people crowded into a territory about
one-third the size of Long Island.

We are host to nearly 8,000 Vietnamese judged by a screening process approved
and monitored by the United Nations refugee agency to be political refugees.
While they wait for Western nations to take them, they are housed in open
refugee centers and are free to move about and obtain employment. Unfortunately,
more than 1,000 have been stuck in camps in Hong Kong more than five years, a
sad commentary on the generosity of the international community.

Also, nearly 15,000 Vietnamese found by the screening to be illegal immigrants
will not be accepted by Western nations. Under the auspices of the High
Commissioner for Refugees, Hong Kong began a program in March 1989 of voluntary
repatriation. Almost 7,000 have volunteered to return home. Neither the United
Nations refugee agency nor any other has found any indication that they suffered
persecution upon return.

We are processing quickly 29,000 more Vietnamese awaiting screening. All have
access to legal counsel and the right of appeal.

Most of the problems in the centers are due to overcrowding. The difficulties
were exacerbated by more than 52,000 arrivals in 1988 and 1989. The living
conditions have improved, as we have dedicated increasing resources to the
Vietnamese. A new center opens this month managed by a nongovernmental
organization.

Those concerned with the plight of Vietnamese in crowded centers might use their
energies to persuade Western governments to change their policies toward Vietnam
and help redress the economic difficulties that most of those leaving Vietnam
are fleeing. Alternatively, they might accept the terms of the international
agreement signed in Geneva in 1989, and endorsed by the United States, which
stipulates that these economic migrants be returned to their homeland.

KERRY F. MCGLYNN
Director, Hong Kong Economic & Trade Office
New York, March 1, 1991

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On Language;
Peacework

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1259 words


THE LINGO OF WAR provided this column with a target-rich environment; now for
the mopping up.

"He is not withdrawing," George Bush said of a statement by Saddam Hussein soon
after the ground war (a retronym) began. "His defeated forces are retreating. He
is trying to claim victory in the midst of a rout."

In previous usage, withdrawal had been a euphemism for retreat, along with
retrograde movement, pullback, pullout, adjustment of front, declination of
engagement and redeployment. Gen. George B. McClellan even brazened it out with
change of base.

In this case, however, the President wanted to narrow the definition of
withdrawal to "voluntary evacuation of troops." In his meaning, retreat meant
"fighting while running away," while withdrawal -- the centerpiece of a dozen
United Nations resolutions -- had been available to the Iraqis as the
requirement for a cease-fire.

Saddam Hussein caught that nuance and, after his troops were in full retreat
from Kuwait, announced their withdrawal as if it were a voluntary act, or at
least one that met United Nations standards. But Mr. Bush was not about to let
him get away with appearing to have complied voluntarily or even honorably.

Was this an attempt to humiliate an enemy? (The root of that verb is the Latin
humus, "earth," and an early meaning was "to pound into the earth," which can
happen in a ground war.) I think not.  The pretense of leaving on his own accord
put up by Saddam (deliberately mispronounced SAD'm by Mr. Bush) invited
clarification; hence, the United States President's careful new distinction
between withdrawal and retreat. The first is done peacefully, the result of
negotiation; the second is done as the direct result of military pressure.
That's how new senses are given old words.

"Bush Relaxes Effort to Abase Saddam" was a subsequent Washington Post headline,
after the President declared Kuwait liberated and suspended offensive combat
operations (a rare pre-ceasefire, showing the extent of the distrust of the
enemy).

That was a literate headline-writer at work (one who had no room for humiliate);
abase is from the Old French abaissier, "to bring lower," and can be heard today
in French in the cry a bas Saddam, "down with Saddam." Though not as strong as
humiliate, it is a more forceful transitive verb than dishonor; another synonym,
defame, is directed more to the reputation than to the person, and belittle and
demean are much weaker.

In the general abasement, care has been taken in print and on the air by those
of good taste to avoid a play on the tyrant's first name. On "This Week With
David Brinkley," George Will caught himself just in time from falling into the
sodomize pun and was then forced into the awkward phraseology of "de-Saddam
Husseinize Iraq."

Before we leave this war, do we agree on what historians are to call it? Some
support exists for the "Six-Week War," a play on the 1967 "Six-Day War," but
that assumes the war began on Jan. 16, 1991, and not on Aug. 2, 1990, when Iraq
attacked Kuwait.

Foot soldiers may call it the "Hundred-Hour War," since that was the exact
length of time chosen by the President for the ground war, but that derogates
the contribution made in softening up enemy forces from the air. (Everybody who
remembers "A Thousand Days" by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. will race for "A
Hundred Hours"; we'll see which publisher wins.)

Calling Colin Colon

HERE IS A PLAINTIVE communication from Colin W. Getz of Tequesta, Fla.: "My
first name has been made prominent by Gen. Colin Powell, Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff. The media are pronouncing the name KOH-lin. You may think there
is not much difference as to whether the name is pronounced KOH-lin or KAH-lin.

"The problem arises," Mr. Getz continues, "when you are a young boy and people
mistakenly call you KOH-lin. Fun-loving kids then ask you if you were named
after a bowel (colon) or other idiots ask you if you are going to name your son
Semi-Colin."

A colin, in pastoral verse, denotes a shepherd, based on the poet Edmund
Spenser's use of the word in the 16th century. According to Eric Partridge's
"Name Into Word," the French name Colin is a diminutive of Col, itself a
shortening of Nicolas or Nicholas. (It is unrelated to Colleen, from the Irish
word for "girl"; save your postage.)

The preferred English pronunciation, says Random House II, is KAH-lin, with the
preferred German pronunciation KOH-lin. The British are firm about it: "Why are
you chaps calling KAH-lin KOH-lin?" asks Sir Basil Feldman, the Conservative
Party stalwart, on the phone from London. Sir Colin Campbell was a 19th-century
field marshal; one of his current namesakes, a political columnist for The
Atlanta Journal and Constitution, says, "My name is pronounced KAH-lin; my
colleague from Texas with the same name pronounces it KOH-lin."

In the Pentagon, the high-rent E-ring facing outside has at least two Colins
working there. One is Maj. Colin F. Mayo, who is an aide to the Chairman and
pronounces his name KAH-lin; the other is his boss, Colin Powell, who pronounces
it the other way but is putting no pressure on his aide to conform. (They don't
call the Pentagon "the Puzzle Palace" for nothing.)

"My parents named me KAH-lin," the general told an interviewer. "My parents were
British subjects and they knew how the name should be pronounced."

But that was not what the other kids called him: "When I was a young boy, there
was a famous American war hero at the beginning of World War II by the name of
KOH-lin Kelly -- I think that is an Irish pronunciation, I am not entirely sure
-- but my friends in the street, hearing that he had pronounced his name
KOH-lin, started calling me KOH-lin." He is comfortable with both
pronunciations, but prefers KOH-lin, "much to the regret of my British friends
who consider us a bunch of ignorant Americans for mispronouncing the name."

Colin P. Kelly Jr. became a United States war hero when his plane was shot down
after he bombed a Japanese battleship. In posthumously awarding him the Medal of
Honor, President Franklin Roosevelt wrote a letter to a future President to ask
that the hero's infant son, Colin P. Kelly 3d, receive an appointment to West
Point when he came of age.

"The young man did grow up, did want to go to West Point," General Powell
recounted, "went to West Point and into the Army. He served in Vietnam as an
armor officer, came back from Vietnam and went into the chaplaincy and became an
Episcopal priest. I met him about nine years ago when he was a lieutenant
colonel and I was a brigadier general, and I said, 'What's your name?' He said,
'KOH-lin Kelly.' And I said, 'Thank God, you have been mispronouncing your name
all your life just as I have.' "

Colon comes from two Greek roots with the same spelling. One has an accent mark
over the first o; it means "part, limb," and has evolved into the punctuation
mark (one dot over the other) that decisively separates two parts of a sentence.
The root without the accent means "food, meat"; (no, that's a semicolon) it has
come to mean this: (there we go) the large intestine or bowel, a hoselike
muscular organ where food is digested.

Which brings us back to the letter of Colin Getz: "My reason for writing this is
that many people, proud of the prominence of General Powell, may be moved to
name their son Colin. My advice to them is: don't."

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Thai Link Lost, Cambodia Feels More Isolated

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 645 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 16


The ousted Prime Minister of Thailand, Chatichai Choonhavan, had been best known
for his desire to turn Indochinese "battlefields into marketplaces." He had
annoyed his Southeast Asian neighbors, and his Foreign Ministry, by opening a
diplomatic channel to the Vietnamese-installed Government in Cambodia.

That is a channel the Thai military junta that took power in a coup on Feb. 23
has moved quickly to close.

Foreign Ministry officials appointed by the military say Thailand will continue
to support the peace efforts of the United Nations and the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.

"Unilateral intiatives, however, will stop," a senior ministry official said.

The shift further isolates the Phnom Penh Government, which had come to rely on
the Thais as a link to the rest of the world.

Senior Western and Asian diplomats disagree on whether the change will make much
difference.

Peace efforts have moved far afield, and are now centered on a draft settlement
drawn up by the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council.
The Indonesian Foreign Minister, Ali Alatas, continues to play an important role
as co-chairman, with France, of an international peace conference on Cambodia.

But Thailand and the other members of Asean do not have much to say on the last,
crucial questions holding up a settlement.

Phnom Penh is the main obstacle now, diplomats agree. Its concerns center on how
to safely demobilize its standing army without benefiting the guerrillas of the
Khmer Rouge, under whose rule more than a million Cambodians died in the late
1970's.

Senior Western diplomats agree that Phnom Penh has a point that requires some
renegotiation. Mr. Alatas is preparing to host another meeting of the Cambodian
factions in late April, while an Australian diplomat, Michael Costello, is
making the rounds of all parties concerned, testing new language.

But some diplomats are now coming to believe that the Phnom Penh Government,
also worried about losing the free election that is the goal of the United
Nations plan, may regard it as riskier to sign a peace pact than to go on
without one.

China's recent statement that it will continue to arm the Khmer Rouge and the
other opposition factions until a settlement is signed is clearly intended to
remind Phnom Penh of the risks of continued civil war. Without a peace, China
will stand by its allies, the Khmer Rouge, and continue to provide the weapons
and mines that are destabilizing the countryside.

China is also the main arms supplier for the American-backed non-Communist
factions of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the Khmer People's National Liberation
Front. Much weaker than the Khmer Rouge, those factions, with American advice
and money, have concentrated on social projects within their zones of influence
and do little fighting.

The downfall of Mr. Chatichai, who was freed from detention last week and went
into exile in Switzerland, will serve as another reminder to Phnom Penh and its
allies in Hanoi of the risks of passing up peace, Western diplomats said.

The coup caused considerable shock in Phnom Penh, said officials of aid agencies
living there. Hanoi also issued statements of concern, hoping that a
Thai-Vietnamese meeting, the first since 1978, might at least be rescheduled.

"They were pretty shaken up," a senior Western diplomat said. "I hope it helps."

But some Asian diplomats say they believe the change in Thailand, though more
than cosmetic, is not fundamental enough to alter Phnom Penh's calculus of its
interests.

While Mr. Chatichai and his advisers were talking to Phnom Penh, the Thai
military maintained its traditionally close ties to the Cambodian opposition,
especially the Khmer Rouge.

The Thai military is the conduit through which the opposition gets its arms, and
Thai officers have traditionally taken their cut.

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Foes of Gulf War, Nation's Victory Is Bitter

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1082 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 16


Despite the nation's euphoria over the allied victory in the Persian Gulf, the
war's hard-core opponents in the United States -- the small group against
military action of any kind -- remain implacable.

They say they worry that the outcome will embolden the United States to resort
to further military force to solve other international problems and will also
result in increased military spending by Congress at the expense of social
programs.

The swiftness and completeness of the victory over Iraqi forces, at minimal
losses to allied forces, prompted few if any second thoughts among the war's
opponents, and they continue to argue that economic sanctions and diplomacy
would eventually have accomplished the same goal, with no loss of life and no
destruction, particularly the costly Iraqi losses.

"This is one victory I'm not celebrating," said Margaret Hummel, a community
organizer from Underhill, Vt., who was so opposed to the war that she journeyed
almost 600 miles to Washington to take part in a protest.

Different Kind of Defeat Seen

"This was a severe defeat for the international community," she added. "I was
appalled at the death of so many Iraqis. Sanctions and diplomacy could have
eventually forced them to leave Kuwait. Now I fear that war will be more and
more accepted as a way to solve our problems and that we'll spend more and more
money on the military instead of on problems at home that are more pressing."

Ms. Hummel's comments were echoed in postwar interviews with other Americans who
earlier had voiced opposition to the war.

"The truth is, I worry more now that the war is over than I did before it
started," said Marian Solomon, a public health nurse from Ames, Iowa. "We came
off as an impatient bully. We should mind our own business, especially at home.
Where will we intervene next? How many more will die?"

Brenda Reed, a writer who was active in the antiwar movement in Oakland, Calif.,
says the war reinforced the "mistaken notion" by Americans that they can police
the world.

Hopes for Alternatives

"I didn't believe that before the war began and I still don't, absolutely," she
said. "Now, more than ever, we have to turn to diplomacy and arms control and a
sane energy policy to solve the problems in the Middle East."

Some leaders of the antiwar movement, which precipitously lost strength as the
gulf conflict progressed, say they will continue to be involved in Middle East
and military issues.

"We intend to stay organized so that we can focus attention on this country's
neglected social problems," said Bonnie Garvin, a coordinator of the ad hoc
National Campaign for Peace in the Middle East, based in New York. "There's
outrage that we could find enough money for a war we didn't need to fight but
not enough money for peace at home. The puffed-up chests that are now everywhere
will deflate in time when people finally realize that we're still not any safer
in this world."

The Rev. McKinley Young, an Atlanta pastor who helped black churches in the
South form an antiwar movement during the gulf crisis, hopes to redirect their
antiwar fervor.

"If this nation can demonstrate so much international war power," he said, "then
it can also demonstrate peace power and the ability to solve national problems.
A nation willing to depend upon thousands and thousands of black soldiers to
help it fight its wars should be able to pass meaningful civil rights laws."

Inquiry on U.S. Tactics

At least one antiwar group, the National Coalition to Stop United States
Intervention in the Middle East, based in New York, not only still believes its
opposition to the war was correct but is also investigating the military tactics
used by the United States.

"We're looking into the possibility of war crimes by the U.S., whether civilians
were targeted for bombing," said Brian Becker, a coalition official. "If so, the
Iraqi attrocities pale in comparison. We may hold a tribunal, the same way that
some antiwar groups did during Vietnam."

Before United States forces went into combat in mid-January, polls indicated
that Americans were almost evenly divided over whether to commence the fighting
or give sanctions and diplomacy more time to work. After the air attacks began
on Jan. 17, support for sanctions and diplomacy dropped to about 15 percent,
with most of the holdouts saying they either opposed wars in general or believed
United States military involvement in the gulf was not in the national interest.

In interviews, many people who switched and came to approve military action said
they had never ruled out that possibility, feeling that Iraq had to be pushed
out of Kuwait.

Switched to Back Bush

They explained that they worried about the possibility of another drawn out
conflict like Vietnam and generally believed in giving sanctions and diplomacy
time to work. But once the war started, they added, they viewed the timing
question as moot and sided with President Bush, though some continued to worry
about the possibility of becoming bogged down in another foreign conflict with
many casualties.

"I was skeptical when it all started, especially because it was not clear to me
what the Bush Administration wanted to accomplish, and why," said J. Michael
Cassell, a public prosecutor in Charles Town, W.Va. "But I didn't really rule
out an eventual military solution. I just knew it had to be quick, not another
Vietnam. It was, thank God. Now the job is to preserve and strengthen the
peace."

Like Mr. Cassell, Nellie Cutchins of Virginia Beach, also had initial doubts
about United States involvement in the gulf.

"But once the war got started, I went along with it," said Ms. Cutchins, a
cleaning woman. "I was just hoping right up to the end that there would be some
other way to get Saddam Hussein out of there. You do what you have to do and
pray for the best."

Like their constituents, many members of Congress initially opposed quick
military action, voting in favor of giving sanctions and diplomacy more time to
work. But once the war started, most backed the President.

Early polls indicate some lawmakers may suffer politically from their initial
opposition. But few, if any, are backing away from their vote.

"I don't regret it," said Senator Paul Wellstone, a Minnesota Democrat who was
an outspoken opponent of quick military intervention. "I voted my conscience.
The flip side would be not to do what I believe in. Going to war is the last
alternative."


LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Margaret Hummel/Underhill, Vt.: "Now I fear that war will be
more and more accepted as a way to solve our problems and that we'll spend more
and more money on the military instead of on problems at home that are more
pressing." (Paul O. Boisvert for The New York Times); The Rev. McKinley
Young/Atlanta, Ga.: "If this nation can demonstrate so much international war
power, then it can also demonstrate peace power and the ability to solve
national problems." (George Tames for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Policy Monotheism

BYLINE: By Leslie H. Gelb

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 740 words


Americans transform every success and every failure in foreign affairs into a
policy doctrine and a political cudgel. We refuse to rest until we possess one
lens through which to view the world and one answer for all challenges. We are
forever brushing off small but important lessons in the quest for great and
single truths.

Ours is a short and tumultuous history of taking largely unique events -- the
fall of Eastern Europe and China to Communism, the Korean War, the Cuban missile
crisis and Vietnam -- and elevating their purported lessons into policy dogmas,
be they Truman Doctrines, Kennedy Corollaries or Vietnam Syndromes.

Once enshrined, high priests wield these theologies like clubs to destroy their
political adversaries. But at some point, they are blinded by their own
convictions and commit blunders, which, in turn, give rise to new dogmas and new
blunders.

We are the monotheists of world politics. Yet we keep abandoning one god for
another with unholy frequency.

Once again, the nation seems poised to bury what the ascendant high priests call
the Vietnam Syndrome in order to establish yet another new world order, or what
may come to be known as the Iraq Pandemic.

The priests of this new order start, appropriately, by settling old historical
scores. They charge that the war against Iraq shows that the U.S. could have won
in Vietnam if the military had not been handcuffed by timorous civilians. But
just as Vietnam did not prove success to be impossible or too costly in Iraq,
Iraq does not prove that victory was achievable in Vietnam.

The U.S. could have obliterated North Vietnamese cities and bombed the dikes and
flooded the rice fields. (We did not do such things in Iraq either.) We could
have fought the ground war in South Vietnam more relentlessly and spread the
fighting into Communist sanctuaries in Cambodia and Laos much sooner.

Maybe Hanoi would have surrendered then; maybe not. Unlike the conventional
victory over Iraq, Vietnam was essentially a guerrilla war, a continuation of a
nationalist anti-colonialist struggle and a civil war. Even Hanoi's military
defeat would not have ended such a war once and for all.

The new-order priests also inveigh against liberal Democrats, who, they say, are
traumatized by Vietnam, do not fathom the realities of power and have an almost
absolute aversion to the use of force. Unfortunately, this is true of a number
of Democrats.

But most Democrats do not fit this caricature and draw quite sensible lessons
from Vietnam. They see in that experience the need to make distinctions between
countries, to define U.S. vital interests more rigorously, and to understand the
imperviousness of most problems to military solutions and the limits of American
power.

There is a healthy skepticism here, not dogma. Democrats with this outlook
reluctantly went along with President Bush's invasion of Panama, but are not
surprised to find that General Noriega's successors also condone drug-running
and money laundering.

In thinking about the Persian Gulf, many such Democrats took their skepticism
too far. They focused far too much on the problems war would not solve and not
at all on the one problem -- Saddam Hussein's military power -- it would
eradicate. Iraq thus holds a critical lesson for moderate Democrats.

But the new-order priests shrug off such specific lessons about distinctions.
They want Democratic scalps. They also want to squash the healthy skepticism
derived from Vietnam and replace it whole cloth.

Mr. Bush pushes his new world order. With more collective security, billions for
economic development, more democracy, more conventional arms for the good guys
and no terror weapons for export, it has all the makings of a Bush Doctrine.
Charles Krauthammer of The New Republic goes further and calls for a policy of
"robust and difficult interventionism."

Their schemes contain good ideas. But the problem is they lead down the path to
new dogma, to the single answer of the U.S. becoming the world's policeman under
the umbrella of collective security. Both schemes would result in a vast
over-extension of American interests and power. Both seek to make the Iraq
experience the rule rather than the exception.

America's strength lies in its regenerative powers, its pragmatism and its
common sense. The nation does not need a new truth; it needs many -- with the
wisdom and courage to choose among them.

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

When the Citizen Soldiers Go Back to School

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 728 words


To the Editor:

The war in the Persian Gulf sparked renewed activism on a large number of our
nation's college campuses. Feelings for and against our country's involvement
were articulated through demonstrations (some peaceful, some violent), marches,
sit-ins, yellow ribbons, pep rallies, flag-waving ceremonies, and in and out of
class discussions and debates.

All of this forced many collegiate institutions, as during the Vietnam conflict,
extensively to examine and in some instances pronounce their official position
on the war. Many institutions, reportedly after weeks of internal deliberations
and legal consultations, elected to take an officially neutral position, later
insisting that all employees avoid any action that might suggest partiality
toward one side of the issue.

I'm aware, for example, of one administrator who was asked to remove a yellow
ribbon from his office door, for in the opinion of his supervisor, the ribbon
connoted a pro-war position. Other institutions, in what has resulted for some
in a public-relations nightmare, wrestled with whether or not to permit students
to hang United States flags and banners from residence hall windows.

Personal ideology and politics aside, the larger, more pressing and important
question has yet to be asked and acted upon by most institutions: namely, "What
must the institution do now to insure an honorable, successful and orderly
transition back to campus for the men and women who bravely served our country?"
Will they upon their return:

* Find themselves without financial aid, because their duty and circumstances
prevented them from completing and submitting the necessary paperwork (financial
aid form, application)? Will the service member return to campus only to be told
by the director of financial aid, "Unfortunately, all institutional aid has been
allocated -- sorry, you should have sent in the paperwork"?

* Find themselves closed out of certain courses, especially courses prerequisite
for graduation? Imagine having fought for your country, only to be told by the
registrar that your graduation date must be postponed because "classes are
filled on a first come-first served basis."

* Find themselves without on-campus housing or unable to find or sign a rental
lease for off-campus housing? Will the director of housing simply shrug and say,
"If we had only received your room deposit, there would be no problem"?

* Find themselves without part-time work, on or off-campus? Like the majority of
students, returning service members will require part-time employment to meet
college costs. Will the director of student employment acknowledge having
limited opportunities available, thus forcing increased indebtedness or
separation from the institution?

* Find themselves without proper counseling and other support services? Those
services readily available and provided to returning service members after World
War II have long been phased out of most campuses. Will the campus counseling
center be prepared and qualified to offer individual and group counseling to
those suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder and related psychological
problems? One needs to look long and hard to find a single scholarly article
published on the topic in the last 10 years.

* Find themselves treated differently by faculty members and administrators who
opposed our involvement in the war? Vietnam veterans
reported a feeling of isolation in the classroom and a lack of rapport with many
of their instructors. Will faculty members and administrators permit personal
ideology to interfere with their interactions and dealings with returning
service member students?

These are but a few of the questions that faculty and administrators alike
should and must begin to grapple with. It is therefore imperative that all
parties set aside their differences and begin to examine those policies,
practices and procedures that warrant immediate change in order to ease the
service member's transition back to campus. Under the careful direction of its
leadership, an institution can provide its returning students with their one and
only desire: namely, a fair chance to pick up where they left off -- with no
penalties, no pats on the back, no celebrations.

KENNETH E. HARTMAN
Director, Admissions & Guidance Services, College Board
Philadelphia, March 4, 1991

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Closer Than We Knew

BYLINE: By Robert A. Raines; Robert A. Raines is the director of the non
denominational Kirkridge Retreat & Study Center near Bangor, Pa.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 19; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 941 words



MARTIN & MALCOLM & AMERICA
A Dream or a Nightmare.
By James H. Cone.
Illustrated. 358 pp. Maryknoll, N.Y.:
Orbis Books. $22.95.

THERE IS A BALM IN GILEAD
The Cultural Roots of Martin Luther King, Jr.
By Lewis V. Baldwin.
348 pp. Minneapolis:
Fortress Press.
Paper, $19.95.

In a landmark analysis, "Martin & Malcolm & America," James H. Cone cuts through
the caricatures of the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. as a certified American hero
and Malcolm X as a black demagogue to reveal two men whose complementary visions
were converging at the time of their deaths. Mr. Cone explains the differences
between this century's major African-American leaders: King saw in America a
dream as yet largely unfulfilled, Malcolm X saw a realized nightmare; King opted
for integration, Malcolm X for nationalism; King taught love of enemies,
nonviolence and the reformability of whites, Malcolm X taught "an eye for an
eye," necessary self-defense and the evil of whites.

Each man, the author argues, became disenchanted with his original vision.
Malcolm X broke with his Black Muslim master, Elijah Muhammad, after learning
that orders had been given to kill him because he had moved away from an
exclusively religious arena into mainstream political and civil rights activity.
In Africa he learned that orthodox Islam, contrary to Elijah Muhammad's teaching
that whites were devils by nature, tolerates no form of racial discrimination.
Malcolm X was moving toward King's point of view when he was assassinated in
1965 "by the blacks he loved and was seeking to liberate from self-hate." After
Malcolm X's death, Mr. Cone writes, King began to make a "radical turn away from
his vision of the American dream and to gaze at the horror of Malcolm's
nightmare." The failure of whites to support authentic integration made him
realize, in his own words, that "the vast majority of white Americans are
racist." The Vietnam War caused King to describe America as the "greatest
purveyor of violence in the world today." He was moving closer to Malcolm X's
views when he was assassinated in 1968 "by the whites he loved and was seeking
to set free of racism."

Mr. Cone, a professor of theology at the Union Theological Seminary in New York,
does not ignore either man's weaknesses, acknowledging, for example, their
sexism. On the other hand, he points out that neither "benefited financially
from the movements they led, and each paid the ultimate price -- death." He also
acknowledges his personal debt to both: "I am an African-American theologian
whose perspective on the Christian religion was shaped by Martin King and whose
black consciousness was defined by Malcolm X."

Mr. Cone makes a compelling case for his claim that the legacy of Malcolm X is
as important to the black community and to American society as that of King.
While King's hope that "we shall overcome" remains an abiding inspiration,
Malcolm X's fierce pride in being black and his strength of black being provide
an indispensable resource for black identity, energy and self-respect. One
observes that Islam as well as Christianity may be an important resource for the
black community in its quest for racial justice. Reading Mr. Cone on the
positive influence of orthodox Islam on Malcolm X causes me to reconsider my own
stereotypes of Islam and Arabs, and to recognize more clearly the anti-Islamic
and anti-Arab prejudice now surfacing in the United States in the aftermath of
the Persian Gulf war. White as well as black Americans are in the debt of James
Cone, whose important book will revise and refocus the legacies of King and
Malcolm X.

In "There Is a Balm in Gilead," Lewis V. Baldwin somewhat overstates the case in
describing his book as "the first extensive treatment of [King's] roots in black
folk culture, particularly that of the South." However, Mr. Baldwin, who teaches
religious studies at Vanderbilt University, discusses King's sense of place in a
Southern context, his nourishing family heritage and his roots in the black
church with its messianic traditions; and his argument is interesting.

We watch King receiving affirmation and a sense of self-worth from his parents,
hearing and learning from black preachers, enjoying soul food, singing the
sorrow songs of slave forebears, drinking in the rich and savory culture of
black Atlanta and Morehouse College, being blessed by marvelous mentors,
including his father, the Morehouse president Benjamin E. Mays and the black
theologian Howard Thurman. Mr. Baldwin argues persuasively that these were the
primary influences that shaped him, his education in the North at the Crozer
Theological Seminary and Boston University adding philosophical concepts to
broaden and clarify the Christian faith bred into him in his early years.

The author's choice of the word "optimism" instead of "hope" to define King's
"incurable faith in God and a belief in the essential goodness of humanity" is
unfortunate. "Hope" is a biblical word, "optimism" is not. As Mr. Cone shows,
King's early optimism was shattered by black riots in Watts and Chicago and by
the Vietnam War, leaving him sadder but wiser, relying on a biblical sense of
hope -- deep, large, eschatological.

This book is marred by gratuitous and self-serving criticisms of other
biographers of King and by Mr. Baldwin's reverential treatment of his subject.
Still, it is vibrant with stories, names, humor, music and all the richness of
the Southern black church and community. Mr. Baldwin succeeds in his mission to
help readers "understand better the faith and the culture to which Martin Luther
King, Jr., was heir."

NAME: Martin Luther King Jr.; Malcolm X

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Martin Luther King Jr., left, and Maloclm X in 1964. (Associated
Press/World Wide Photos)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WHITE HOUSE SEEKS TO REVIVE CREDITS FOR ARMS EXPORTS

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1511 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 17


The Bush Administration is asking Congress to authorize a Government agency to
underwrite sales of military goods for the first time since the 1970's.

After a long and divisive internal debate, the White House came down on the side
of American military contractors, whose business has been lagging because of
American plans to reduce the size of the armed forces.

The proposal comes at a time when Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and other
members of the Administration have been trying to limit the rearmament of the
Middle East in the wake of the Persian Gulf war.

Administration officials insist the two efforts are not at counterpurposes.

Could Include Third World

The legislation would establish a pilot program that would guarantee up to $1
billion in commercial bank loans to overseas buyers of military products. The
sales are expected to be made largely to members of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and to Japan, Israel and Australia. Should the President determine
it is in the national interest, the program would also be available for "any
other country," which would include the third world.

Backers say the proposal, which the Administration sent to Capitol Hill last
week, would merely level the playing field with America's main industrial
competitors, most of which have export credit agencies that finance military
sales.

A State Department official, who insisted on anonymity, said the proposal is "a
strictly commercial operation and is to be used only to counter subsidized
credit packages from competing countries, like France."

But opponents of the proposal say that by diverting resources that should be
concentrated on nonmilitary exports, the program will hurt American
competitiveness and encourage poorer countries to spend more money on arms.
America's competitiveness will suffer, they say, because there is less of a
ripple effect through the economy from arms sales than from, say, advances in
consumer electronics.

'Very Wrongheaded'

Representative David R. Obey, Democrat of Wisconsin and chairman of the House
Appropriations Subcommittee on Foreign Operations, Export Financing and Related
Matters, called the proposal "very wrongheaded." Arms sales, he said, are "by
their very nature noncommercial and political."

In 1989, the last year for which statistics are available, the United States
sold about $10.8 billion worth of major conventional weapons systems abroad. The
bulk of these sales went to American allies in NATO.

The Administration's request that the Export-Import Bank, a Government agency,
underwrite the arms sales promises to be hotly debated in Congress. A
Pentagon-administered military credit guarantee program was suspended in the
late 1970's after too many customers went into arrears.

With the President's backing, the proposal is expected to pass the Senate. But
it will run into stiffer opposition in the House, and at this stage, its fate
there cannot be determined.

Even within the Administration, the proposal produced a debate before the White
House decided to proceed. The State Department and the Pentagon supported the
change. The principal objections came from some executives of the Export-Import
Bank.

The bank was founded 56 years ago to stimulate trade by providing financing to
overseas buyers of American goods at below-market rates. Since 1974, it has had
policy of financing only nonmilitary exports.

Would Rescind Ban

The Administration's proposal would rescind Section 32 of the Arms Export
Control Act of 1968, which was enacted after widespread use of the agency as an
instrument of "backdoor financing" of military sales to Southeast Asian nations
during the Vietnam buildup. Section 32 bans the use of Export-Import Bank
financing of military sales to developing countries. The White House has
proposed that the Export-Import Bank guarantee up to $1 billion of commercial
bank loans to the overseas customers of American military contractors.

Such a sweeping expansion in the scope of Government credit activities for
military exports has been vigorously promoted by large military contractors like
the United Technologies Corporation, the Raytheon Company and the Martin
Marietta Corporation, and the White House has now decided to go along.

After that decision was made, John D. Macomber, president of the export agency
and a friend of President Bush, offered this explanation: "The central point is
that we're going through very difficult times in this country for defense
industries. The basic motivation behind this is that the Government recognizes
there are some real economic adjustment problems for these companies to go
through, and this would be a way for the Government to be of some help." He was
referring to the budget cutbacks of the last two years.

Representative Jim Moody, another Wisconsin Democrat, is seeking legislators'
signatures on a letter to Secretary Baker, warning that the initiative is
"likely to cost the taxpayer dearly" and is a "rather transparent attempt to
circumvent the budgetary limitations" of the Pentagon's Foreign Military Sales
program.

This program is the main military assistance effort under which the Pentagon in
the next fiscal year plans to spend nearly $5 billion in grants and low-interest
loans to American allies. Although 50 countries are on the list of recipients,
half goes to two, Israel and Egypt.

Opposition From Industry

The Administration has also been seeking to limit strategic arms in talks with
the Soviet Union, and it has proposed restrictions on the sale of chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons technology to the third world. The Administration
proposal has divided the export community. Most companies whose earnings are
primarily from military sales back the proposal. Others, like the Boeing Company
and the General Electric Company, which have some military business but far
larger nonmilitary operations, have reservations.

They worry about the crowding out of scarce credit resources, the possibility
that separate divisions within companies may have to compete for Export-Import
Bank money and an undercutting of political support for the bank if it becomes
too strongly identified with military programs.

"Boeing recognizes financing support is required for the export of defense
products," said John F. Hayden, the company's corporate vice president. "But we
question the appropriateness of involving Ex-Im Bank as the mechanism."

He noted that since "defense products exports are not simply commercial
transactions, but involve foreign policy and national security, Boeing feels the
Department of State may be the appropriate agency to administer a
defense-products export-financing program."

Willard M. Berry, vice president for Congressional affairs at the National
Foreign Trade Council, said that before Congress takes up the proposal, "it is
in the interest of all concerned to insure that all alternatives are explored
and the pros and cons of each are fully debated."

William F. Paul, senior vice president of United Technologies, said that because
the United States could not provide competitive credit terms, his company lost a
big Brazilian military helicopter contract to France's Aerospatiale in 1988.

"We need a mechanism for financing this kind of defense trade when it's
necessary," Mr. Paul said. "Our competitors have access to this sort of
facility, and we desperately need it ourselves."

Largely through the efforts of Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of
Connecticut, United Technologies, based in Hartford, won legislation last year
specifically authorizing the export credit agency, on a one-time basis, to
provide loan guarantees for a bid to produce 200 military helicopters jointly
with Turkey. United Technologies is competing with French and Italian companies.


Some Risks Involved

But opponents of the proposal say the Export-Import Bank should not be used to
assume the risks of financing military exports and taking the risk of political
backlash.

Albert H. Hamilton, a former government affairs manager for the bank and now
senior associate of First Washington Associates, an Arlington, Va., consulting
firm, said export credit agencies of other countries have gotten into serious
polticial and financial difficulties by supporting exports of military
equipment.

One example is the British agency's backing of military sales to the Kwame
Nkrumah Government in Ghana. When that Goverment changed in 1966, its successor
sought to repudiate the arms-related debt.

The new legislative proposal may explain why President Bush during his visit to
Ottawa on Wednesday was cool to Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's
proposals to curb arms sales.

The President said at a new conference that the destruction of Iraq's military
threat gave him hope that there would not be increasing arms sales in the Middle
East. But he added: "That doesn't mean we're going to refuse to sell anything to
everybody. We're not going to cut off all weapons sales."

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Weapons for Sale" shows sales of major conventional weapons
systems, in bilions of constant 1985 dollars. (Source: Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute) (pg. D6)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

ESSAY;
Swarmin' for Norman

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 756 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


"If nominated, I will not run," said a war hero a century ago; "If elected, I
will not serve."

That was General Sherman's legendary response to politicians eager to sponsor
his candidacy for President. But what was Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf's response
last week to the same talk? "Never say never."

Do not flinch from the applecart-upsetting: this guy knows he is a hot candidate
for a Democratic draft and is playing his political cards perfectly.

His use of television pictures suggests he has a Deaver modem built into his
brain. From his commanding damn-the-blackout world TV debut to his jargon-free
victory news conference (always with visored cap, never with forbidding helmet);
from the on-his-knees bottle of Kuwait sand photo opportunity to his job-wanted
tete-a-tete with Barbara Walters the other night -- we are witnessing the very
model of a modern major political talent in the act of visual domination.

President Bush is well aware of this. Today, his own re-election seems a sure
thing; but tomorrow, as the Draft-Schwarzkopf movement gets into swing, a spark
of delicious doubt will creep into '92 speculation.

Pundits facing 18 months of dreary shoo-in commentary will breathe on the spark;
Democrats in Congress fearing that a Bush landslide might unseat them will add
their fuel; and all those Vietnam syndrome-sinners who followed Sam Nunn over
the cliff into terminal dithering will see their political salvation in the
Schwarzkopf prairie fire.

Merchandisers will tie in; what American child will go to bed without today's
security blanket -- a Stormin' Norman camouflaged-poncho bedspread?

Sure his name is a Germanic mouthful; so was Eisenhower's. O.K., so he has no
political philosophy; who among the current crop of Democratic candidates has?
Granted, he's overweight; so are most Americans -- only the rich starve
themselves.

John Sununu, anticipating the collapse of his boss's ratings in the face of a
fresh face, will try to head off the Schwarzkopf movement for a few years by
offering (a) five stars, (b) the Joint Chiefship and (c) the services of James
Baker as campaign manager in 1996 on whichever party's ticket General
Schwarzkopf chooses.

With the characteristic firmness that Americans have come to admire, the General
will salute smartly and spit in Sununu's palindromic eye. As Hannibal said,
"When you've crossed the Alps, get rid of the elephants." Military life offers
nothing to a victorious general beyond MacArthurian fading-away.

Instead, we will see the ticker-tape parades, the stirring retirement address,
the book contract already known to literary agents as "Desert Deal" and the
struggle between the Washington Speakers Bureau and Harry Walker to deliver 100
dates at 50 G's a crack within one year. Thus will the General provide for his
family while remaining above the political storm until he lets his name be
entered in a late primary next summer.

A few timorous pols will ask, "What's the downside?"

Negative research could turn up some skeleton in his closet. More likely, he
could make a misstep, as when he said "I have no apologies" when he should have
said "I have no excuses" about bombing friendlies. There's the Coriolanus
role-shift problem: "I'll take three questions" sounds crisp in a busy
commander, but unduly imperious in a candidate for office in a democracy.

The General has never been in a political mine field, nor faced hostile media
fire. He has never had to handle sustained questioning, unduckable on security
grounds, about overestimating the enemy force by a McClellanesque 50 percent; or
grumbling from desert headquarters about military unreadiness, which affected
political decision-making at home; or conspiring to treat as secret available
figures on Iraqi casualties; or covering up the failure of the Patriot missiles
to stop most Scud warheads.

But those are not questions that would be tossed at him by Mr. Bush in a
Presidential TV debate. On the contrary, the worst the General could expect
would be zingers on abortion, gun control, the death penalty and new taxes,
issues on which any competent media adviser could suggest positions to express
cost-effective alarm.

For a party facing remorseless retribution for zigging while the culture zagged,
the upside potential of a Schwarzkopf candidacy is unlimited. Thus is the
political landscape transformed.

Of course, the Bush forces would not cut and run, Saddam-style, at first sight
of the Big Guy. (Is it true that Colin Powell speaks Yiddish?)

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Some Veterans Fear Reopening Psychic Wounds

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words

DATELINE: MENLO PARK, Calif., March 15


Bill Soares returned unheralded from Vietnam 22 years ago and began a tortured
slide into cocaine addiction, marital discord and chronic unemployment.

Now, Mr. Soares and his fellow patients at a psychiatric hospital here for the
victims of combat stress have been invited to a celebration, in the nearby
community of Millbrae, to honor those who served in the Persian Gulf.

They will not be going.

The invitation was turned down by Fred D. Gusman, the founder and director of
the National Center for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, the model for 20 such
in-patient programs at Veterans Affairs medical centers across the country, most
of them full to overflowing with the psychiatric casualties of the Vietnam
conflict, America's most unpopular war.

"Everyone will be too preoccupied with the Desert Storm people, and it will
raise sad memories," said Mr. Gusman, a social worker. "The fact that we've had
a military success doesn't mean everyone is healed."

Some Lessons Learned

Mr. Gusman's task these days is a complicated one: preparing to treat the new
victims of post-traumatic stress disorder now that the Persian Gulf war has
ended, and continuing to nurture the 100 men in his care whose old hurts have
been revisited.

A national study found that 15 percent of Vietnam veterans suffer serious combat
stress, and experts expect a smaller percentage among the Persian Gulf troops,
in large measure because of military and political lessons learned in the
Vietnam War and psychiatric lessons learned afterward.

The gulf war was far briefer and less bloody than Vietnam, and ended with a
clear victory and an exuberant welcome home. In addition, in the intervening
years between Vietnam and the gulf war post-traumatic stress disorder has been
recognized as a psychiatric illness, thus making it likely the latest victims
will be diagnosed early and will get the best care available.

"Because of what happened to the Vietnam veteran, something different is
happening today," said Joan Furey, an Army nurse in Vietnam and the associate
director at the Menlo Park program, which was the first of its kind when it
opened in 1978.

Unflattering Comparisons

The patients in Menlo Park, on the penisula south of San Francisco, share the
nation's postwar euphoria and are proud that their experience has improved the
odds for the soldiers that followed them. But they are also racked by the
unflattering comparisons being made to the Vietnam War, a long and losing effort
that for many veterans brought nightmares and failed marriages rather than
yellow ribbons and parades.

Like others here, Mr. Soares is awash in those contradictory emotions. "It
brings a pride to see these soldiers treated the way we wanted to be treated and
not dropped off on the street corner by the bus," he said. "But it's hard to get
rid of 20 years of pain, misdirection and agony. The wounds heal but the scars
remain."

In some ways, during the Persian Gulf war life went on as usual at the hospital
here, where the walls are hung with combat photographs and maps of Southeast
Asia and the book shelves bulge with medical dictionaries, Alcoholics Anonymous
manuals and Vietnam retrospectives. Therapy groups continued from morning to
night, new patients arrived and others graduated, and men pushed their
wheelchairs into the courtyard for cigarette breaks.

But television privleges were expanded from weekends-only to several times a
day, Dan Rather came to visit and report, and the patients watched current
events unfold through the lense of personal history.

Like Americans elsewhere, some were for the war and others against it; some were
angry and others sad. Many were disheartened that the nation would choose to
fight yet another foreign war. Others longed to relive the adrenaline surge that
combat brings, and had to resist the urge to enlist.

Studies on Stress Disorder

When the ground war was delayed from mid-January until the end of February, the
men here were jumpy with anticipation, as if the wait was their own. And when
victory came, with a rush of praise for an all-volunteer force that was sober,
chaste and efficient, some were insulted at the implication that the Vietnam-era
soldiers did not have the right stuff.

Their war produced the research and literature on post-traumatic stress disorder
that will shape treatment for years to come. A national study in 1988, done by
the Research Triangle Institute in North Carolina, found that of the 3.1 million
Americans who served in combat zones in Vietnam from 1964 to 1973, 15 percent,
or 479,000, suffer from the disorder. Another 11 percent, or 350,000 more,
suffer a partial form of post-traumatic stress disorder, less intense but
warranting professional attention.

Other studies have painted a grim picture of how the Vietnam era combat veterans
have fared. One-fourth of them were arrested within two years of discharge, and
200,000 are thought to be addicted to drugs or alchohal. Their divorce rate is
twice that of the general population and their suicide rate 23 percent higher.
Among the nation's homeless, one-third are said to be veterans of the Vietnam
War.

Some Hesitant Predictions

Mr. Gusman and Ms. Furey offered a few hesitant predictions about who among the
Persian Gulf veterans is most likely to suffer post-traumatic stress disorder.
They were careful to note that war zone stress is most common but not limited to
those with the longest and most intense exposure to the sights and sounds of
combat.

At special risk, they said, were the prisoners of war, the seriously wounded and
the people who saw the most bloodshed. They also mentioned members of the
National Guard and the Reserves, whose lives were most disrupted by the
hostilities and who do not return to a military community, but rather to
ordinary jobs and more indifferent neighbors.

Mr. Gusman, Ms. Furey and other experts noted that quick diagnosis of
war-related stress lessens the severity of the illness because dysfunction is
not heaped upon dysfunction. By the time Mr. Soares entered the hospital last
December, for example, he was addicted to cocaine, had been married and divorced
four times and was so disruptive that he could no longer find work as a
furniture-maker.

With patients like these, "we're not really treating the person who came home
from Vietnam," said Mr. Gusman. "We're treating a 40-year-old who has had a
lifetime of experiences since then. The longer they wait to get help the more
ingrained they are in coping styles that are destructive."

As Mr. Soares prepared for discharge from the hospital later this month, he said
he had one bit of advice to offer the soldiers returning from the Persian Gulf
so they can save all the time that he has lost. "If you feel anything change
within yourself," he said, "go ask for help -- fast."

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: While many Vietnam veterans at the National Center for Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder in Menlo Park, Calif., share in the nation's gulf war
euphoria, they are racked by the unflattering comparisons to Vietnam. "The
wounds heal but the scars remain," said Bill Soares. (Terrence McCarthy for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words



International A3-13

Iran is supporting Iraqi dissidents involved in the rebellion against President
Hussein, Kuwaiti officials say. The effort seems to be partly inspired by a deep
desire to exact revenge on the Iraqi leader. Page A1

The unrest in Iraqi Kurdistan is the most serious anti-Government revolt in that
region in almost two decades, but it alone is unlikely to topple President
Hussein, according to Middle East experts. A12

Kurdish insurgents are said to take major Iraqi city A12

The sales of conventional weapons in the Middle East would not be limited when
the security of America's allies might be at stake, Defense Secretary Cheney
said. A13

Spain works to mend post-war ties to North Africa A13

War astonishes Chinese and stuns their military A13

A debate over the Golan Heights among Israeli officials grew into a verbal
firestorm when the army Chief of Staff suggested that Israel might safely give
up some occupied land in exchange for peace. A1

Captors link fate of two Americans with Arabs held in Israel A8

News analyis: The referendum in the Soviet Union did less to point the nation in
any direction than to illustrate its disorientation under Mikhail Gorbachev and
perestroika.  A1

Kremlin says the vote gives Gorbachev a mandate A10

The Yugoslav armed forces will not interfere in the political talks regarding
the nation's future, but, at the same time, it will not allow armed conflict,
the military high command said. A3

The museum at Buchenwald, the former Nazi concentration camp, presents a
distorted picture of the abject horrors that took place there, say critics
seeking changes in the museum's staff. A3

Rio slum dwellers seize luxury apartments A5

Colombia roiled by gang battles A7

Paris Journal: A case of possible treachery from Vietnam era A4

National A14-26, B7

The Consumer Price Index surged seven-tenths of 1 percent after eliminating
price gyrations in energy and food. It was the second recent dose of high
inflation figures. A1

The savings and loan bailout would receive $30 billion in a measure agreed to by
Congressional negotiators that clears the way for final votes in the Senate and
House. D1

Solving the nation's domestic woes will necessitate the same kind of intensive
efforts and unity of purpose that emerged in the gulf war, experts agree. But
such interest and unity does not seem to be in the offing. A1

Standards for medical laboratories that were signed into law in 1988 have still
not been implemented. The standards were created following widespread concern
over inaccurate medical testing. A1

AIDS drug patent challenged in suit A19

U.S. agenda urged by astronomers A15

Official tells of U.S. plan to discourage abortions B7

A nominee to an appeals court post may not be approved. Several Senate Democrats
seem exasperated with the nominee's explanations about his membership in a
country club with a reputation for excluding Jews and blacks. A14

Unions gained enhanced protection against lawsuits by members dissatisfied with
the outcome of a strike or negotiation under a Supreme Court ruling. A24

Mayor Bradley of Los Angeles and other politicians kept up a chorus of criticism
of the police department over the police beating of a black motorist, while
emphasizing the importance of maintaining calm in the city. A18

Tape forever ties victim to beating A18

Workers exposed to radiation at low-levels at a national center for nuclear
weapons production suffered greater numbers of deaths from cancer than workers
who were not exposed, researchers say. A14

Vietnam veterans who suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder say that they
are glad that the gulf war veterans have been treated much more supportively
than they were, but the war itself has sparked some bad memories. A14

Miami is fined for violating rights of homeless A23

Pilots in collision call airport markings confusing A24

Wyoming Journal: Iron horse makes a comeback out west A14

Regional B1-6

More budget cuts from city agencies, another $850 million, will be necessary to
close a gap that the city now acknowledges is over $3 billion for the budget
year beginning July 1, city officials said. A1

Rally protests cuts in Cuomo budget B4

News analysis: Mayor Dinkins, by marching in the St. Patrick's Day parade with a
group of Irish homosexuals, demonstrated a growing willingness to take strong
stands on causes that are important to him, even if others might not like it. A1

An accord between film producers and two New York unions was tentatively
settled, ending a stalemate that shut down new moviemaking in the city and
threatened its multibillion-dollar film industry. B1

Five police officers were charged in the death of a 21-year-old car-theft
suspect who suffocated during a struggle with them last month, lawyers for the
officers said.  B1

Mother and daughter held in slaying B3

Youth held in six murders in arson in South Bronx B3

Peter Stangl has been cleared of any criminal wrongdoing for allowing a friend
to sit at the controls of a commuter train, transit officials said. Mr. Stangl,
who is the president of Metro-North, has been nominated to head the M.T.A. B1

Robert Maxwell wants $30 million more in savings from the Daily News in addition
to what he has already won by making the unions accept job cuts, he said. B1

Six News unions ratify contracts in voting rush B2

Gaps in Flake income data shown by U.S. prosecutor B3

Noxious fumes sicken workers at Bronx plant B6

Business Digest D1

The Living Section

Food

What makes food Italian? Don't ask American chefs C1

The 5th question at the Seder: Have a macaroon?  C1

Hot-cross buns: giving tradition a fresh accent C1

Living

It's called joie, but in Paris it's pronounced Ungaro C7

Arts/Entertainment

Miramax Films against the giants C11

Explaining "The Mahabharata" C11

Dispute on Hercules C11

Music: Muti conducts Romantic bill C11

Education Page B8

Videodisks coming to class as high-tech tools for teaching

Obituaries B9

John Voelker, judge and author

Sports

Baseball: Doctors disagree on Jackson injury D25

Is Bo Jackson worth the risk?  D25

Basketball: Knicks rout the Hornets D25

Boxing: Tyson victory steeped in controversy D25

Colleges: Panel calls on college presidents to take control D25

Column: Anderson on Tyson fight D25

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A28

The quicksand in Iraq

Abstract ideas, real births

An institute worth saving

Topics: Saving on paving

Letters A28

Tom Wicker: An unknown casualty A29

Leslie H. Gelb: A unified, weak Iraq A29

Judith Martin and Gunther Stent: Attack ideas, not people A29

Amanda Foreman: High noon at the P.C. corral A29

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR;
Senator Regrets Arnett Remark

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 173 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 19


Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican of Wyoming, who evoked wide controversy for
his comments about Peter Arnett, the CNN reporter who remained in Baghdad while
it was under attack by the United States, has issued a qualified apology.

In a letter in Wednesday's New York Times, Mr. Simpson said his choice of the
word "sympathizer" to describe Mr. Arnett "was not a good one."

Senator Simpson said, however, that "dupe" or "tool" would better describe what
he regarded as Mr. Arnett's role.

And he apologized for having said that Mr. Arnett had been able to report from
Saigon after it fell to the Communists "because of his marriage to a Vietnamese
woman who was reported to have a brother active in the Vietcong."

Mr. Arnett, reached tonight, responded: "I accept his apology for involving my
family in this whole affair. On any question of my coverage from Baghdad, that
is something I and CNN would be ready to debate with him at any forum."

Declining further comment, Mr. Arnett said, "For me, the incident is closed."

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
An Unknown Casualty

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 29; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 782 words


With the Persian Gulf war over and won, the Air Force has chosen to disclose a
fact that few television viewers or newspaper readers could have suspected while
the fighting was going on: The famous "smart bombs" made up only 7 percent of
all the U.S. explosives dropped on Iraq and Kuwait.

In fact, despite all those TV scenes of precision-guided bombs going down the
chimneys or in the doors of Iraqi targets, 70 percent of the 88,500 tons of
bombs dropped on Iraq and Kuwait in 43 days of war missed their targets. This is
not a condemnation of the Air Force, which did an outstanding combat job and
voluntarily made these facts public -- after the war. It is a damning commentary
on the controlled information policy exercised by the Pentagon during the war.
And it's no compliment to the American press or public, both of which too tamely
accepted military censorship.

The point is not that military officials lied; they said the war was being won,
and it was. It is not even that they impermissibly distorted the facts; smart
bombs were about 90 percent successful -- though the nation was not told that
81,980 tons of unguided bombs had an accuracy rating of only about 25 percent.
Of these, 62,137 tons missed their targets.

The real, and dangerous, point is that the Bush Administration and the military
were so successful in controlling information about the war that they were able
to tell the public just about what they wanted the public to know. Perhaps
worse, press and public largely acquiesced in this disclosure of only selected
information.

Suppose the military had been lying? Suppose the briefers had been radically
distorting the facts? Suppose in the next war -- and all the talk about Pax
Americana presupposes one -- Pentagon and military officials are not so
circumspect as Generals Schwarzkopf and Powell and Secretary Cheney usually were
this time? If information can be controlled at all, without public reaction or
sufficient press protest, it can be controlled to any particular purpose the
controllers may desire.

Since the fighting ended, we have learned -- for another example -- that the
vaunted Patriot anti-missile missiles were destroying Scud missiles as claimed,
but not Scud warheads. The catastrophic damage said to have been inflicted on
Kuwait by Iraqi invaders has been downgraded, both as to its extent and the cost
of restoration. While there's no doubt that the occupation was bestial, it's no
longer clear that Iraqis actually threw babies out of their incubators, as was
alleged during the war.

There's nothing new in wartime about exaggerated claims of success, or
inflammatory charges of enemy atrocities. The need to keep the home fires
burning is obvious; and since the days of Alexander the Great, it's been
acknowledged that the first casualty of war is truth.

Nor is there anything new in the military trying to control information.
Censorship of reporters' stories was imposed in World War II. Though there was
no censorship in Vietnam, reporters were given guidelines as to what could not
be reported, and briefers -- in Saigon and in the field -- habitually put the
best face on things.

In the gulf war, however, though it was clearly a less challenging episode than
World War II and Vietnam, the military went further than ever in order to
control information. Not only did stories have to be cleared before publication
or airing; reporters and cameras were limited in their movements and inadequate
"pool" coverage was the rule. Even troop interviews were monitored and sometimes
forbidden. Ernie Pyle, the famous World War II correspondent, could not have
done his work with his movements so limited.

Polls showed that the American public by a wide margin approved this drastic
information control. One reason may have been demonstrated public dislike for
the press; another probably was that so much information seemed to come through
on television, and so many events were shown as they happened, that many
Americans watching at home did not realize that they were seeing only what their
Government and military permitted them to see -- not including the bodies of
dead Americans or "collateral damage" in Iraqi cities.

Nor did press and television, to their discredit, protest as effectively as they
should have, or always make it as clear as they could have, that much of what
they conveyed -- like the can't-miss version of Air Force bombings -- was not
only controlled by the military but prettified for home consumption. Thus was
the First Amendment badly wounded in Desert Storm -- though war-giddy Americans
seemed not to know about or mourn this national casualty.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

'The Word "Sympathizer" Was Not a Good One'

SECTION: Section A; Page 28; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 752 words


To the Editor:

At a Washington luncheon during the height of the air war against Iraq, I told a
group of reporters that I thought Peter Arnett of CNN was a sympathizer for
staying in Baghdad and for allowing Saddam Hussein to use him for Iraqi
propaganda.

I also repeated a rumor that seems to have followed Mr. Arnett for more than 20
years -- a rumor that indicated that because of his marriage to a Vietnamese
woman, who was reported to have a brother active in the Vietcong, Mr. Arnett
decided it was safe to stay in Saigon long after the evacuation of United States
forces. It is a matter of record that he was granted permission by the
Communists to continue reporting for the Associated Press after the fall.

While I still strongly criticize him for his reporting from Baghdad during the
Persian Gulf war, I do feel the deep personal need to apologize for repeating
the rumors about Mr. Arnett's family connection to the Vietcong. I said from the
outset that if it couldn't be proven, I would apologize. In the absence of
concrete evidence to corroborate the family situation, I wish to do so now. I
greatly regret any hurt, pain or anguish that I have caused his family.

Furthermore, I admonish all who have engaged in this item of gossip over Mr.
Arnett's past to put up or shut up. I regret being part of it. Just as Operation
Desert Storm has healed many wounds left from Vietnam -- it is also time to
allow that wound to heal. So, I direct this expression particularly to Peter
Arnett's son, Andrew, who wrote so eloquently and poignantly in "The Truth About
My Family" (Op-Ed, March 13).

I have not changed my opinion of Peter Arnett's presence in Baghdad. I felt the
bunker incident reporting was repugnant. The baby-formula factory story only
slightly less so.

Several journalists delivered reports on the bunker bombing. What was most
disturbing about Mr. Arnett's report was that it seemingly condemned the United
States for carelessly bombing civilian targets, and yet, it was mostly based on
what his Iraqi handlers told him about the event. He reported that civilians had
routinely been sleeping in the bunker, without ever confirming this assumption.
He did not make an attempt to determine if the bunker had military markings. Yet
other reporters who made the effort to climb upon the bunker did find evidence
of military camouflage paint on its roof.

Saddam Hussein may have placed civilians in the bunker with the conjecture that
the United States would target it and reward him with a significant propaganda
victory. Or it may have been one of those random events of war, unplanned by
President Hussein. What is certain is that Mr. Arnett reported the event in a
tone and manner that was helpful to the Government of Iraq and harmful to the
United States. He reported hearsay evidence -- just as I had done with regard to
his family -- and did little to investigate Iraqi claims.

I happen to know firsthand of Saddam Hussein's obsession for propaganda and
disinformation from how he manipulated and abridged the transcript of a meeting
I had with him last April. All references to our criticism of his Government,
from the gassing of the Kurds to the hanging of a British journalist, to
possessing nuclear triggering devices and the big pipe-gun caper, all went
unreported. He did report that I said that some of the Western press in that
area of the world were a "haughty and pampered press -- they all consider
themselves political geniuses. They are very cynical." And the news media will
be wrapping that one around my head like a tire iron for lots of years to come.

Yet it is my firm belief that if Western reporters had not been in Baghdad --
behind enemy lines, if you will -- Saddam Hussein might not have been tempted to
indulge himself in the photo opportunities that were presented to the world. He
knew devilishly well the consequences of his actions. Unfortunately, the news
media naively overlooked theirs.

My choice of the word "sympathizer" was not a good one. I wish I could have
snatched it back and rephrased my remarks. The word "dupe" or "tool" of the
Iraqi Government would have been more in context with my original comments.
However, I do know when I am wrong and stubborn -- and for that I apologize. I
would also hope the news media might acknowledge their serious mistakes on the
coverage of the gulf war from Baghdad. But I sure won't hold my breath on that
one.

AL SIMPSON
U.S. Senator from Wyoming
Washington, March 15, 1991

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Paris Journal;
Vietnam Echo Stuns France: Case of Treachery?

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 977 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 17


As Georges Boudarel remembers things, he was driven by idealism when, in the
early 1950's, he joined Communist Vietminh rebels fighting French colonial rule
in Indochina and finished up giving Marxist indoctrination classes to French
prisoners of war.

His former captives, on the other hand, remember Mr. Boudarel as the treacherous
young Frenchman known as Dai Dong who deserted to the enemy camp, who engaged in
"moral and psychological torture" and who did nothing to prevent dozens of his
countrymen from dying of starvation.

After a humbled France withdrew from Indochina in 1954, the surviving prisoners
-- some 100 of perhaps 500 who passed through the Vietminh's notorious Camp 113
-- lost track of Mr. Boudarel, but they neither forgot nor forgave him. And many
pledged to keep looking for him until their dying day.

The odd thing is that Mr. Boudarel was not in hiding. He had stayed on in Hanoi
until moving to Prague in 1964, but he had lived in Paris since 1967, teaching
Indochinese history at a branch of the University of Paris and earning a solid
academic reputation among his colleagues.

Leftists Rally Around Him

But it was only last month that his name was spotted on a list of speakers at a
seminar on Indochina organized by the French Senate. A group of survivors led by
Jean-Jacques Beucler, a former head of France's Veterans' Office, went along,
identified him and denounced him publicly for treason.

Now, in the name of 18 former prisoners of Camp 113, a French lawyer, Jean-Marc
Varaut, has announced plans to charge him with "crimes against humanity."
Conservative politicians have also demanded that he be dismissed from his job at
the University of Paris.

But the case is far from simple. Mr. Boudarel, who is now 64 years old, asserts
that he is protected by a general amnesty decreed by the Government in 1966.
Further, 40 left-leaning intellectuals have rallied around him, saying he is
being persecuted for opposing French colonial rule.

An immediate result has been a revival of the perennial debate over how France
handles its painful past, not only its defeat in Indochina, but also the
delicate question of French collaboration with German occupation forces in World
War II and the "loss" of Algeria in the early 1960's.

In this debate, the concept of "treason" is ever present, wielded against
leftists who opposed the Indochina war, against rightists who coexisted with
Nazi occupiers and against both leftists who fought colonialism in Africa and
rightists who took up arms to block Algeria's independence.

No Expressions of Remorse

The case of Mr. Boudarel has nonetheless shocked French public opinion, not only
because of the prisoners' accounts of his behavior as deputy chief of Camp 113
but also because, while claiming to have renounced Communism, he has refused to
express remorse for his decision to join the Vietminh.

The specific charges against him are that he tried to brainwash prisoners of war
with Communist propaganda during "political re-education" sessions that would
follow 12 hours of hard labor. He is also accused of withholding food and
medicine parachuted to the starving prisoners by the Red Cross.

So far, no one has asserted that he took part in physical torture. But many
prisoners remember that when 80 bedraggled prisoners were about to be freed
after a four-day march through the jungle to a French Army post, Mr. Boudarel
returned one of them to likely death in Camp 113 after he stole an egg from a
village.

Claude Bayle, one P.O.W. who was released on that occasion, said Mr. Boudarel
forced the prisoners to denounce and judge the egg thief. "We were so obsessed
with our liberty that we turned our backs on friendship," he recalled with
grief. "It was unthinkable what we had become."

'I Joined Through Conviction'

With the attacks against Mr. Boudarel increasing, some university professors
have signed a manifesto saying his rejection of racism and colonialism in
Indochina "have now exposed him 40 years later to attacks from those for whom
the victory of decolonization were personal defeats."

Mr. Boudarel has also answered his critics. "I regret nothing about having
joined the side of the Vietnamese and the colonized," he said in a long
interview on the Europe 1 radio network. "I joined through conviction. At the
time I was a Communist. I now think I made a 100 percent mistake in choosing the
Communist option."

He admitted that the prisoners experienced "atrocious" food shortages but, he
insisted, so did their Vietnamese captors. "It is sad to say that 80 to 100
prisoners died in that camp," he said. "It is a painful and unfortunate memory
for me. I shared their pain."

He also admitted sending the egg thief back to Camp 113, but he defended the
decision by arguing that it was demanded by local villagers. "I regretted it,"
he said, "but the population said, why are you freeing men who continue to steal
from us?"

A 'Prisoner' Himself

When asked why he did not do more to help his countrymen, Mr. Boudarel said he
had become "a prisoner of an ideological system to which I had attached myself."
And he added, "I was part of the hierarchy and I obeyed orders just as the
French soldiers obeyed orders from their officers."

Whether the case against Mr. Boudarel proceeds will now depend on whether a
French court decides that he is shielded by the 1966 amnesty decreed by
President Charles de Gaulle or is still open to the charge of "crimes against
humanity," which were not included in the amnesty.

In the past, both the French Government and the courts have shown themselves
reluctant to reopen old wounds by trying decades-old crimes. But the current
head of the Veterans' Office, Andre Meric, noted a few days ago that "not even
political idealism" could justify Mr. Boudarel's acts.

NAME: Georges Boudarel

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Georges Boudarel has been accused of "crimes against humanity"
for his part in the treatment of French prisoners of war by the Vietminh, whom
he joined in the early 1950's. He was escorted from a radio station in Paris
last week after an interview. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 21, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

The Limits of What Reparations Can Achieve;
War Guilt and Debt

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 303 words


To the Editor:

While it may be a legitimate principle that an aggressor owes reparations to
compensate for war losses ("Reparations, Without Retribution," editorial, March
4), Iraq has few resources to compensate Kuwait for the damages to its economy.
Iraq, with about one-third the population of Vietnam and the economic output of
Kentucky, has suffered possibly $100 billion of damages to its own economy.

While you point out that Germany paid 15 billion gold marks ($3.5 billion)
reparations from World War I, the total reparations assessed against it were 132
billion gold marks ($31.4 billion). The economic disaster of the 1920's (and
political disaster of the 30's) resulted from the Allies' attempt to extract
payments.

Resistance by debtor countries crystallizes as domestic opposition to the
macroeconomic measures necessary to make reparations develops. This contributes
to the degeneration of the country's finances, making the economy less
productive and the obligation more burdensome.

German obligations did not remain constant as you imply, but evolved through a
series of negotiations that rescheduled old debts and arranged new loans. The
original London schedule of 1921-23 differed substantially from the Dawes plan
of 1924-29 and the final Young plan of 1929-31.

The fiscal-austerity program required by the debtor country is politically
unsustainable because it lowers incomes and makes the distribution less equal.
We must keep in mind that war guilt does not have anything to do with the
ability of a country to pay; to force Iraq to pay reparations will prove not
only futile, but also harmful to future United States interests in the region.

DANIEL PATRICK KING
Whitefish Bay, Wis., March 6, 1991

The writer teaches economics at Milwaukee Area Technical College.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 23, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Prosecutor Wins Right to Wear Flag Pin

BYLINE: By KEVIN SACK, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 975 words

DATELINE: QUEENSBURY, N.Y., March 22


As an allegory for these patriotic times, none may be better than the scene
today in a Warren County courtroom where a young prosecutor won back the right
to wear an American flag pin on his lapel.

In a case that has become the talk of this Adirondack town, a Supreme Court
justice reversed a lower court's decision by ruling that William E. Montgomery
3d, the county's district attorney, could keep the tiny metal pin on his jacket
while addressing a jury.

A local defense lawyer, Kurt Mausert, had argued that the pin could unfairly
influence jurors because of the nationalistic fervor sweeping Warren County --
and the rest of the country -- after the Persian Gulf war.

Based on the letters in the local paper, the comments on radio call-in shows,
and the talk at Pat's Diner (the self-described "home of the 99-cent
breakfast"), most residents seem to feel that Mr. Mausert's contention lies
somewhere between the seditious and the absurd.

Distributing Flag Pins

"I think the whole thing is ridiculous," said Kit M. Graves of Warrensburg, who
was pouring coffee at the diner. "He's from the United States so why shouldn't
he be able to wear a flag pin if he wants to?"

Joseph P. Fiore of Glens Falls, a World War II Marine who joined other veterans
in distributing flag pins outside the county courthouse today, was more
indignant than bemused. "Anyone should be able to wear this flag," he said. "You
should be able to wear it to school, to your church or synagogue, to your
fraternal organization. You can wear it into heaven or hell, too."

Justice John G. Dier of State Supreme Court made it clear today that he agreed,
and his unabashedly flamboyant ruling won a raucous ovation from a crowd of
flag-pinned spectators.

Not only did Justice Dier rule that Mr. Montgomery could wear his pin, he also
recommended a judicial review of the lower court judge and ordered that Mr.
Mausert be banished from the ranks of lawyers allowed to defend indigent clients
in Warren County.

Mr. Mausert, who said at least half his practice consists of defending poor peo
ple, said he would appeal the decision.

Justice Dier suggested in his ruling that he felt obligated to block the path to
a slippery slope.

"If the courts of this state ever deny anyone the right to wear the American
flag, what would be next?" he asked, reading a prepared text. "The Masonic pin?
The Rotary pin? The crucifix? The Star of David?"

That Mr. Mausert, who says he is as patriotic as the next guy, even thought to
raise the issue speaks volumes about the national mood and how high it has swung
since the days of the country's last major war. It is an evolution that did not
go unnoticed in the courtroom.

"The courts have recognized that the American flag can and indeed has evoked not
only emotion but physical activity," said Peter A. Firth, the lawyer for Michael
J. Muller, the Queensbury town justice who ruled on March 6 that Mr. Montgomery
could not wear his pin. "You only have to look back about 20 years to the
Vietnam era. There were demonstrations by American citizens that included
burning and mutilation.

"Now a short 20 years later, in light of the military successes that this
country experienced in the Persian Gulf, there are many who are inspired by it.
The point is that at times of strong national feeling the flag has been known to
evoke strong emotions. This just happens to be one of those times."

That was Mr. Mausert's feeling on Feb. 22, the day before the land war began,
when he noticed that one of Mr. Montgomery's assistant prosecutors was wearing a
flag pin in Justice Muller's court. The judge granted Mr. Mausert's request that
the prosecutor be ordered to remove the pin before a jury trial began, and the
prosecutor took the pin off to avoid being held in contempt.

'The Wrong Message'

"My reasons were not anti-flag," said Mr. Mausert, who is 33 years old. "My
motion was made at the height of the Persian Gulf war and the flag was
everywhere, on restaurants, on laundromats. And that's wonderful. But if it's on
the chest of the District Attorney it could send the wrong message to the jury."

On March 6, the 35-year-old Mr. Montgomery came into Justice Muller's court to
try a defendant accused of illegally connecting his cable television. He was
wearing a tiny flag pin that was given to him in 1990 by Representative Gerald
B. Solomon, a fellow Republican. Mr. Mausert repeated his motion.

During a hearing in Justice Muller's chambers, Mr. Mausert and Mr. Montgomery
made it clear that they shared little mutual respect.

Mr. Mausert called Mr. Montgomery "a threat to the integrity and well-running of
the justice system," according to a transcript. Mr. Montgomery suggested that
Mr. Mausert might share a dislike of the flag with Saddam Hussein. Mr. Mausert
called Mr. Montgomery a "scoundrel" and said the remark was "scurrilous."

Justice Muller again ordered that the flag pin be removed. Mr. Montgomery
announced that he would not do so and took his case to the Supreme Court. In the
interim, Mr. Montgomery did not discourage speculation that Justice Muller's
ruling was related to the judge's active support for Mr. Montgomery's opponent
in the 1990 election for District Attorney.

Mr. Montgomery well remembers the hostility shown toward the flag during the
Vietnam War, when John Prine sang: "Your flag decal won't get you into heaven
anymore, they're already overcrowded from your dirty little war."

Twenty years later, Justice Dier also seemed to have captured the national mood
today with his ruling.

"I find it very difficult to understand that anyone who is a citizen of this
country could object to another citizen of this country wearing an American flag
pin," the judge said. "And especially today with the situation as it exists in
the Middle East."


LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: William E. Montgomery 3d, the Warren County, N.Y., District
Attorney, second from right, won back the right yesterday to wear an American
flag pin in his lapel. He was greeted by supporters at the municipal center in
Glens Falls. (David Jennings for The New York Times) (pg. 25); Kurt Mausert, a
defense lawyer in Warren County, N.Y., had argued that an American flag pin worn
by a prosecutor could unfairly influence jurors. (David Jennings for The New
York Times) (pg. 26)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 23, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Some Veterans Facing New Battles on Return

BYLINE: By THOMAS C. HAYES

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1399 words


The return of gulf war veterans to workaday life after the cheering stops will
bring surprises for managers, co-workers and spouses, as well as the veterans
themselves -- and many companies and workers are poorly prepared.

In several cases, small-business owners, salespeople and professionals are
returning to discover that they will have to rebuild their businesses and
reclaim old clients and customers who have drifted away while they were in the
gulf. Those kinds of competitive pressures on the job will compound the
financial worries that plague many returning veterans.

"About two more weeks of this and I'd be in financial straits," said Thomas J.
Blagg, a gunnery sergeant in the Marine Reserves. Mr. Blagg, who returned to his
regiment's base in Dallas last week, said his income plunged to one-fourth the
level he earned as a sales manager before being called up in December.

In a few cases, having no job in the midst of a recession will be the worst
surprise for returning veterans. At the McDonnell Douglas Corporation in St.
Louis, which pared 15,000 jobs in the months after the war began last August,
four reservists were caught in the cutbacks. The company guaranteed jobs for all
nonunion employees called into the military, but the unlucky four were members
of one of two unions whose seniority rules left them without work.

Of the 545,000 American troops sent to Saudi Arabia after Iraq invaded Kuwait
last August, 80,000 were called up from the military Reserve and National Guard
units. Over all, 227,400 reservists and National Guard members were called to
active duty.

It hardly matters, psychologists and experts said, whether a veteran was on the
front lines or far from combat. "There was constant, pervasive fear of impending
doom, impending death, and never knowing if something might happen," said Dr.
Calvin J. Frederick, chief of psychological services at the Veterans Affairs
Hospital in Los Angeles, who has counseled several gulf war veterans. "Some of
the troops experienced weight loss, fatigue and loss of sleep and are really
stressed out. All of these things at one level are normal. It's only if they
continue and become intense that they will need to seek help."

How this will manifest itself in the workplace is difficult to predict. But
experts say veterans who confronted combat and death are most vulnerable to
sleep problems, prickly moods, elevated blood pressure, inability to concentrate
on a task and digestion troubles commonly associated with post-traumatic stress
disorder, a mental disturbance that some researchers believe affects one of five
Vietnam veterans.

Some psychologists say that in stirring old ghosts of battle, the gulf war might
even cause more troubles among Vietnam veterans in the workplace than among the
new veterans.

 Impatience Expected



Dr. Robert Albanese, head of the Center for Human Resources at Texas A & M
University, in College Station, Tex., said many workers who saw duty in the gulf
might consider their work trivial and show little patience with the mistakes of
others.

Dr. Reagan Andrews, a clinical psychologist at the Veterans Affairs Hospital in
Dallas, said executives should consider assigning these people to special
projects or making them trouble-shooters.

For years, many large employers have relied on employee-assistance programs to
provide counseling for troubled workers and their families. Over the years,
these programs have provided help for alcohol and drug abuse, family problems
and depression. But some experts warn that these programs may not be enough to
deal with the special problems that veterans encounter on the job.

Dr. Albanese said managers who direct the assistance programs often know too
little about how special counseling services can help or which employees need
them.

'Prepared to Help'



Many families of reservists on the payroll at McDonnell Douglas have already
asked for medical and financial advice. "We are prepared to help, whatever the
circumstances," said Daniel C. Smith, the company's director of
employee-assistance services.

Many reservists who returned from the gulf last week said emotional outpourings
of public support helped to soothe memories of terror and destruction. "We have
been deluged with requests for things like color guards and speakers to come to
Lions clubs," said Bill J. English, a lieutenant colonel in the Marine Reserves
who directed artillery fire in the combat zone and once fought as an enlisted
marine in Vietnam. A lawyer in Norman, Okla., Mr. English, who is 44 years old,
was toasted by more than 100 friends at a surprise party last Saturday night.

But for many returning veterans, the most immediate problem will be financial.
Mr. Blagg, the Marine gunnery sergeant, said that if he was released from duty
by the end of next week he would be in his sales office in Krum, Tex., the
following Monday. Returnees can take up to 90 days off before they return to
work, but Mr. Blagg said, "I can't afford to."

Other sales managers in his division at Central Transport Inc., a transportation
company based in Detroit, tried to cover his seven-state territory during his
absence, but competitors lured away some big accounts. Mr. Blagg said he must
move quickly to regain those customers or his income would suffer. "I'm judged
by my production," he said.

Other veterans are thinking about economic warfare, too. David Meek, owner of an
office-supply company in Topeka, Kan., and navigator on a KC-135 refueling
tanker, said one of his worst moments during the war was when he was told during
a call home that Bizmart, a national chain of discount office-supply stores,
would open a store in Topeka next month. "That probably shook me the most of
anything that happened over there," he said.

Mr. English, the lawyer, had to drop his private practice and its six-figure
income when he left on Dec. 4 for the military. The yearly pay rate for his job
as a lieutenant colonel in the Marine Reserves is about $50,000. "The pay cut
was enough to make my banker go crazy," he said.

Hours before he left, Mr. English got in touch with his clients and gave their
files to other lawyers. "Most of the clients were understanding," he said. "But
with all due respect, they want you there when they want you there. All that
aside, I wanted to go and was happy to go."

Mr. English said he once spoke against legal advertising when he headed the
local bar association, but he now sees few options in attracting old and new
clients. "It will take a good amount of time to get the practice up to where it
was," he said.

Threatened With Evictions

In some cases, spouses and children of reservists with modest incomes have
suffered badly. Military chaplains in the Dallas area said Hispanic families
were unlawfully threatened with eviction from homes and apartments when
paychecks from reservists were slow to arrive in the mail.

"Ribbons are fine, rallies are fine, but I don't think the American people
realize that these people need financial help," said Sam Boyd, a former Green
Beret commander in Vietnam. A lawyer in Dallas, Mr. Boyd has begun a campaign to
raise $1 million to be used for interest-free loans and grants to families of
military reservists and National Guard members in northern Texas.

Some psychologists said the military services would be returning thousands of
managers and workers who discovered new courage or leadership abilities in the
crucible of combat or training that far outweigh any mental or physical ills
they bring with them

More Appreciation of Life

And some have learned simply to appreciate life a bit more. Mr. Meek, who flew
32 missions over northern Saudi Arabia and Iraq during the 42 days of war, said:
"When you suddenly find yourself in these intense conflicts and question whether
or not you're going to survive, you set your priorities differently. I'm going
to take a little more time to enjoy life."

James Campbell Quick, a specialist on stress management and a professor of
organizational behavior at the University of Texas at Arlington, said: "The low
number of casualties has a very important effect on those who have gone to war.
Employers can anticipate that there are going to be fewer misadjustment problems
as a result. You never have a good war, but from our standpoint this is getting
close."


LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo Gunnery Sgt. Thomas J. Blagg, right, and Lieut. Col. Bill J.
English returned from Saudi Arabia to their Marine reserve regiment's base in
Dallas last week. The two men, respectively a sales manager and a lawyer in
private practice in civilian life, suffered considerable financial hardship as a
result of their call-up and plan to return to work soon after they are released
from active military duty (Jarrold Cabluck for The New York Times) (pg. 31)

Drawings (pg. 41)

Chart: "Helping the Returning Veterans"

What managers can do to ease transition from active duty to the office for
reservists and National Guard members who served in the war, according to
psychologists specializing in veterans' affairs.

Talk it out. Encourage veterans to discuss their experience if they want to, but
do not pry. Let them set the tone.

Be aware of problems. Expect the work of some veterans to be impaired by sleep
disorders, their startled responses to unexpected sounds or motions, and vivid,
terrifying daydreams.

Set goals. Be clear about performance goals but do not coddle veterans.
Anticipate that readjustment could take months.

Expect new attitudes. Deliver criticism when necessary, but anticipate
occasionally angry reactions.

Rethink schedules. Consider offering overtime to provide extra income.

Be sensitive. Veterans face letdowns as the thrill of victory and homecomings
gives way to the mundane realities of life. Many will discover new priorities
and want more challenging jobs. The alert manager can direct these restive, new
ambitions into special projects. (pg. 41)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Cover Stories

BYLINE: By Jill McCorkle; Jill McCorkle is the author of four novels, the most
recent of which is "Ferris Beach."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 673 words



HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT
By Whitney Otto.
179 pp. New York: Villard Books. $18.

Whitney Otto's remarkable first novel, which is set in the small central
California town of Grasse, chronicles the local quilting circle and its eight
members. The stories of these women's lives are framed by a ninth one, that of
the narrator, Finn Bennett-Dodd (granddaughter of one of the members), an
about-to-be-married eavesdropper who is collecting advice. As she prepares for
her own adult life, Finn has a wide array of stories and lessons to sort
through.

Finn's grandmother, Hy (Hyacinth), and Hy's sister, Glady Joe (Gladiola
Josephine), spend their widowed years traveling the countryside, visiting their
children and searching for interesting fabrics for their quilts. They avoid
speaking about an event from their past, a situation that forced both women to
examine their lives and marriages and made it necessary, later on, to piece
their relationship with each other back together. Joining them in their quilting
is Sophia Darling, whose youthful aspirations to leave Grasse were squelched by
pregnancy and marriage. When quilting, Sophia likes to "work within a narrow
confine" and resists the suggestion that the circle fashion a crazy quilt, "the
pattern with the least amount of discipline and the greatest measure of
emotion."

Another quilter, Constance Saunders, is a transplant to California who enjoys
the physical activity of quilting but does not relish the close friendship of
other women; in fact, after her husband's sudden death, she seeks the company of
another quilter's husband. This affair leaves that woman, Em Reed, to study her
marriage, focusing on the incongruity of her artist husband's long history of
infidelities and the loving way he has rendered her, year after year, in
portraits. Another member, Corrina Amurri, loses her son in Vietnam, yet forges
a strange but powerful bond with her son's friend Will, who has remained at
home.

Perhaps the heart of the novel, though, is Anna Neale. The founder of the Grasse
Quilting Circle, Anna is the daughter of a black mother and a white father and
has spent her life as a domestic servant. A quilt called "The Life Before,"
which depicts African stories and myths, was made by Anna's
great-great-grandmother and is her legacy. Anna has one child, Marianna, also
the product of a white father, who after college lives for many years in France.
Marianna can easily pass for white and has lived in both worlds. But ultimately
she chooses to return to Grasse, where her heritage is clearly defined (as are
those of all the women) within the circle of quilters: "It was this recognition
of their differences that allowed the group to survive, not pretending to
transcend them. The impulse to unify and separate, rend and join, is powerful
and constant."

Reading Ms. Otto's novel is much like studying a quilt. Its design is as
complicated as one of the many patterns described within its pages. In fact,
there are how-to sections, written in a second-person voice, interspersed among
the individual stories, instructions that account for every aspect of quilting,
right down to preservation, and serve as metaphors for events in the lives of
the women who have done the stitching.

The completed novel, like a completed quilt, presents the reader with an
intricate design; but it does so in such a fashion that we first see the
individual pieces, and only then how each piece fits into the whole pattern. It
is an impressive feat to put such a complex creation into just 179 pages. Yet,
thinking back to the book's opening, the reader realizes that the design was
there from the very beginning, every stitch in place.

"How to Make an American Quilt" is more than a study of women. It is a history
of social change. It is a tribute to an art form that allowed women
self-expression even when society did not. Above all, though, it is an
affirmation of the strength and power of individual lives, and the way they
cannot help fitting together.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: NONFICTION;
Rockin' With Nietzsche

BYLINE: By MICHAEL E. ROSS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 233 words


In an era when Vietnam consumed the national attention, Jim Morrison may well
have been rock's point man in the cultural free-fire zone of the 60's. As lead
singer and chief lyricist of the Doors, Morrison's dark lyric vision, dramatic
stage presence and leonine visage electrified the rock world. When he died -- at
the age of 27, probably of a heroin overdose, in July 1971 -- many refused to
believe he was gone. If ever a rock star was capable of resurrection, it was Jim
Morrison. The Doors' records continue to sell well, in many instances better
than they sold when Morrison was alive. His presence returns anew in Oliver
Stone's film "The Doors" and in books chronicling his life. In JIM MORRISON:
Dark Star (Viking Studio, $29.95), the journalist Dylan Jones charts the star's
rise and fall and offers some fresh insights into his motivations and early
influences. To his credit, Mr. Jones explores Morrison's embrace of Nietzsche's
thought, calling "The Birth of Tragedy" the key to understanding Morrison and
the Doors. But there's often a sense that the book has been rushed into print,
and it offers us little beyond the boilerplate tragedy. "Dark Star" flickers
occasionally, but it will probably take its place with other books on other
stars whose grip on the popular imagination extended beyond their lives --
another well-intentioned example of cashing in on a dead legend.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jim Morrison in 1967. (From "Jim Morrison")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Plural Perspectives, Heightened Perceptions

BYLINE: By Alfred Corn; Alfred Corn's most recent volume of poems is "The West
Door." He is also the editor of "Incarnation: Contemporary Writers on the New
Testament."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1637 words



THE CONTINUOUS LIFE
By Mark Strand.
63 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.

LET EVENING COME
By Jane Kenyon.
70 pp. St. Paul:
Graywolf Press. Cloth, $16.95. Paper, $9.95.

MYSTERY TRAIN
By David Wojahn.
85 pp. Pittsburgh:
University of Pittsburgh Press. Cloth, $16.95. Paper, $9.95.

Mark Strand, who was recently appointed Poet Laureate of the United States, has
now brought out, after a decade without a book, "The Continuous Life" as well as
a "Selected Poems" taken from his first five collections. A quarter of a century
ago, in his first book, Mr. Strand said, "I am always amazed at / how easily
satisfied / some people are." One form of dissatisfaction for him is a
continuous revision of how he writes. Latin American surrealism, Elizabeth
Bishop and Kafka were formative influences on him, and behind them the darker
strain in American consciousness that produced artists like Hawthorne, Poe and
Dickinson. In his early books -- filled with dread and tombstones and women
problematic to the poet -- he poured an edgy brilliance into litanies to
nothingness that make ordinary happiness seem rather sappy. He approached his
theme from several angles, expanded his vision and refined his expressive means
from book to book. There were also frequent excursions into an ironic, wincing
comedy somewhere between Beckett and Grand Guignol. In his previous book, "The
Late Hour," some of the intransigence softened, and glimmerings of consolation
appeared.

"The Continuous Life" doesn't strike me so much as a capstone of Mr. Strand's
career as one more turning in his development. The poems are cast in long,
fairly regular iambic lines, and the level of diction has risen. A first-person
plural is used in a number of the poems, implying more than private
perspectives. This is a poetry written, as it were, in the shadow of high
mountains, and touched with their grandeur:

For us, too, there was a wish to possess
 Something beyond the world we knew, beyond ourselves,
 Beyond our power to imagine, something nevertheless
 In which we might see ourselves. . . .

As that poem, "The Idea," progresses, a cabin appears in the frozen reaches
imagined by the narrator as a counterpart to his state of mind:

And we stood before it, amazed at its being there,
 And would have gone forward and opened the door,
 And stepped into the glow and warmed ourselves there,
 But that it was ours by not being ours,
 And should remain empty. That was the idea.

Readers of Wallace Stevens will be reminded of the deserted cabin on the beach
in "The Auroras of Autumn," and the refrain of "Farewell to an Idea," which
makes an elegy of that poem. Mr. Strand's last sentence is a pun, making a
colloquial phrase Platonic, visionary. What's usually called negative
transcendence is presented here with a light touch.

In "Orpheus Alone" Mr. Strand for the first time uses a figure from Greek
mythology to base a poem on. Three of Orpheus' songs are described, the third in
high-Romantic terms and with its own, I suppose, Orphic power -- a sort of
sublime "review" of a poem, in a poem:

 it came in a language
 Untouched by pity, in lines, lavish and dark,
 Where death is reborn and sent into the world as a gift,
 So the future, with no voice of its own, nor hope
 Of ever becoming more than it will be, might mourn.

It comes as something of a surprise that there are also satiric prose narratives
and comic verse here, with titles like "Grotesques," "Translation" and "The
Continental College of Beauty," which, to a degree, muffle the impact of the
serious poems. Yet they make Mr. Strand seem less like a visionary to be
approached reverentially. He can be seen as susceptible to human weaknesses like
impatience and scorn. And some of the wisecracks made me laugh, which is always
welcome.

"Let Evening Come," Jane Kenyon's third collection, shows her at the height of
her powers. Reading these five dozen first-person lyrics will stir again a wish
felt by almost any poet at some time: wouldn't it be wonderful if all I needed
to do was write about myself in moments of heightened perception, confronted by
the world and some of its inhabitants? But people would say the perspective was
too narrow, wouldn't they? What's more, Ms. Kenyon lives in New Hampshire, so
she has to expect routine pigeonholing as a regional poet. The fact is, however,
that this book holds one's attention and promotes identification with the
author's sensitive and forthright temperament.

This is a "sunset" collection, unified around the themes of nightfall, the sense
of endings, the death of family and friends and, implicitly, the maturing of a
poetic talent. Fairly early in the volume we are familiar with the poet's daily
round. Like Emily Dickinson, she might say, "I started early -- took my dog,"
for Ms. Kenyon likes to range around the countryside with her faithful
companion. It comes to represent everything in her identity that is physical,
spontaneous, untrammeled by tragic knowledge.

Time to head home. I wait
 until we're nearly out to the main road
 to put him back on the leash, and he
 -- the designated optimist --
 imagines to the end that he is free.

That poem gains resonance from an earlier one in which the poet takes a similar
walk after having received news of her father's incurable relapse as a cancer
patient. His death is recalled in "We Let the Boat Drift":

Once we talked about the life to come.
 I took the Bible from the nightstand
 and offered John 14: "I go to prepare
 a place for you." "Fine. Good," he said.
 "But what about Matthew? 'You, therefore,
 must be perfect, as your heavenly Father
 is perfect.' " And he wept.

Jane Kenyon's descriptive skills are as notable as her dramatic ones. Her
rendering of natural settings, in lines of well-judged rhythm and simple syntax,
contribute to the memorableness of the poems, a late adaptation of Poundian
Imagism:

Spring rain, relentless as obsession:
 the mountain streams run swift and full.
 The red tassels of blossoming maples
 hang bright against wet black bark.

In the title poem, after a series of details vividly presented in declining
light, the poet summons the end of day: "God does not leave us / comfortless, so
let evening come." Among the comforts, we can guess, is the ability to see
things clearly and to find verbal equivalents for them. The volume's last poem,
not incidentally, pictures the poet on one of her walks, dog ranging along ahead
of her; the time of day is sunrise.

David Wojahn's "Mystery Train" is the third book of a poet whose abilities were
first acknowledged nine years ago by Richard Hugo when he was editing the Yale
Younger Poets series. John Berryman had been his teacher at the University of
Minnesota shortly before he leaped to his death from a bridge in Minneapolis, as
Mr. Wojahn reminds us in "A Fifteenth Anniversary: John Berryman":

 Sometimes I'd see you
 eating breakfast alone,
 Gray's Drug lunch counter, shaky and -- I don't know -- drunk already,
 a hand that trembled
 around the egg-yolked fork. The bridge was utterly
 nondescript, the one

 I aimlessly walked that day, and every day for six
 uneventful years.

We also get a pastiche dream song in "John Berryman Listening to Robert
Johnson's 'King of the Delta Blues,' January 1972," the 20th installment of a
35-poem sequence dealing with pop music. In the sequence the 18-line form used
by Berryman takes its place beside a number of expertly rhymed sonnets, and one
poem in William Carlos Williams's three-tier lines, which in fact describes
Williams in a Newark hospital watching Elvis on television. Delmore Schwartz
also appears in the sequence, no doubt because he was Lou Reed's teacher for a
term. Otherwise, the poems deal largely with figures known to millions who have
never been to college: Buddy Holly, Roy Orbison, Ritchie Valens, James Brown,
the Beatles, the Stones, Janis Joplin, the Sex Pistols -- but no Prince or
Madonna. The emblematic figure who appears in several of the poems is of course
the King himself, in the end entombed like a pharaoh at Graceland, where "Young
and Beautiful" plays on a parking-lot loudspeaker. We note that most of the
artists have now died. The sequence allows Mr. Wojahn to touch on a number of
American themes -- poverty and riches, race and class, alcoholism and addiction,
war and suicide. The peculiar overlap of pop music and the Vietnam War is
suggested by a poem called " 'It's Only Rock and Roll but I Like It': The Fall
of Saigon, 1975."

The guttural stammer of the chopper blades
 Raising arabesques of dust, tearing leaves
 From the orange trees lining the Embassy compound:
 One chopper left, and a CBS cameraman leans
 From inside its door, exploiting the artful
 Mayhem. Somewhere a radio blares the Stones,
 "I like it, like it, yes indeed."

But these showstopping poems should not draw attention away from such others as
"Diary Pages: Amsterdam," which recounts a visit to the Anne Frank museum just
before the breakup of a romance or "Azimuth," an invented memory of the poet's
parents' honeymoon in Chicago more than 40 years ago. Or there is "The
Resurrection of the Dead: Port Glasgow, 1950," the final poem, which blends one
of Stanley Spencer's resurrection paintings with a memory of a summer when the
poet worked in a Tucson hospital. Spencer's ecstatic vision is placed next to
Mr. Wojahn's friendship with a badly burned Mexican youth, whose skin grafts
never heal. At the end he says:

 I want you to move closer. Feel
 his breath on the napes of your living necks.
 Stroke, if you can, his face. You -- the risen,
 the born again -- how can you turn away?

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR TORN

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8; Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 106 words


Philip Caputo expressed my fears exactly ("War Torn," Feb. 24.). As a Vietnam
veteran, I, too, know that war is neither a chess match nor a video game.
Slick, censored television coverage of the gulf war obscures rather than reveals
the ugly truth. War is dirty, dull, boring, endless waiting that suddenly turns
into fright and gore. The quick conclusion of the gulf war with relatively low
American casualties could glamorize and popularize war once again. There could
be a terrible legacy of this conflict -- a tolerance of war by an impatient,
xenophobic and technophilic America.

PETER HOLLORAN
Chestnut Hill, Mass.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR TORN

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8; Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 230 words


I was troubled that while Philip Caputo was determined to dispel one
misconception about the war, he at the same time raised another.

On the one hand, he attempted to clarify delusions that the atrocities of past
wars will not be replayed in this age of advanced technology. Caputo presented a
somber view that war is carnage and casualty, and that all the techno-optimism
in today's world will not change that fact. We have seen (or should have
mentally pictured) the body bags from skirmishes, the bombing of Baghdad and
friendly-fire mishaps. Anyone who still claims that this war is "different" is
gravely mistaken.

On the other hand, Caputo raised the question of costliness -- what price will
we be willing to pay for the liberation of Kuwait? He rested his support for the
war on the possibility that sometimes the benefits of war outweigh the costs.
But experiences such as Caputo's own show that the costs of war are so clear,
and that the proffered benefits are so clouded. Why did Caputo, and our nation
as a whole, accept that diplomacy was useless and assertions that the results of
a military operation would justify the costs? Are we such a Pavlovian society
that we respond to the prods of our leaders that this is "not another Vietnam,"
that this war is between good and evil, and that war can be cheap?

BARBARA HOECKLIN
Chapel Hill, N.C.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

County G.O.P. Sets the Tone Of Its '91 Campaign

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 1; Column 5; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1212 words

DATELINE: RYE BROOK


JACK KEMP, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, came to Westchester
last week to help county Republican leaders open the 1991 political season. But
from the opening moments of Tuesday's fund-raising dinner, it appeared he wasn't
needed.

Anthony J. Colavita, the county Republican chairman, set the tone right away,
predicting that "this is going to be a great Republican year," with President
Bush "showing the world that he is a great leader with great courage and good
judgment."

Then came the thrust, in the form of another prediction, this one addressed to
Nita M. Lowey, the Westchester Democrat who unseated a Republican in 1988 and is
now serving her second term in the House of Representatives. "We're going to
remember how she voted on the Persian Gulf resolution," Mr. Colavita warned, to
the first robust cheer of the evening. "There's going to be an accounting."

The Vote to Authorize War

Mrs. Lowey was one of 179 Democratic Representatives who declined to authorize
President Bush to go to war against Iraq in mid-January, preferring to give
economic sanctions more time to succeed. A total of 86 Democrats joined 164
Republicans in the House in supporting the President's request to use force. The
House vote to enter the war was 250 to 183. The measure passed 52 to 47 in the
Senate.

Mr. Kemp, who called for a "new domestic order of freedom and opportunity and
help for the helpless," paused near the end of his 20-minute address to make his
own comment on those who opposed the Persian Gulf Resolution.

"I know we're not supposed to criticize Democrats for how they voted on the
authorization to allow the President to fulfill the mandates given to him by the
Security Council of the United Nations," he said, "so instead I will quote Sir
Winston Churchill" on the beginnings of World War II.

Sir Winston spoke of "how easily the tragedy of the Second World War could have
been prevented," Mr. Kemp said, "how the malice of the wicked was reinforced by
the weakness of the virtuous."

Mrs. Lowey Responds

Churchill, Mr. Kemp suggested, "wanted us to see how the councils of prudence
and restraint had become the prime agents of mortal danger, how the middle
course, adopted from a desire for safety and the quiet life, was bound to lead
directly to disaster."

Mrs. Lowey, speaking later from Washington, said she felt that "those who
politicize the issue and try to divide the people again are making a great
error."

"The country is united and there is a marvelous feeling of confidence," she
said.

Mr. Kemp "is very committed to the housing program of this country and is
aggressively pursuing an agenda," Mrs. Lowey said. "I'd hope he and Mr. Bush
would use that enormous popularity with the same intensity used in focusing on
the war.

"The debate on the Persian Gulf resolution was a superb moment, and immediately
afterward everyone rallied behind the President."

At the time of the vote, Democrats conceded that a negative vote would be
characterized as an expression of appeasement if the war turned out to be short
and with relatively few casualties. Republicans feared that a long and costly
conflict, like the war in Vietnam, would leave them vulnerable to criticism for
an affirmative vote.

Mr. Kemp spoke at the yearly Chairman's Dinner, a fund-raising event and pep
rally at the Rye Town Hilton here that drew more than 800 Republicans at $250
each. The Secretary of Housing praised Westchester's leaders and specifically
acknowledged the presence of a former Governor, Malcolm W. Wilson, saying, "Oh,
that he were Governor today."

He repeatedly jabbed at Gov. Mario M. Cuomo, a Democrat, even in a brief chat
with reporters who asked whether his department would have a continuing role in
the Yonkers housing-desegregation case.

'A Viable Alternative'

"Our party offers the best opportunity that people have had in a long time to
have a viable alternative to the politics of envy, the politics of
redistributing the wealth, and the politics of higher and higher, ever higher,
taxes that has become the keynote of the Democratic Party," Mr. Kemp said.

Speaking of the decision to go to war with Iraq, he said: "When the Governor
says he still can't figure out whether or not it was the right decision, you
have to question whether or not the national Democratic Party is ready to lead
the world into the next century.

"We can only achieve peace and freedom and democracy by keeping our country
strong, making sure aggression is not rewarded. And while I never question
anyone's conscience, I do question the judgment of those who say they're ready
for world leadership but are to the left of the United Nations."

Progress in Yonkers

Addressing the Yonkers desegregation case, Mr. Kemp said that he was "not going
to make any accusations" but that he hoped "this can be moved forward." He
declined to be more specific. Work is proceeding on the first five of seven
sites, where construction of 142 of a planned 200 units of subsidized housing is
expected to begin in early April,

The Department of Housing and Urban Development is paying for the first 200
units as part of an agreement that removed H.U.D. from among the defendants in
the 10-year-old housing desegregation case. Judge Leonard B. Sand ruled in 1985
in Federal District Court in Manhattan that Yonkers had intentionally segregated
schools and housing over a period of four decades.

Yonkers education officials, ordered to find appropriate remedies, quickly
introduced busing, created magnet schools to attract students across racially
segregated neighborhood boundaries and took other steps that a court-appointed
monitor said fulfilled the judge's requirements.

Integrating housing has been another matter. The Yonkers City Council refused to
cooperate, so in 1986 Judge Sand proposed his own plan: 200 two-story,
single-family town houses on seven sites "scattered" through the city's mostly
white eastern and northern neighborhoods; and another 800 units of affordable
housing to be built by private contractors, who would be granted incentives to
include the apartments in market- rate developments that would have a total of
4,000 units.

'About As Far As We Can'

But after five years, no developer for the 800 second-stage housing units has
come forward. Mr. Kemp was asked last Tuesday if he saw a Federal role in
breaking this impasse.

In reply, he recalled increasing H.U.D.'s financial contribution for the 200
units and then said, "I think we have gone about as far as we can or should go."

County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, who accompanied Mr. Kemp, said he thought
the soft housing market had made a complex situation even more complex.

Yonkers, meanwhile, is making another bid to delay the start of construction.
The city is asking a Federal Appeals Court for extra time while it asks the
United States Supreme Court to rule on an issue involving the manner in which
DeLuxe Homes, the developer of the first 200 housing units, took control of the
building sites last summer.

The city is seeking to challenge Judge Sand's the order transferring the sites
to DeLuxe. City officials want a guarantee that Yonkers will regain control of
the sites if they are not used for housing.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Not Euphoric but Perplexed, Nation Deals With the Peace

BYLINE: By MICHAEL deCOURCY HINDS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1301 words


When the war with Iraq ended on Feb. 28, Americans sighed with relief, and many
smiled with pride. For a precious few days, the euphoria stilled domestic
disputes and indulged a national daydream about solving economic and social woes
with something akin to six weeks of surgical bombing. Then America woke up, and
the recession was still playing on the clock radio.

In interviews last week, sociologists, economists and poll takers, not to
mention plastic surgeons, letter carriers and surfboard salesmen, spoke of a
perplexing period of rising and falling moods and expectations.

"What Americans are telling me," said Samuel W. Kaplan, a professor of sociology
at Swarthmore College, "reminds me of what Rita Hayworth once said about
herself: 'Men go to bed with Rita Hayworth and wake up and find it's only me.'
America went to bed with a great victory and woke up with a victory that no
longer seems so great and a world filled with problems that we basically aren't
able to do anything about."

Even the sweet aftertaste of triumph was tainted by omens of civil war, disease
and famine in Iraq. "There is still so much turmoil over there in the gulf,"
said Andrew K. Bassett, a letter carrier who paused in his rounds in downtown
Philadelphia. "Who knows how it will end?"

Surveys suggest that while the war caused a lot of anxiety it never fully
distracted people from problems at home. On the day the cease-fire was
announced, only one number popped up like a champagne cork: Americans gave
President Bush an 88 percent approval rating for the way he was handling his
job, according to The New York Times/CBS News Poll. But even then, the
respondents gave the President a 42 percent approval rating (and a 43 percent
disapproval rating) on his handling of the economy, which they ranked as far and
away the nation's biggest problem.

Nor did the afterglow of victory shine on Vice President Dan Quayle, whose
approval rating rose just 3 points, to 19 percent from 16 percent two months
earlier. (The nationwide telephone poll of 1,252 adults was conducted March 4-6
and had a margin of error of plus or minus three percentage points.)

If these numbers could talk, though, some of them would certainly sound like
Leopold J. Schlogel, a retired aircraft mechanic who lives in White Marsh, Md.,
a suburb of Baltimore. "I am a Democrat, but I think the war victory will help
President Bush. He's going to try to straighten things out here at home, and I
think he will do all right.

"Before the war," he continued, "we would say we're going to do this or do that,
and we never did. Like in Vietnam, where we just gave up. This time, we did
exactly what we said we were going to do, and that means a lot. People will look
up to us and believe what we say, and I really do think the victory will help
solve our problems over here too."

Winning, but So What?

In a poll conducted in the last two weeks of the war, 677 residents of
metropolitan Houston ranked their concern about war in general far behind their
concerns about drugs, the environment and the economy. "What this poll says is,
'We're winning this war, but it is largely irrelevant to us,' " said Stephen L.
Klineberg, a sociology professor at Rice University who directs the poll, the
Annual Houston Area Survey.

America's anxiety level is also measured by how much people spend. Some bankers
and economists predicted that the end of the war would reduce uncertainty,
entice droves of consumers back to the marketplace and make the recession fade
quickly. The Bush Administration encouraged such hopes by linking the start of
the recession with the start of the gulf crisis in August, and just about every
faltering business and ballet troupe blamed the war for some of its troubles.

But Herbert B. Ershkowitz, a history professor at Temple University, said World
War II had imprinted on many Americans an erroneous notion that wars and
economic recoveries are linked. The war with Iraq was largely fought with
supplies from inventory, and it caused none of the disruptions that accompanied
earlier wars in this century, like rationing and price controls. As World War II
ended, Professor Ershkowitz said, millions of Americans had been unable to buy
new houses or cars for 16 or 17 years; the Iraqi cease-fire came after a decade
of prosperity and rising personal debt.

A Reservoir of Uncertainty

Many economists say the war's end does reduce uncertainty and anxiety about the
future, but not greatly. John Kenneth Galbraith, the Harvard economist, said,
"There might be some people who, out of largely irrational concerns, postponed
consumer durable purchases like houses and automobiles during the war, but their
purchases won't have any significant effect on the economy."

And plenty of uncertainty remains. "I was in euphoria when we won the war, and I
never use the word euphoria," said Fran Carpentier, an editor at Parade magazine
in Manhattan. "I had the sense we were America the Unbeatable again.

"Then there was all this positive stuff about the war carrying over, and the
Bush Administration predicting the economy would turn around and that consumers
would not behave as dourly as they have. What's happening? I was just getting
ready to tighten my belt! Now I am afraid to miss a day's newspaper for fear of
missing an entire economic trend."

In a random survey of businesses in several cities, most managers said they had
not seen any significant improvement since the end of the war. But there were
some exceptions: Home sales in Houston surged after the cease-fire. Sears,
Roebuck & Company is seeing more traffic in its stores. Travel to domestic and
foreign destinations is picking up, spurred by bargains and giveaways.

Surfboard sales are up at Bruce Jones Surfboards in Los Angeles. Plastic surgery
has picked up in Dr. J. Bradford Fisher's office in Fullerton, Calif. And in
Manhattan, demand has "gone through the roof" the past two weeks for Elizabeth
Arden's Miracle Morning, a $175 package of services that include a facial,
makeup application, manicure and cucumber sandwich, said David Fairbrother,
Arden's general manager.

Leigh Martin, the manager of Jones Surfboards, said: "People were dealing with
the burden of not being sure how long the war was going to drag on, and now
there's nothing to watch on CNN anymore, so they're starting to come out and buy
things again."

People Still Have to Drive

Automobile sales are way off, but Marion and Leo Brenner, a retired couple from
Wilmington, Del., still were shopping for a car in the Winner Lincoln-Mercury
dealership in southwest Philadelphia. "We just needed a new car, with or without
the gulf war," Mrs. Brenner said.

But Howard Holniker, a Winner salesman, said a flood of customers came with
war's end. "The two weeks after the war were our best in four or five months,"
he said. "Traffic through here tripled."

Other consumer experts say the consumer has not yet spoken. "There is no
surprise that the very large positive reaction to the end of the war could not
be sustained, but the real issue is how much of that gain in consumer confidence
will be maintained," said Dr. Richard T. Curtin, who takes monthly samples of
consumer attitudes at the Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan
in Ann Arbor.

"I think I'm a typical consumer," said Richard Heslin, a professor of psychology
with a specialty in consumer behavior at Purdue University in West Lafayette,
Ind. "My two daughters got married this year, and I'm just starting to pull back
from credit card disaster. I am determined to pay cash for my next car, and I
may only have enough to buy a 4-year-old one.

"The country is feeling good about the war. I'm feeling good about it, but I
still can't afford a new car."

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
What the U.S. Wants to Happen in Iraq Remains Unclear

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1282 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


FIRST there was the fog of war. Now there is the fog of peace.

When asked about American intentions toward Iraq and Saddam Hussein, the Bush
Administration offered ever more ambiguous answers last week. On Friday, for
example, Marlin Fitzwater simply refused to say what Washington would do about
the mounting evidence that Baghdad was ignoring its warning not to use combat
helicopters against insurgents. "There is an element of murkiness," the
President's spokesman said amiably, "that we want to preserve."

More than three weeks after President Bush ordered a suspension of hostilities
against Iraq, it is increasingly clear that while the imperative to avoid
another Vietnam helped the Administration make its military objectives in the
Persian Gulf clear, Washington did not define its political objectives as
carefully.

Administration officials have long been aware that getting into the gulf crisis
would prove easier than getting out. Now that the time for getting out has
arrived, there is much that the President and his advisers have yet to work out,
even among themselves.

The United States has goals in Iraq and it has a wish list. But does it have
specific policies to attain these objectives, many of which are in conflict with
each other and raise basic political, ethical and strategic questions?

"This is clearly policy being made on the run," said William B. Quandt, a Middle
East analyst at the Brookings Institution who was on President Jimmy Carter's
national security staff. "We didn't have a grand design going in, and we don't
have a grand design coming out."

One primary goal of the United States is clear. Mr. Bush has said it repeatedly:
Washington wants Mr. Hussein to fall from power.

Indeed, officials say privately that American policy is predicated on an
assumption that this will happen by the end of the year. Mr. Bush, these
officials say, is trying to do what he can to help; he is encouraging the Iraqis
to overthrow Mr. Hussein on their own and, through political and military means,
he is hampering the Iraqi dictator's ability to combat the insurrections that
flared up when the war died down.

But officials say Mr. Bush also insists that the United States not become
directly involved in Iraqi politics -- a directive that seems clearly in
conflict with the activities designed to encourage Mr. Hussein's ouster. The
officials are left to try to balance these directives as they react to a rapidly
changing military situation.

The gamble the Administration is making is that it can encourage the rebels in
Iraq just enough that Mr. Hussein's own political and military power structure
will feel under enough pressure that it will kick him out -- before Iraq
dissolves into a civil war in which no central authority could control the
country. In such circumstances, Administration officials fear, Iraq could become
another Lebanon, leaving the Middle East even further from the stability that
Mr. Bush said he was seeking when he sent troops to the Persian Gulf.

If there were an all-out civil war, who would enforce the formal cease-fire that
Mr. Bush needs to bring American troops home? And to whom would the allies
return the 15 percent of Iraq that their troops are now occupying? Who would
restore the basics of everyday life to the Iraqi civilians whom Mr. Bush said he
was trying to spare with pinpoint bombing? Would the allies end up doing what
they are trying so hard to avoid -- administering the defeated country?

Administration officials say they believe the odds against their bet are not
unacceptably high. "The Iraqi Government is functioning, if at a minumum," an
official said. "It's able to make decisions vis-a-vis the United Nations. It's
able to move troops about. It's able to hold military-to-military talks. This
kind of turmoil has always existed and Baghdad has weathered it before."

Mr. Quandt commented: "On the face of it, I suspect that it's true that a total
breakdown of central authority and massive outside intervention in the country's
affairs, a true Lebanonization, is not necessarily in the offing. However, by
excluding one horrible outcome, that doesn't mean there couldn't be some fairly
unpleasant ones."

Bringing the Troops Home

For one thing, there is the question of withdrawing American troops. Gen. Colin
L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, indicated on Friday that
American military forces in southern Iraq would stay for "some months to come"
to keep the pressure on Mr. Hussein. But the Administration has yet to resolve
the conflict between that approach and the pressure to get the troops out more
quickly in order to satisfy the domestic political need for a swift return home.

"I think our druthers would be to try to get our troops home as quickly as
possible," a senior official said. "The countries in the Middle East,
particularly our principal allies in Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Syria, would not
like us to move out faster."

The United States has yet to identify any opposition group that it would prefer
to Mr. Hussein, or one that could succeed in overthrowing him. The Kurds in the
north are not considered strong enough. The Shiites in the south are too closely
allied with Iran.

A senior Administration official said Washington expects that if Mr. Hussein
falls, "it would probably come very quickly and then we would be looking at
another military person stepping in, a junta of some sort." In some ways, this
official and others said, that would be the simplest solution, at least in the
short term.

While Administration officials acknowledge that whoever replaces Mr. Hussein is
not likely to be any more acceptable to the United States, they hope a successor
will at least be pragmatic enough not to buy arms and invade Iraq's neighbors,
even if he does not prove any more humane toward his own people.

But where does that leave the objective of an Iraq that can be brought back into
the international fold? If the point is simply to get rid of Saddam Hussein,
then Mr. Bush could be open to questions about whether the whole thing was
personal, in the same way that similar questions were raised about Panama and
Manuel Noriega. If the goal is to obtain a smarter but not necessarily less
authoritarian regime in Baghdad, did American policy carry through on its
philosophical underpinnings: the rule of law, self-determination, democratic
reform?

Beyond that, there is the question of what the United States now owes the rebels
fighting Mr. Hussein's army in Iraq. Against the Bush Administration insistence
that it is aloof from the internal politics of that country is the record of Mr.
Bush's statements inciting Iraqis in general to overthrow their leader. Will he
at some point have to decide whether he must simply abandon to their fates those
rebels who rose to his challenge?

In an interview last week, a ranking member of Mr. Bush's war council said the
President is, at least for now, willing to subordinate most other things to the
central objective of preserving Iraq's territorial integrity. "I think the
Administration is willing probably to soft-pedal reform and democratic movement
-- the kind of things we'll see in Kuwait, probably -- in the interest of
getting a firm government, the kind that Iraq has always had, capable of holding
it together, restoring order, rehabilitating lost infrastructure," he said. "And
there again it seems to keep going back to present or past military."

Do Mr. Bush and his advisers think that will work?

"I think the Administration hopes that the country will not fracture," the
official said. "I don't know that the element of certainty is as strong as
'think' implies."

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Iraqi government forces captured by Kurdish rebels last week in
fighting for control of Iraq's northern Kurdistan province. (NHK via Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Republicans Vs. Democracy

BYLINE: By Anthony Lake; Anthony Lake teaches international relations at Mount
Holyoke College.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 502 words

DATELINE: SOUTH HADLEY, Mass.


It was a fine moment for democracy. For years, critics of Congress, liberal and
conservative, had condemned its refusal to share responsibility with the
President on decisions of war and peace. But in January, Congress rose to the
occasion. As it moved to vote on the gulf resolutions, members congratulated one
other -- across the partisan lines of their argument -- on the solemnity, even
eloquence, of their debate.

Only two months later, what was acclaimed as responsible debate is being
denounced as unpatriotic. As a result, there is reason to fear that the moment
will prove ephemeral, that the old patterns of Congressional irresponsibility
will be reimposed.

In the classic formulation, an ambiguous Constitution presents the President and
Congress with "an invitation to struggle" for power over foreign policy. But
since 1950 Congress has largely declined the invitation. It let Harry S. Truman
go to war in Korea without debate. A growing chorus of legislators denounced
Lyndon B. Johnson's Vietnam policies, but they never used the power of the purse
to rein in Presidents, until our troops had come home.

Since the so-called Congressional resurgence of the mid-1970's, there has been
far more involvement in the details of foreign policy on Capitol Hill. But when
it came to the toughest issues, when blood might be shed, Congress still ducked.
On no occasion when forces were sent into harm's way later -- for example,
Grenada and Panama -- did Congress insist that the President invoke the War
Powers Act, thus requiring action by Congress. When Congress authorized sending
marines to Lebanon in 1983, there was with little serious debate.

Why this caution, even irresponsibility? It made political sense. During the
Korean and Vietnam wars and ever since, the safest course has been to criticize
or cheer from the sidelines. If things went wrong, the President could pay the
price with the voters; if they went well, he would get the credit, in any case.

That is why many of us, whatever our views on the issue, were impressed in
January by the courage of a Congress that shared responsibility with President
Bush for a venture that was unclear in its outcome and political implications.

And that is why we should be outraged by the use of that debate and those votes
by the most partisan Republicans against Democrats who favored sanctions over
immediate war. It is not merely a question of whether the Republican assault
will backfire politically, as the Democrats hope. Perhaps most voters will
resent this partisan use of what was an American rather than Republican triumph
in the gulf. Perhaps they won't.

These attacks will have a chilling effect in the future when we will again need
mature national debate on an issue of war and peace -- when members of Congress
should speak their hearts and minds, but may conclude that it is too dangerous
politically. The partisans may be aiming at the Democrats. But the worst wounds
they inflict may be on democracy itself.


LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

No More Ernie Pyles

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 129 words


To the Editor:

Thirty-six American war correspondents were killed in World War II, eight in
Korea, 16 in Vietnam. More than that were wounded. So far as I know, none were
killed or even scratched by enemy fire in the Grenada invasion or in the
invasions of Panama and the Persian Gulf.

Those three actions were quickly over, of course, but this seems to me to be
collateral evidence that our modern military leadership has put an end to the
time-honored role of combat correspondent in American journalism. We are not
likely to see, hear or read the work of any future Ed Murrows, Ernie Pyles,
Homer Bigarts or Bob Capas. I would settle for that only if future American wars
were equally unlikely, which is doubtful.

ERIC SEVAREID
New York, March 15, 1991

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ENERGY;
Hunting Elephants Around The World

BYLINE: BY BILL BANCROFT; Bill Bancroft is a Dallas-based business writer.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2; Page 16; Column 1; Business World Magazine

LENGTH: 4460 words


RAY HUNT REMEMBERS THE MOMENT clearly. It was just past 7 o'clock on the night
of Jan. 16, and the 47-year-old president of the Hunt Oil Company was in his
new, twin-engine Canadair Challenger jet over Nashville and bound for
Washington. Suddenly, the pilot, Jim Wilson, called him to the cockpit. Wilson
had just spoken to the Nashville airport. "Ray," he said, "the ground
controllers are saying that the bombing's started in Iraq."

Hunt reached for the telephone and confirmed the report with his headquarters
staff in Dallas. Then Hunt ordered Wilson to turn the jet around and head for
home.

Ray Hunt has a lot at stake in the Middle East. Back in 1984, a wildcat well
drilled by Hunt Oil uncovered a giant field in central Yemen near the Saudi
Arabian border, and the company is still a major presence in the country, with
220 employees and oil production worth $100 million in revenue last year. After
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August, Ray Hunt had ordered the dependents of his
American employees evacuated: Yemen had allied itself with Saddam Hussein. Hunt
and his top aides had also drawn up plans for every contingency, from
anti-American riots to outright battle in the oilfields. There was no obvious
reason for Hunt to return to his headquarters the night the bombing began.

"It was a gut, emotional thing," he explained a week later. "I don't want to be
pompous about it but, in a storm, the captain ought to be on the bridge."

Ray Hunt is not pompous, but he is earnest, wholesome and monogamous --
qualities for which his father, the late H. L., once the richest man in America,
was not noted. H. L. was self-involved and eccentric; Ray is Dallas's unofficial
First Citizen, mainstream all the way. There are, however, certain physical
resemblances: chunky build, high forehead, full cheeks, blue eyes. And, in his
quiet way, the son has matched the father's willingness to take big risks and
his iron determination to come out on top. Says Jack Knox, a college friend and
C.E.O. of Sixx Holdings, a Dallas investment company: "Ray's an achievement
freak."

After taking over the family business in 1975, Hunt increased its annual revenue
by more than 300 percent, to $750 million by 1990. He did it largely by betting
millions on overseas oil exploration, at a time when other independents --
exploration companies unaffiliated with the majors, such as Exxon -- were
sticking close to home. Along the way he has taken part in the discovery of
three "elephants," oil-patch lingo for those rarely found fields that hold at
least 100 million barrels of petroleum.

Hunt Oil is not America's largest independent -- that title goes to the Oryx
Energy Company of Dallas -- though it is among the top half dozen. It operates
in 11 states, and encompasses oil pipelines, a refinery and service stations,
not to mention a cattle ranch and a vegetable farm. Unlike so many independents,
Hunt can finance its own exploration operations, with no help from the majors.
What's more, Hunt is privately owned, free to pursue higher-risk, longer-term
investments that shareholders of a publicly traded company might not tolerate.

For most independents, the last five years have been the worst of times. The
vast majority are small operators with a handful of employees. As was true a
century ago, they drill most of the nation's wells -- over 32,000 of them last
year -- and often leave development of the fields to the majors. But in 1986
they were dealt a double blow. The Tax Reform Act disposed of the favorable tax
treatment that had traditionally attracted capital to oil exploration, and the
price of oil plunged to $10 a barrel. The result has been what Ray Hunt calls "a
fundamental restructuring," with thousands of mergers, takeovers and
bankruptcies. The ranks have thinned from more than 11,000 in 1985 to about
5,500 in 1990.

Discouraged about prospects for finding more oil in a country that has been
pawed over by generations of wildcatters, and attracted by the favorable terms
offered by undeveloped nations, growing numbers of the bigger independents have
turned their attention overseas. One survey predicts that their exploration
investments abroad will rise this year by 15 percent. Ray Hunt's focus is still
on foreign prospects, but -- ever the contrarian -- he is putting increased
emphasis on exploration in the United States. Previous drillers, he believes,
have overlooked major fields that modern technologies can uncover.

The ability to recognize an opportunity and then bet the bank was one of H. L.
Hunt's trademarks and, among other things, it made him a great poker player. So
is his son, but with a difference. Friends tell of his sitting at the table
after a game, with piles of money around him, wearing an unhappy expression.
"After he wins," says Tom Meurer, Hunt's senior vice president for
administration, "he feels guilty." Still, in poker as in oil, Ray Hunt never
deals a hand he does not intend to win.

HUNT OIL'S headquarters occupies eight floors of a glass-and-steel skyscraper
whose nose-cone peak gives it the look of a rocket ship. The offices are home to
a brigade of geophysicists, petroleum engineers, lease negotiators, lawyers and
all the other specialists of the modern oil-exploration business. Outside Ray
Hunt's office a portrait of his father stares benevolently down at visitors.

"Ray doesn't have the idiosyncrasies his daddy had," says 81-year-old Michel T.
Halbouty, a Houston wildcatter who sank his first well in 1935 and remains
active in the oil business. "Ray is a sophisticated, well-trained oilman, where
his father learned by the seat of his pants."

When H. L., a failed cotton planter and trader, got into the oil business in the
1920's, a handshake served as a drilling contract and a wildcatter relied on
creekology to find oil. The principle was simple. Petroleum is typically found
in porous stone, trapped under pressure beneath layers of harder, impermeable
rock. The terrain of creek beds sometimes indicates such formations. The
creekologist would also keep an eye peeled for oil seeps, gas bubbles or other
signs of oil. In practice, however, creekology often amounted to little more
than a wildcatter's striding up to the bank of a creek and announcing, "What the
hell, let's drill one here."

During the 1920's, H. L. Hunt relied on hunches and grub stakes raised at the
poker table to achieve modest success as an oilman in Arkansas and Louisiana.
His historic moment came in 1930, when a septuagenarian wildcatter, Columbus
"Dad" Joiner, drilled a promising well in East Texas. Hunt secretly employed an
oil scout to monitor test results at another wildcat well in the area and,
before Joiner realized the full extent of the discovery, H. L. persuaded Joiner
to sell his entire 5,000 acres of leases. The price: $30,000 and the promise of
up to $1.3 million from any resulting oil.

As it turned out, Hunt had purchased rights to some of the richest ground in the
elephantine East Texas oilfield -- the largest single oil deposit ever found in
the continental United States. For Hunt, the field was the path to a personal
fortune worth, by some estimates, $2 billion.

Hunt, a notorious philanderer, had six children by his first wife, Lyda. After
her death he formally acknowledged the existence of a second family by marrying
Ruth Eileen Ray, a former Hunt Oil secretary, and adopting their 14-year-old
son, Ray, and his three sisters. The "second family," as it is known in Dallas,
had lived in a modest one-story house a two-minute drive from H. L.'s mansion,
which was named after and modeled on George Washington's Mount Vernon.

Following their marriage, H. L. moved Ruth and her children out of the bungalow
and into the big house. Ray's older half-siblings -- Margaret, H. L. Jr.,
Caroline, Herbert, Bunker and Lamar -- were adults, with trust funds of their
own. The two families have never been close.

Ray began working summers at Hunt Oil when he was in the eighth grade,
accompanying his father's "land men" as they negotiated oil leases with ranchers
and farmers. He joined the company full-time in 1965 after graduating from
Southern Methodist University, where he majored in economics. He had served in
the student senate, been elected president of the Phi Delta Theta chapter and
named "outstanding business student."

In the years before H. L. Hunt's death in November 1974, the company seemed to
be drifting. Herbert and Bunker nominally ran Hunt Oil, but they increasingly
concentrated on their own ventures. It was Ray who had the office adjacent to
the patriarch's -- the only office with a door directly into H. L.'s sanctum.

Ray Hunt was named executor of his father's estate, and his mother inherited all
of H. L.'s stock in Hunt Oil. After considerable wrangling, Ray bought out the
first family's stake in the company. "The common perception is that this was all
laid out for me on a platter," he says of his oil empire. "But the family
situation was such that it wasn't."

IT WAS A FEW DAYS after Christmas, and Robert Garrett, Hunt Oil's chief
geophysicist, was giving Ray Hunt and a handful of his top executives a spirited
briefing on the state of the company's operations in Guyana. The walls of the
headquarters conference room were covered with giant maps of thousands of acres
of South American jungle that Hunt Oil had been studying for several months.

The company obtained exploration rights to the property after a Canadian
competitor had actually found some oil but then withdrawn, convinced that the
site held no commercial potential. Hunt and his people thought the Canadians had
simply given up too soon.

Hunt Oil's basic exploration tack is seismic. A dynamite charge is set off,
sending shock waves down into the earth to bounce off the various rock strata.
Back on the surface, a geophone records the shock-wave reflections on magnetic
tape, which a computer translates into a cross-section of the rock layers below
the site. Geophysicists like Garrett can study these cross-sections for signs of
traps where oil might be located.

"Bob, were there any surprises?" Hunt asked. By all accounts, he is a good
listener, unlike his autocratic father.

Garrett shook his head. "Everything is going pretty much as we expected," he
said. Better, in fact: the testing was a year ahead of schedule, thanks in part
to the $50,000 satellite telephones the fieldworkers have been using to send
voice and fax updates to Dallas. In years past, it might have taken several days
to truck a batch of test data over dirt roads to the capital city, Georgetown,
so it could be shipped back to the States by airplane. With the new electronic
links, Hunt's headquarters staff has been able to analyze the test results
quickly and then direct the seismic crews to the more promising sites.

Ray Hunt relies on briefings like this one to keep tabs on his global
expeditionary forces. A prolific writer of memos, he always carries a small note

book where he jots down his ideas. And wherever his senior managers are, on
Sunday nights they can count on hearing from Hunt, by fax or car phone if
necessary, as he prepares for the coming week. Though he prides himself on
giving aides great latitude to do their jobs, his fingerprints are all over
major decisions.

In oil-patch parlance, to "spud" a well is to commence drilling. Hunt, who is
all too familiar with the odds against wildcat wells -- 5-to-1 in the United
States -- is fond of telling his staff, "Every single time you spud a well, it's
probably going to be a dry hole." But even poker-faced Ray Hunt must be pleased
with the conclusions of Bob Garrett's briefing: the seismic data from Guyana
point to several potential traps that could be hiding large reservoirs of oil.

RAY HUNT'S FATHER never drilled overseas. But by the beginning of 1976, Ray was
starting to think international. The overseas potential seemed endless, though
exploration there was dominated by the majors. As it happened, his decision to
leap was the result of pure serendipity.

One day, representatives of the Sabine Corporation, a small Dallas-based oil
company, came calling at the business offices Ray still shared with his
half-brothers. Sabine was looking to sell its 15 percent stake in a British
North Sea exploration led by Mesa Petroleum. It had come to pitch the offer,
with an asking price of $50,000, to Bunker Hunt. But Bunker was out, so the
brokers dropped by Ray's office. He snapped it up.

The Beatrice Field in the North Sea became Ray Hunt's version of the Dad Joiner
deal -- an elephant of 150 million barrels. As oil prices escalated in the 70's,
the value of Hunt Oil's stake grew to more than $500 million. "We were in the
club now," Hunt says, savoring the memory. "It allowed us the vehicle to quickly
establish ourselves in the international arena."

By 1980 the company's lease acreage overseas had reached 21.9 million, including
interests in Australia, Portugal and South Korea. Hunt was flirting with the
Chinese, hoping to obtain offshore leases in the South China Sea, though he
eventually broke off talks after failing to reach agreement on price.

Hunt's strategy was, and is, carefully calculated to allow for the risky niche
he has chosen -- to look for oil in less developed, often politically volatile
nations. He bases his potential return on the assumption of $15-a-barrel oil,
and he is prepared to lose all the money he puts into any given exploration --
provided that there is a chance of finding a very large field. "It's a mistake
to do low-risk, low-reward kinds of plays," he says.

Hunt has had his share of losing bets, hitting dry holes in Argentina, Jordan
and South Korea, among other countries. But he has stayed with his strategy
because it is tailored to Hunt Oil's competitive circumstances. The majors, with
their financial clout and vertical integration -- from oil well to gasoline pump
-- have a lot to offer a foreign nation looking to develop its resources. On the
other hand, the majors have high overheads and, as publicly owned companies, low
tolerance for speculative searches in politically risky third-world countries.

The big companies have another disadvantage, according to John Lichtblau,
chairman of the Petroleum Industry Research Foundation in New York. "In some
cases a government may not want to work with a major for image reasons,"
Lichtblau says. "They're considered part of a Western monopoly."

Hunt Oil, by contrast, is a lean organization, able to make quick decisions and
move fast. And its corporate culture is very different from that of the faceless
behemoths. To emphasize his company's affability, Ray Hunt will invite potential
foreign clients home for dinner with Mom. Last year, Ali Abdullah Saleh, the
President of Yemen, was the guest of honor at a 46-person banquet at Mount
Vernon. Ray's mother presented Saleh with a porcelain Yellow Rose of Texas, and
the after-dinner entertainment was a Mississippi Delta banjo band. Folksiness
aside, such occasions are intended to demonstrate that the Hunts have deep
enough pockets to live up to their contracts.

To sort out the political and cultural conditions in a target country, Hunt Oil
retains high-level consultants like former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger.
Other friends in high places include one of the Bush Administration's lead
emissaries to the Middle East, Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger,
and Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the American military commander in the Persian
Gulf. Eagleburger and Schwarzkopf have both been guests on Hunt's annual
bonefishing excursion off Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula.

Hanging in Hunt's office is an autographed photo of a notable one-time Texas
wildcatter, George Bush. The picture was taken when the then-Vice President
helped dedicate Hunt Oil's Yemen refinery in 1986. They have been friends since
Hunt worked on Bush's unsuccessful 1972 Senate campaign, and they get together
as their schedules allow. When the President was in Dallas last fall, for
example, the two men had a half-hour meeting.

What do Hunt and the President talk about at such sessions? "Anything he wants
to talk about," says Hunt.

IN THE MID-80'S, A DECADE after the end of the Vietnam War, the political
climate seemed to be changing in Indochina, and Hunt Oil began thinking about
Laos. "When we go into a country, we know a lot," says Tom Meurer, 49, one of
Hunt's top negotiators. "We don't just crap shoot."

For Marilyn J. Odell, a Hunt researcher, the assignment was "like 'Mission
Impossible' " -- find written evidence of the existence of petroleum in Laos
without revealing Hunt Oil's interest. Odell started in the musty, cavelike
basement of the Societe Geologique de France in central Paris, where field
reports from the former French colony were stored. She found hints that oil
might lie beneath the Savannakhet region of southern Laos. She also tracked down
"the one person still alive who had done a lot of field work in Laos" -- Dr.
Henri Fontaine, a paleontologist and Roman Catholic priest. He told her that an
exploration team had drilled a well in the country during World War II, but that
it had been abandoned after a Japanese raid.

In 1986, Meurer visited the Laotian capital of Vientiane, where he was received
with some suspicion by a deputy foreign minister: why would an American company
want to look for oil there when the price -- $10 a barrel -- was so low? Laos
was not yet ready to deal.

But Meurer was a persistent suitor. Laotian Foreign Vice-Minister Soubanh
Srithirat came to New York the following year for the United Nations General
Assembly session, and Meurer persuaded him to come down to Texas afterward for a
day of fishing at Hunt's Circle K ranch outside Dallas.

Last year, Meurer's persistence paid off. Hunt Oil received exploration rights
to more than seven million acres in southern Laos. The company will not disclose
the details of this "production sharing" agreement, but such deals generally
work this way: In return for a percentage of any resulting oil production, the
exploration company agrees to conduct geological and geophysical tests, followed
by the drilling of a specific number of wells. The contract typically spells out
how the exploration company is allowed to proceed, depending on the testing and
drilling results.

In the case of Yemen, Hunt Oil's inspiration arrived in the person of a Syrian
oil consultant, Moujib al Malazi, who visited Ian Maycock, chief geologist in
the company's London office, in the fall of 1980. Malazi reported that the World
Bank had funded a study of the Yemeni mountains the previous year, looking for
gold, silver and other minerals. The aerial readings of the earth's magnetic
field had turned up evidence of formations that might contain oil-bearing rock.

Within a few months, Maycock and Malazi, along with Tom Meurer, were in Yemen
and walking parts of the basin near the ancient city of Ma'rib. They liked what
they saw.

The agreement giving Hunt Oil drilling rights to 3.1 million acres was signed in
September 1981. True to form, Ray Hunt left most of the bargaining to his team
of legal specialists. He did not even go to Yemen himself until 1983, when the
company was far along with its seismic testing and nearly ready to select its
first drilling site.

Hunt Oil spudded that well, the Alif No. 1, about 35 miles outside Ma'rib. The
initial results looked promising, and in February 1984 a South Korean consortium
purchased 24.5 percent of Hunt's production-sharing agreement. The price was
never disclosed, but it was enough to cover half of Hunt's exploration costs,
the company says. Four months later, the well tests showed a potential flow rate
of 7,800 barrels per day. (The initial flow from the Dad Joiner's East Texas
discovery well had been 6,800 barrels a day.) Yemen had joined the Arab oil club
with a field that held an estimated 600 million barrels.

FOR RAY HUNT AND his team, however, the real celebration occurred 17 months
later, when Hunt struck what may have been the deal of his life. As an
independent, Hunt did not have the capital resources to develop the Ma'rib
fields -- to build the necessary pipelines, refinery and other support systems
to get the oil to market. He invited 11 companies to discuss that task, and
finally decided to talk in earnest with Exxon.

In fact, despite his customary reluctance to play negotiator, he took charge of
the bargaining, which involved several all-nighters. "When you get to the point
where you're trading elephants," says Tom Meurer, "you can bet your bottom
dollar that Ray Hunt is going to be right in the middle of it."

The deal he cut with Exxon for 49 percent of Hunt Oil's stake was worth $1
billion -- half in cash for Hunt, the other half committed to the construction
of a refinery and a 260-mile pipeline from Ma'rib to the Red Sea port of Ras
Isa. Hunt Oil operates the facilities, which eventually will become the property
of the Yemeni government.

Ray Hunt notes that Exxon's offer was not the highest, that he went for it
because he wanted to clinch the deal quickly and because he felt that Exxon
would make the best long-term partner. "We have a reputation for never squeezing
the last nickel out of a deal," Hunt says. "My grandmother had an expression:
'Pigs get fat and hogs get slaughtered.' "

The agreement with Exxon still had to be approved by the Yemeni Government. In
December 1985 Hunt embarked upon several long days of bargaining in the Yemeni
capital, Sanaa, where he made the mistake of leaving his contact lenses in too
long. By the time he arrived back at the Dallas-Fort Worth airport, Yemeni
approval in hand, his eyes were so irritated that he could not see. He spent
Christmas and New Year's wearing patches over both eyes.

There is another version of the Yemen oil story, told by wildcatter Jack
Crichton, chairman of the Dallas-based Arabian Shield Development Company.
Crichton charges that Arabian Shield reached a tentative exploration agreement
with a Yemeni oil minister in February 1981 -- seven months before Hunt Oil and
the Yemeni Government signed a deal. "Our allegation is that we would have been
awarded the contract if it had not been for the interference of the Hunt
people," says Crichton, who has sued Ray Hunt and Hunt Oil and is waiting for
his day in court before detailing his charges.

A Texas court summarily dismissed the case in 1988, and late last month an
appeal was pending. Yemen's Government has denied Arabian Shield's claim, and
Ray Hunt, in a rare display of anger, describes the suit as "a bunch of
garbage." He adds, "It's a shakedown, and they're shaking down the wrong
people."

THE FIRST CLEAR INDICATION of Ray Hunt's contrarian business style came not in
oil but in real estate. That was in 1970 when he bought a 20-acre site on the
wrong side of the tracks from Dallas's Union Station train terminal. "The
conventional wisdom was that downtown was dying," Hunt recalls. But eventually,
out of negotiations between Hunt and city officials, there emerged the Reunion
project -- a 50-acre downtown development that included renovation of the train
terminal and construction of a new sports arena. Hunt put up a Hyatt Regency
hotel and a 600-foot tower with a revolving restaurant on top, a kind of giant
dandelion that has become a signature building on the city's skyline.

Hunt is generally conceded to be the city's most powerful single resident.
Despite a population of more than one million, Dallas has traditionally had the
power structure of a small town, dominated by a dozen or two leading business
and professional people. Ray Hunt makes his voice heard. Currently, his most
visible post is chairman of the Southern Methodist University board of trustees.

Asked about his No. 1 ranking in "D" magazine's "most powerful" list, Hunt
visibly squirms. "People's reputations are like their shadows," he says. "They
are longer or shorter than they should be. Right now, mine is longer." Hunt also
shuns ostentation: he drives a Buick, and he and his wife, Nancy, have sent
their five children to public schools.

Those who know Ray Hunt best say it is his mother's influence that explains his
civic works, his straight-arrow manner, his refusal to put on airs. The contrast
between Ray and his half-brothers, Herbert and Bunker, has long been a staple of
Dallas conversation. The most dramatic example came in 1980 with his
half-brothers' failed effort to corner the silver market, after which each was
fined $10 million by the Government and banned from commodities trading. In
1988, Herbert and Bunker's Penrod Drilling Company went into Chapter 11, and was
eventually taken over by their creditors, including the Fort Worth investor,
Richard E. Rainwater.

In fact, Rainwater seems to be making a habit of picking up Hunt properties. In
the early 80's Ray Hunt built the 40-story, million-square-foot Continental
Plaza office tower in downtown Fort Worth for an estimated $90 million. When
depressed oil prices threw the region into a recession, Hunt had trouble finding
tenants and keeping those he had; last year Rainwater took the property off
Hunt's hands at the fire-sale price of $64 million.

Real estate, of course, is pretty much a sideline for Hunt, but the odds may be
catching up with him even in the oil side of his business. He has failed to find
another elephant since his Yemen trophy. The results from Laos and Guyana are
not yet in. In Chile, after one dry hole last June, the company is exploring a
block high up on the Altiplano de Arica, a mountainous moonscape near the
borders with Bolivia and Peru; no oil hunters before Hunt have thought the
Altiplano worth drilling.

Meanwhile, he is devoting more time and money to domestic exploration. In the
face of conventional geological wisdom, he says he firmly believes there are
giant natural-gas fields -- true elephants -- that were missed by earlier
generations of wildcatters. It would somehow be fitting if H. L.'s boy, the
consummate contrarian, were to make his next big find back home.

One afternoon last January found him aloft in his Canadair Challenger, five
miles above cloud-covered East Texas. "It's this shaded area," he said, hunched
over a map, pointing toward a section of land near the small Cajun town of
Jennings, La., the jet's destination. His company had just started a new well on
the site.

Hunt was hoping, he said, to uncover a field holding 114 billion cubic feet of
natural gas -- the equivalent of 20 million barrels of oil. Not an elephant this
time, maybe, but a cash cow worth milking, all the same. He looked up and
allowed himself the smallest of smiles. "It would be a real good discovery."

NAME: Ray Hunt

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Louisiana: Ray Hunt on the site of a three-mile-deep natural
gas well that Hunt Oil is drilling near Jennings, La. (Danny Turner for The New
York Times); Guyana: Seismic testing has indicated several potential oil-bearing
formations below a 2.5-million-acre tract on the Rewa River; Chile: On the
Altiplano de Arica, near the northern borders with Bolivia and Peru, Hunt Oil is
exploring a 1.2-million-acre tract -- after drilling a dry hole in c central
Chile last June. (pg. 16); North Sea: Ray Hunt struck oil on his first overseas
venture: a minority stake in Mesa Petroleum's play off the coast of Aberdeen,
Scotland, in 1976; Yemen: This facility near Ma'rib controls the flow of crude
oil from the 600 million-barrel field Hunt Oil discovered in 1984 -- the
nation's first petroleum find; Laos: Hunt Oil geologists are exploring 7 million
acres near the Thai and Kampuchean borders. (pg. 17)

H. L. Hunt, with son Ray in 1966, receives an award from the Independent
Petroleum Association of America. (Hunt Family Archives)(pg. 26)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Wall Street's Ambitious Top Cop

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN LABATON;  Stephen Labaton, a reporter in the Washington
bureau
of The Times, covers financial regulation.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2; Page 12; Column 2; Business World Magazine

LENGTH: 4564 words


TRIM IN BLUE SHIRT SLEEVES AND striped suspenders, an electronic beeper pegged
to his hip, Richard C. Breeden charged into a conference room at the Securities
and Exchange Commission in Washington late on a Friday afternoon. The
41-year-old S.E.C. chairman was responding to an urgent request for a meeting
with his legislative staff.

Three days earlier, on Feb. 5, the Treasury Department had proposed the most
sweeping overhaul of the nation's banking system in half a century. The massive
report had far-reaching implications for Wall Street and for the investing
public, which the S.E.C. has a mandate to protect. One controversial
recommendation would free commercial banks to deal in stocks and bonds and
sanction the ownership of banks by investment firms and industrial companies.

Now Treasury was calling on the S.E.C. to fill in the details so that a draft of
proposed legislation could be sent to Congress. But the nine S.E.C. lawyers
around the conference table questioned a section that would allow banks to sell
mutual funds, the widest form of stock ownership for Americans. Breeden brushed
aside their doubts.

"Let the banks sell mutual funds in the lobby. As long as they're not selling
the securities of the bank or its parent company in the lobby, the way Charlie
Keating did, then there won't be a problem," Breeden said. The S.E.C. is
investigating the sale of bonds of the American Continental Corporation, vehicle
of the high-flying entrepreneur Charles H. Keating Jr., to hapless customers of
his Lincoln Savings Bank.

Breeden grew animated. "When a customer walks into a bank, a teller can say,
'Mr. Customer, you can put your money in this account,' " Breeden said, turning
up his left palm. " 'Or you can put it in this account,' " he continued, turning
up his right. " 'If you put it here, it is Federally insured. On the other hand,
if you put it here, it is not insured.' As long as the bank is complying with
the Investment Company Act, as enforced by our team, it should be no problem."
Since 1940, mutual funds have been regulated by the S.E.C. under that intricate
piece of legislation.

One staff lawyer expressed concern about the possibility of a commingling of
assets that might encourage speculative activity by banks. "The quid pro quo,"
Breeden countered, "is that the banks cannot use the mutual fund money as part
of their insured deposit base. The fire wall that exists will be between the
money of the two accounts."

The chairman signaled an end to the discussion. "We need to move fast because
Treasury wants to circulate a draft by next week," he snapped. Everyone around
the table understood that some staffers would be canceling weekend plans, a not
unusual circumstance since Breeden took over the S.E.C. in the fall of 1989.

Breeden's autocratic personality has become Washington legend. Detractors call
him King Richard; even supporters acknowledge that he is wildly ambitious.
Indeed, the Bush Administration's plan to deregulate the financial system
represents an opportunity for Breeden to expand his power. It would allow the
agency to monitor the growing number of businesses that banks could enter. Says
Breeden, "I don't know any parts of the package on financial reform that are not
S.E.C. related."

WHEN FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT WAS sworn in as President in March 1933, the nation
was paralyzed by the economic crisis that had followed the stock market crash of
'29. One of his first acts was to declare a bank holiday, temporarily closing
institutions in all 48 states. In the United States Senate, public hearings were
laying bare a pattern of financial abuse -- insider trading, market
manipulation, reckless speculation or special favors to influential friends --
by such distinguished banking institutions as J. P. Morgan and Company, National
City Bank and Chase National Bank.

Congress responded with the passage of the Glass-Steagall Act, which would be
the cornerstone of New Deal banking reform. The measure called for strong
barriers between the commercial banking and securities industries. From 1933 to
1940, through a patchwork of legislation, the regulation of the financial system
was divided among several government entities. The Federal Reserve Board, the
Comptroller of the Currency and state regulators continued to supervise
commercial and savings banks. The S.E.C. was created to keep watch over
investment banks and the stock exchanges -- to restore public confidence in the
securities markets by ensuring their efficiency and fairness.

To the consternation of reformers, in June 1934 President Roosevelt appointed
Joseph P. Kennedy, a hugely successful stock speculator, to be the first S.E.C.
chairman. The President offered this rationale for his choice: "Set a thief to
catch a thief." Kennedy earned general praise for his one year of service in the
post, which was devoted to organizing the new agency and cleaning up the worst
practices of the stock exchanges. The next two chairmen, James M. Landis and
William O. Douglas were brilliant legal scholars; they put muscle in the new
Federal securities laws, which emphasized the protection of investor interests
by compelling full disclosure by those involved in the public trading of
securities.

From the start, the S.E.C.'s power to police Wall Street has been civil
authority. Its primary enforcement weapons are injunctions, suspensions, fines
and contempt actions, which can lead to imprisonment. Criminal investigations
are referred to the Justice Department.

Breeden's arrival at the S.E.C. coincided with another watershed for the
financial system of the United States. With the Government forced to bail out
hundreds of insolvent S.&L.'s, with giant commercial banks posting huge losses
from risky loans, with Wall Street in serious retrenchment and public confidence
in the system eroding, many observers have seen alarming parallels to the
1930's.

The New Deal's remedy for the crisis was to tighten controls; the view of the
Bush Administration is that many of those regulations are now stifling American
banks and securities firms. According to this perspective, the rules are no
longer realistic at a time when global trading has become routine and markets
are dominated by large institutional investors who often deal outside the
securities exchanges.

Breeden, who has been acting as Administration cheerleader and running back,
expects the S.E.C. to play a key role in the reordering of this universe. "We
have a very large responsibility for the functioning of the capital markets," he
says.

FROM HIS PREPPY garb to his blue-chip credentials to his conservative
pragmatism, Breeden is a striver cut to the George Bush mold. His start in life,
however, was unremarkable.

Breeden's family was living in Levittown, L.I., when he was born on Dec. 6,
1949, the eldest of three children. When he was 7 years old, the family moved to
Manhattan Beach, Calif., a middle-class neighborhood near the Los Angeles
airport. After failing in private business, Breeden's father went to work as a
sales manager for a greeting card company. His mother taught nursery school.

Richard Breeden set his sights on becoming a lawyer. At Stanford University on
scholarship, he majored in international relations and found time to join the
sailing team. "I was not among the antiwar crowd," Breeden says, referring to
campus protests against the Vietnam War. Bachelor's degree under his arm, he
headed to Harvard Law School in 1972. Already a dedicated Republican, he
exhibited the first signs of political ambition. "He had seen John Dean's
testimony before the Watergate committee," a college friend recalls, "and he
said, 'I'd like to have a job like counsel to the President.' "

Following a teaching stint at the University of Miami School of Law, Breeden in
1976 moved to New York, where he worked as an associate at two top Wall Street
firms: first at Cravath, Swaine & Moore, then at Willkie, Farr & Gallagher.

"The criticism about New York was that you worked 24 hours around the clock,"
Breeden says, "but I figured I could learn in three years in New York what I
might learn in five or six years in California."

He received his call to Washington in 1981, when the Under Secretary of Labor,
who happened to be the father of a woman he had dated, asked him to serve as his
executive assistant. A year later, C. Boyden Gray, chief counsel to Vice
President Bush, tapped Breeden to be his deputy.

Breeden directed the staff of the blue-ribbon panel that in 1984 called for the
complete overhaul of regulations governing the nation's financial services
industry; many of the panel's proposals turned up again in the Treasury report
last month. It was a crucial assignment for Breeden, who developed expertise in
Washington's byzantine regulatory structure and also established his credentials
among the senior regulators on the panel.

He moved from government to the more lucrative private sector in 1985 when he
became a partner in the Washington office of Baker & Botts, the Texas law firm
co-founded by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d's great-grandfather. Breeden
specialized in banking and thrift issues. His clients included the Federal Home
Loan Bank of Dallas and several financial institutions that required Federal
assistance -- among them Gibraltar Savings and a unit of MCorp.

Yet he kept a hand in politics, helping to raise money for and advising the
George Bush Presidential campaign. During the primaries, he even played Jack
Kemp, the conservative Republican Presidential candidate, during a practice
session for a debate. Before the primaries Breeden had worked on the Bush
platform and, after the election, was invited to the White House to become the
President's assistant for issues analysis. In 1989 he joined two Treasury
advisers, David W. Mullins Jr. and Robert R. Glauber, in orchestrating the
bailout of the savings and loan industry.

At first, "the rap on him was that he was arrogant and nobody would want to work
with him," says Rep. Charles E. Schumer, the Brooklyn Democrat who is on the
House Banking Committee and was a prominent figure in the bail out. But when
President Bush introduced the S.&L. legislation, known as the Financial
Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act, Schumer says, "Breeden
knocked on my door and asked, 'What do you think of it?' Just by doing things
like that he would win people over. He was far more willing than other members
of the Administration to do what had to be done to get the legislation through
Congress."

Breeden kept in touch with industry executives and lobbyists who had a special
interest in the legislation. In one instance, he met with Robert J. Thompson, a
lobbyist and former aide to George Bush, to "sketch some general guidelines
which should prove helpful in evaluating an investment strategy," according to a
memo from Thompson's office. A client of Thompson's was interested in buying
assets from failed savings associations. The memo begins by noting that Richard
Breeden was "an old friend from Bob Thompson's days in the White House."

As a reward for helping get the complex legislation through Congress in the
near-record time of seven months, President Bush in September 1989 nominated
Breeden to be the S.E.C. chairman. The fact that Breeden, over the summer, had
advised the White House personnel director, Chase G. Untermeyer, about the
qualities that should be sought in a new chairman had probably not hurt his
chances.

THE MOMENT HE arrived 17 months ago at the cramped S.E.C. headquarters on 5th
Street N.W., Breeden astounded everyone with his youthful energy and political
smarts. He has shown signs of being the most activist chairman in decades and
has set an expansive agenda, often picking his issues for maximum visibility.

Breeden has insisted that his primary role is to "encourage the efficient
formation of capital." In part, he wants to lower corporations' costs of raising
money. One of his first accomplishments was to lead the commission to adopt Rule
144A. This decision makes it easier for large companies to issue and trade their
securities in a private market without going through the same rigorous and
expensive registration and disclosure process required for stocks and bonds
offered to the public. Breeden maintains that the institutional investors who
are the customers for private placements are sophisticated enough not to require
all of the protections of the public market.

Breeden has also called for the elimination of many state laws that regulate the
public sale of corporate stocks and bonds -- the so-called blue sky laws. He
argues that, given the jumble of state statutes, it is easier for a German
company to raise money through an offering in Britain than for a New York
company to sell an issue in New Jersey.

His position is unpopular with state officials, who now receive substantial
revenues from securities and brokerage registrations. They also feel, in the
words of John R. Perkins, the commissioner of securities in Missouri and the
president of the North American Securities Administrators Association, that "By
attacking the states, Breeden is attacking the protections afforded the small
investors. Remove our ability to register stocks and you remove our ability of
enforcement."

Many Breeden watchers have reached the conclusion that his quest for "market
efficiency" and the commission's recent tilt away from Federal regulations
requiring thorough corporate disclosures are catering to the interests of the
largest market players.

"The old S.E.C. believed that registration and disclosure of securities and
other financial instruments was a virtue," says John C. Coffee Jr., a professor
at Columbia University School of Law. "The new S.E.C. believes that there are
times when the costs outweigh the benefits."

Breeden helped persuade a skeptical Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady that if
commercial banks were to invade Wall Street by selling securities, investment
houses should be able to own banks. Breeden's call for a "two-way street" opened
the way for industrial enterprises to acquire commercial banks, as spelled out
in the Treasury's bank-reform blueprint. Nine of the 15 largest securities
companies, including Shearson Lehman Brothers, Prudential Securities, Dean
Witter and Kidder, Peabody, are already owned by industrial and nonbanking
companies.

"Breeden is a person who is seeking to foster the maximum amount of innovation
in the capital markets, yet he understands that you have to have traffic
lights," says James D. Robinson 3d, chairman of American Express, parent of
Shearson. "He's got the right perspective, which is that all the markets are
interrelated." The Treasury proposal would allow the financial services
conglomerate to further broaden its base by buying a full-service bank.

On Capitol Hill, some lawmakers have drawn parallels between the Bush
Administration's plan to dismantle Glass-Steagall and the Reagan
Administration's deregulation of the savings and loans, which enabled the
thrifts to make risky investments. In fact, senior Treasury officials
acknowledge privately that, if the problems confronting commercial banks were to
approach those that brought on the S.&L. debacle, the Treasury proposal would
not make it through Congress.

Despite his zeal for loosening regulatory restraints, Breeden has taken the
stance of the tough cop when it comes to enforcement of existing securities
laws. He has set the staff to rooting out a wide variety of frauds, pursuing
penny-stock brokers as well as billion-dollar banks, both of which count small
investors among their victims. The S.E.C. is currently in the midst of several
investigations into securities abuses at bankrupt savings and loans.

One of Breeden's earliest achievements was to shepherd the long-stalled
Securities Enforcement Remedies and Penny Stock Reform Act through Congress last
year. The law substantially strengthens the S.E.C.'s hand. Without having to get
an order from a Federal judge, the commission now has the authority to ask that
the assessment of monetary damages be handled by one of the S.E.C.'s own
administrative law judges, who tend to favor the agency's position.

By all accounts, the commission is seeking stiffer sanctions, such as interest
on ill-gotten gains, calculated from the date of the infraction, and longer
suspension times for brokers and dealers found to have cheated their customers.
"Breeden's a little too aggressive in the enforcement area," laments Harvey L.
Pitt, a partner at the Washington office of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &
Jacobson, whose most famous client was Ivan F. Boesky. Pitt served as general
counsel to the S.E.C. in the 1970's. "Breeden wants to extract the last penny
out of every case and ratchet up the penalty as high as he can," Pitt says.

William R. McLucas, director of the S.E.C.'s enforcement division, notes that,
"With respect to settlements and sanctions, there's no question that Richard has
taken a more active role." At closed meetings, McLucas notes, the commissioners
have rejected some settlements proposed by the staff on the grounds that they
were too lenient. As a result, more cases have been going to trial in Federal
district courts.

Breeden also played an unusual role in the securities fraud case of Michael R.
Milken. The civil part of the lawsuit had been framed under Breeden's
predecessor, David S. Ruder, now practicing law at the Chicago firm of Baker &
McKenzie. Breeden's staff was actively involved in negotiating the terms of the
criminal settlement with the United States Attorney's Office in Manhattan. And
Breeden felt he had every right to let his feelings about Milken's sentencing be
known. In a letter to Federal District Judge Kimba M. Wood before she imposed
sentence, Breeden argued that the bond trader's manipulations and frauds could
"ultimately destroy the efficiency of the marketplace," and warranted "a
substantial term of incarceration."

Notwithstanding its vigorous enforcement actions, the S.E.C. under Breeden is
accused of neglecting some significant parts of its mission. To the dismay of
institutional shareholders such as pension funds, for example, the agency has
moved at a glacial pace in addressing the highly restrictive rules governing
proxy contests, which make it difficult for shareholders to challenge
management. "We had hoped that they would move sooner," says DeWitt F. Bowman,
chief investment officer of the California Public Employees' Retirement System,
which has led an effort to loosen the restrictions.

Breeden casually dismisses the notion that he has neglected fundamental aspects
of securities regulation. His critics, he says, define "fundamental" too
narrowly. "They want us to just reinterpret rule 10b-7 every few years," he says
of a rule relating to the manipulation of the public offering price of a new
issue. "But I think we should be doing more than that."

"More" includes the expansion of the S.E.C.'s jurisdiction to include the
regulation of stock index futures, baskets of imaginary stock that permit
investors to wager on whether the market will rise or fall. Stock index futures,
which are traded in Chicago's commodities pits, were implicated in the October
1987 market crash as a primary factor in the deterioration of the New York
markets. A Presidential task force headed by Brady recommended that, to prevent
dangerous market volatility, there be greater coordination on the setting of
margin requirements.

Last year, Congress considered a bill that would have given the S.E.C.
regulatory power over the stock futures markets now held by the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission. Breeden led the charge. Although his effort had the
endorsement of the White House and the Treasury Department, C.F.T.C. chairman
Wendy L. Gramm enlisted the support of lawmakers from the Farm Belt.  Gramm,
whose husband, Texas Senator Phil Gramm, is chairman of the Republican
senatorial campaign committee, stopped Breeden and his powerful supporters in
their tracks. A compromise measure on the regulation of stock index futures is
under consideration.

Breeden's attention has not been confined to the national scene. He has been
traveling extensively, seeking to organize his counterparts abroad in an attempt
to reconcile securities, accounting, and clearance and settlement rules that are
often in conflict and make it more expensive for companies to raise money across
international boundaries.

Breeden's globe-trotting recently figured in a flare-up with Rep. John D.
Dingell, a Michigan Democrat and the chairman of the House Committee on Energy
and Commerce, which oversees the regulation of Wall Street. Dingell's father
worked on the Glass-Steagall Act when he was a Representative in the 1930's.

In a January letter to Breeden, Dingell suggested that his requests for
information about the agency were being neglected by a chairman who was
traveling abroad too much. Dingell complained that staff reports had
"disappeared into a black hole" in Breeden's office and -- in the Washington
equivalent of a declaration of war -- ordered Breeden to account for the 10
overseas trips taken since his appointment.

THE CHAIRMAN OF the S.E.C. presides over a staff of 2,451 employees deployed in
offices in Washington and 13 other cities. Breeden, who draws a salary of
$115,300, is one of five commissioners, each of whom is appointed by the
President, subject to Senate confirmation, for five-year terms. By law, no more
than three can be from any one political party. The terms are staggered so that
one position becomes vacant in June of each year.

Since Breeden was appointed, three commissioner slots have opened up, providing
the chairman with the rare opportunity to assert firm control at the top of the
agency. "Everybody but me owes his seat at the table to Richard," says Edward H.
Fleischman, the most senior commissioner, who is more often in dissent than any
of the others.

Philip R. Lochner Jr., who came to the commission from Time Warner Inc., where
he served as general counsel, is a former colleague of Breeden's at Cravath.
Mary L. Schapiro, former counsel to the chairman of the C.F.T.C., was appointed
in 1988 to complete the term of another commissioner, and reappointed last year
on Breeden's recommendation. And the appointment last year of Richard Y.
Roberts, a former aide to Senator Richard Shelby, represented a courtesy to
Treasury Secretary Brady, who was returning a favor to the Alabama Democrat.

Though Breeden says he strives for consensus, Fleischman, who is now serving
under his third chairman, complains he is often left out in the cold. "Richard's
personality is such that if you don't agree, you are excluded from the process,"
Fleischman says.

Some members of the S.E.C. staff describe Breeden as a highly demanding and
sometimes vindictive boss. "He's got a short temper and he doesn't really know
how to use human capital well," says a senior official who insists on not being
identified.

According to one senior S.E.C. staff member, "During Ruder's days, the staff
sometimes had the impression that he was working for them. Now it is clear that
this staff is working for Richard."

While Breeden has put the S.E.C. back squarely on the political map, turnover
remains high; it has been 80 percent for the last five years and is still
rising. He has fought hard to raise S.E.C. salary levels to near parity with
those of the bank regulators.

Breeden has doubled the size of his office and doubled the size of his personal
staff, hiring an advance man from the White House to assist him in public
relations and a White House confidential assistant to handle his invitations.
Securities lawyers say that, when they now visit the chairman's office, they get
catered meals, served by waiters, instead of soup and sandwiches.

Breeden and his wife, Holly, live with their three boys about a half-hour from
Washington in Great Falls, Va. Holly Breeden, the niece of former New Hampshire
Governor Walter R. Peterson, is a fundraiser for the March of Dimes.

Their split-level house, on five rolling acres overlooking a pond, conveys a
rustic air. An empty barn serves as the final rusting place for Breeden's old
and battered MG sports car. He now drives a red Porsche with the license plate
1RCB1.

George Bush is Breeden's Mao: the walls of Breeden's office are lined with
photographs of President and Mrs. Bush; additional pictures and other Bush
memorabilia are strewn about the Breeden home, even in the downstairs bathroom.

Some officials at the S.E.C. and on Capitol Hill gossip about the degree to
which Breeden uses the Bush connection to enhance his own image. There is no
doubt that there is a relationship between Breeden and his mentor. At a
Christmas party, President Bush was overheard telling Breeden how much he was
missed at the White House. And in February the White House proposed to give the
S.E.C. a 20.4 percent increase in its budget for the next fiscal year, while the
overall Federal budget would rise only 2.6 percent.

But there are also signs that the Bush connection may be more superficial than
Breeden likes to portray. He was not invited to a pivotal meeting at the White
House in January with other regulators and officials, including Federal Reserve
Chairman Alan Greenspan, Comptroller of the Currency Robert L. Clarke, Treasury
Secretary Brady and the chairman of the President's Council of Economic
Advisers, Michael J. Boskin. Breeden was described by friends as being livid
over the exclusion, whether it was an oversight or a purposeful snub.

WHERE WILL BREEDEN'S consuming ambition take him? His vision of a new financial
order rests largely in the hands of a Congress controlled by the opposition
party, which is unlikely to move quickly enough or boldly enough for his liking.
That should not be fatal, however: his career has continued to thrive despite
growing criticism of the Government's bailout of the savings and loans, a
program he helped craft.

There is little doubt that, at some point, the S.E.C. chairman could cash in his
experience for a highly rewarding law practice. His future in Government rests
with next year's elections; the President has repeatedly turned to Breeden, each
time handing him more authority.

Because his agenda is far wider than that of any S.E.C. chairman in recent
memory, there has been speculation that Breeden could ultimately wind up as the
Treasury Secretary. The post could become vacant if Brady decides to escape the
very public criticism of him as one of the least effective senior economic
policymakers in years. But Breeden may have different dreams.

Shortly after he was named to his present post, Breeden named two family cats
"Securities" and "Exchange." What, he was asked, would he name pets when the
time came to move on to his next Government position?

With a wry grin, he replied, "State" and "Department." And then -- lest anyone
confuse him with John S. R. Shad, the former S.E.C. chairman who became the
United States's senior diplomat in the Netherlands -- Breeden added: "I'm not
interested in an ambassadorship, or anything like that."

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: Photos: from left, S.E.C. commissioners Richard Y. Roberts, Philip R.
Lochner Jr., Edward H. Fleischman (with shillelagh), Mary L. Schapiro and
chairman Richard Breeden. (pg. 13); Richard C. Breeden in his office at the
Securities and Exchange Commission. (pg. 12)(Photographs By David
Burnett/Contact for The New York Times)
Cover photo: S.E.C. chairman Davis Richard Breenan, after testifying Before a
senate Banking suncommittee in January.

Chart: "Breeden's Agenda"

Changing the rules:

GLASS-STEAGALL ACT (Banking Act of 1933): Restricts commercial banks from
engaging in stock brokerage or investment banking activities such as
underwriting corporate securities. Breeden is pushing for a major overhaul.

INVESTMENT COMPANY ACT OF 1940: Regulates the $1.1 trillion mutual fund
industry. Breeden is considering revisions that ease the marketing of foreign
investment funds and bring pools of collateralized securities (such as
credit-card receivables) and bank offerings of common trust funds under S.E.C
jurisdiction.

Modifying the tools:

RULE 144A OF THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933: Sets forth conditions for selling
unregistered securities without filing a registration statement. Amended last
year, opening door to wider range of private placements.

SECTION 10(b) AND RULE 10b-5 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934: General
antifraud provisions, interpreted to forbid insider trading. (Ivan Boesky and
Michael Milken paid fines to settle charges of violating 10b-5.) Breeden is
resisting efforts to have Congress clarify the rule.

SECTION 14D OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 (Added in 1970 under the
Williams Act): Imposes requirements with respect to public tender offers. The
S.E.C. is loosening restrictions for foreign companies so that American
shareholders can take advantage of their tender offers.

SECTION 14a OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934: Governs proxy contests.
Pension funds and institutional investors want the rule eased so they can have
more say in corporate governance; top managements are opposed. The S.E.C. has
moved slowly on this issue.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                    March 24, 1991, Sunday, National Edition

NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Atlanta;
Asian Square, For Shopping

BYLINE: BY FORD RISLEY

SECTION: Section 8; Page 1; Column 2; Real Estate Desk

LENGTH: 408 words


CONSTRUCTION of an $8 million, 109,000-square-foot shopping center begins next
month to serve a growing Asian population here.

The project, Asian Square, is scheduled for completion in mid-1992, said Roger
Lin, general partner in a group of Chinese businessmen developing it. Space is
being leased or sold, and so far 30 percent of it has been committed, he said.

The shopping center will have a supermarket as an anchor that will carry
specialty foods appealing to Asian tastes. It will rise just northeast of
Atlanta, in the town of Doraville, home to many of the Asian immigrants moving
to the Atlanta area. The architect is Gerald Tirella of Atlanta.

The partners are financing the project themselves, said Mr. Lin, a native of
Taiwan who has lived in Atlanta for eight years.

Although the Atlanta region has a glut of retail space, Mr. Lin said the
partnership was encouraged to pursue the project because of the growing Asian
population and the success of a similar shopping center nearby.

About 70,000 Asians -- among them immigrants from Taiwan, Hong Kong, Korea and
Vietnam -- live in the Atlanta area. The population is expected to jump to about
82,000 by 1995.

The smaller Asian shopping center, China Town, built by another group of Chinese
businessmen, is almost fully leased. The center, which includes a bank, a
newsstand, a video store and several restaurants, attracts large crowds,
particularly on weekends.

"There certainly is a need for another Asian shopping center," said James Yeh,
president of the Atlanta Taiwanese Chamber of Commerce.

Although Asian Square may struggle initially because of its large size, Mr. Yeh
said the project should be successful in the long run. The vacancy rate for
retail space in Atlanta is 15.7 percent, according to a study by Jamison
Research in Atlanta.

Mr. Yeh said Asian businesses are now scattered along a corridor between
Doraville and Chamblee, another Atlanta bedroom community northeast of the city.
Business leaders hope that the shopping centers will concentrate merchants in a
Chinatown arrangement of the sort found in other major cities.

Kim Nguyen, a clothing store owner who plans to move to Asian Square, said
several Asian businesses had outgrown their current space and were looking for
new locations.

"I think it's going to be a good place to have a business," said Mr. Nguyen, a
native of Vietnam who has lived in Atlanta for about 10 years.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 25, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR;
Thai Bar Girls Greet Sailors Like Heroes

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 885 words

DATELINE: PATTAYA, Thailand, March 24


The young women from Marilyn's A-Go-Go broke through the lines of staring
tourists and hit the beach at about 11:30 this morning, and quickly formed an
escort party for the 7,000 American sailors coming ashore here for their first
liberty since victory in the Persian Gulf war.

Sharing the sands, somewhat uneasily, were about 400 wives and children, some
with yellow ribbons and a few in yellow dresses, who had not seen their husbands
since the aircraft carrier Midway and its battle group left for the gulf on Oct.
2.

Two of the wives, Mary K. Humber and Jeanne Grzelak, had come here together from
Yokosuka, Japan, to see their husbands, both lieutenants on the cruiser Mobile
Bay, one of the seven American ships that arrived here today.

"We heard they'd be here early and we almost came down at dawn to see if we
could see the lights of their ships," said Mrs. Humber, who teaches English in
Japanese junior high schools in Yokosuka, the Mobile Bay's home port.

Sex Industry Center

The Mobile Bay had shore leave last year in Pattaya, the closest big beach
resort to Bangkok and notorious as a center for Thailand's sex industry. "We got
to see videos from here," said Mrs. Humber. "We said, 'Gee, this looks like an
exciting place, but you boys had better stay on the ship!' "

As the women talked, they kept glancing at the horizon, searching for the first
small boats to come ashore. "We sent a message to them, saying we'd be here,"
said Mrs. Grzelak. "We hope it got there."

Mrs. Grzelak and her husband, Lieut. Thomas Grzelak, both 25 years old, met at
Cornell University and have been married two years. With the war and all the
time at sea, she said, they have had only seven months together. "I never
thought it would be so hard," she said.

Mrs. Humber watched the Thai women pull at the arms of the fit young American
men. "They haven't been in a port for over four months, and that was Abu Dhabi,
so it's going to be wild," she said. "Hold on to your hat, bubba."

Sharp Decline in Tourism

Airman John Joyce, aged 19, came ashore from the Midway, a World War II-vintage
carrier, with his friend, Petty Officer 3d Class David Cohen.

"This is absolutely unreal," said Airman Joyce, from Parkersburg, W. Va.
"Unnnn-real."

"Look me in the eye," Petty Officer Cohen said to him. "Did I lie to you? Did I
lie?"

"Unnnn-real," said Airman Joyce.

Petty Officer Cohen, from Syracuse, N.Y., led him up the beach and away.

Pattaya, which has suffered from a sharp decline in tourism because of the gulf
war, had prepared itself for the Midway and its sister vessels. The many bars
were decked with American flags and carefully drawn banners. "Welcome U.S. Navy
to the Red Parrot Sexy Life Show," said one. A banner from the Limmatquai
Entertainment Co. Ltd. said, "Thank you, Mr. Bush," over a cartoon of the
American President spanking an abashed and trouserless President Saddam Hussein.

The V.I.P. Massage Parlour had a banner welcoming the Navy and advertising its
speciality, the "Sandwiches Massage."

The owner of the Blackout A-Go-Go said he hoped to make up for the last three
months in the next four days, which is as long as this shore visit will last.
Men and women who work in Thailand's sex industry have been arriving in Pattaya
from all over the country, hoping to salvage this dry season.

AIDS Is Increasing

Lurking like the ghost at the feast, however, is AIDS, which has been increasing
at an alarming rate in Thailand, especially among prostitutes.

In the province of which Pattaya is a part, according to the latest Thai Public
Health Ministry figures, after sampling in December, more than 40 percent of
women who work in brothels are HIV positive and carry the AIDS virus. Among the
women in go-go bars and massage parlors, which is where the sailors have been
flocking today and tonight, fewer than 5 percent are HIV positive, but the
percentages are rising quickly.

Pattaya's bar owners and managers, some of them Americans who settled here after
the Vietnam War, when this fishing village was turned into a rest-and-recreation
center for the air base at nearby U-Tapao, get extremely upset at any mention of
AIDS.

The United States Navy, however, has been forthright with its sailors. Videos
about AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases have been running often on
board the ships, and the sailors received detailed briefings on Pattaya before
coming ashore. They were also issued condoms and urged in strong terms to make
use of them. More condoms are available, if requested, from the Navy's beach
office, set up directly across the street from where the sailors landed.

Lieut. (J. G.) Sherman Baldwin, a pilot from the Midway and the beach duty
officer, said: "We're beating the men over the head to use condoms. The Navy is
doing all it can do in terms of information and education to get the word across
to every 18- and 19-year-old sailor about how to protect themselves."

Back on the beach, Mrs. Grzelak and Mrs. Humber were happily hugging their
husbands, who had received the message and wangled a fast boat ashore. "When I
left the gulf," said Lieut. Stephen Humber, one arm gripping his wife's waist
like a life preserver, "I was afraid to look back. I thought I'd turn into a
pillar of salt."

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sailors from the cruiser Mobile Bay in Pattaya, Thailand, on
their first shore leave since Persian Gulf war. (Agence France-Presse)

Map of Thailand highlighting Pattaya

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 25, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Saigon' Previews Begin

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 14; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 347 words


The helicopter has landed.

"Miss Saigon," the highly publicized hit London musical that was scheduled for
Broadway, then canceled, then scheduled again, gave its first preview
performance in New York on Saturday night before a sellout house at the Broadway
Theater. There were no pickets and no protests, despite the furor stirred up
over the show last summer.

The $10 million musical arrived complete with its much ballyhooed onstage
helicopter, symbolic of the one that carried out the last Americans during the
fall of Saigon in 1975. It also arrived with its two award-winning London stars,
both of whom had briefly been barred from performing in the New York production:
Jonathan Pryce, the British actor who was turned down because he wasn't Asian,
and Lea Salonga, the Filipino actress who was rejected because she was.

The theater's doors opened at 7:30 P.M. Among those who arrived early was
Eleanor Rivera of Livingston, N.J., a native of the Philippines who said she had
seen Ms. Salonga some years ago in the Philippines in "Annie." Also waiting was
Ivan Segal of Hull, England. "I saw the show in London and liked it so much that
I flew over from England especially for the first performance," Mr. Segal

It's Official in April

Presented by Cameron Mackintosh, and created by the team of Alain Boublil and
Claude-Michel Schonberg, the team that created "Les Miserables," the musical has
an advance of more than $35 million. Official opening night is April 11.

Last August, Actors' Equity rejected Mr. Pryce, who portrays a
French-Vietnamese, saying it could not approve a Caucasian playing the role of a
Eurasian. A week later, after many Equity members objected to the decision and
Mr. Mackintosh canceled the New York production, the union changed its mind.
Then in December it turned down Ms. Salonga, saying an Asian-American should get
the role. But in January an arbitrator ruled in favor of the 20-year-old
actress, who protrays a Vietnamese bar girl who falls in love with an American
marine in a modern-day versian of "Madama Butterfly."

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 26, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

In Vietnam, a Chance for Friendship Beckons

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 214 words


To the Editor:

Toward the end of World War II Ho Chi Minh chose to collaborate with the United
States Office of Strategic Services in southern China and the jungle of North
Vietnam.

In courting the United States, he hoped to enlist support eventually to rid
Vietnam of French rule and pre-empt Chinese interference, no matter who -- Mao
Zedong or Chiang Kai-shek -- came out on top in China after the war.

Soon after World War II ended with the capitulation of the Japanese, the United
States ignored Ho's approach and supported France's attempt to re-establish its
rule over Indochina. Had the United States adopted a different policy, perhaps
the Vietnam War would not have happened.

Now the Soviet Union has virtually relinquished its role in Vietnam, cutting aid
from $2 billion a year to a mere $150 million, and requiring cash for Soviet
goods, including fertilizer, fuels, wheat and perhaps even the military hardware
and spare parts that Vietnam needs to maintain its armed forces.

Only two world powers, China and the United States, could fill the vacuum that
has been left by the Soviets. It's not difficult to figure out which one would
be favored by Vietnam -- and by other Southeast Asian countries.

PHI-BANG NGUYEN
Garden City, L.I., March 12, 1991

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Guardsmen Return From War They Didn't Fight

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1536 words

DATELINE: ROME, Ga., March 26


For the crowd of dignitaries, the high school marching band and the horde of
reporters at Hunter Army Airfield in Savannah, it looked as if the big moment
had finally arrived when a plane landed around midnight earlier this month,
apparently bringing the first troops home from the Persian Gulf war.

But instead of victorious warriors returning here after dismantling Iraq's
Republican Guard, the plane carried men of the 48th Infantry Brigade, made up of
National Guardsmen who had been activated as an early deployment combat force,
only to spend the war training in the California desert.

And instead of a heroes' welcome, they were quietly shunted out of view so as
not to distract from the fanfare that the war veterans received when they landed
a half-hour later.

There are worse things to go through than training for a war but not being sent
into combat. But for the troops of the 48th Brigade, 69 of whom were being
deactivated today at the National Guard armory here that is the home of Company
A, First Battalion, 108th Armor Regiment, that moment at the airfield in
Savannah summed up the frustrations of their deployment.

A Struggle for Influence

Many believed their experience had as much to do with the struggle for influence
within the military as it did with the fighting in the gulf.

"They were given a hero's welcome and sent out the front gate," First Lieut.
Bill Jinright, a 29-year-old insurance salesman from Dalton, Ga., who is one of
the brigade's 4,200 members, said of the returning war veterans. "We were thrown
in buses and slid out the back gate. We wear the U.S. Army patch over our left
breast, close to the heart and everything, and we just weren't treated equally."

Common, too, among brigade members was a frustration that the unit was deployed
too late, given inadequate equipment, never taken seriously by the Army and then
branded a failure.

"At times we were treated like the Army's red-headed stepchild," Lieutenant
Jinright said. "We were called to active duty, yet we were still treated like
the National Guard. It was like being second string, sitting on the bench for
the state championship football game when you expected to play."

Set up as a "roundout brigade," a National Guard unit capable of combat in the
early days of a military action, the 48th Brigade was supposed to augment the
24th Mechanized Infantry Brigade. Instead, the 24th spearheaded the ground war
in Iraq, while the 48th was left behind to train for two months in California.

The 48th Brigade was not alone. A total of 14,000 troops, including Louisiana
guardsmen serving in the 256th Infantry Brigade and Mississippi guardsmen in the
155th Armored Brigade, were assigned to roundout units but were withheld from
service in the gulf.

Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said earlier this month that National Guard units
could probably not be mobilized as early as had been hoped. That marked the
first official statement of doubts that had long swirled around the roundout
units. Beginning in the 1970's, when the military first embraced the notion of
combining guardsmen with Regular Army troops, many Pentagon planners and
military experts expressed doubts that troops who trained one weekend a month
could be ready to fight in combat.

A number of soldiers in the 48th Bigade said they noticed flaws in their
training, leadership and readiness. But now, as they prepare to return to
civilian life, most also feel they were caught in the middle of a bitter turf
war in which the Army, facing a continued shrinkage in its forces, stands to
lose manpower if reserve forces can carry out the same missions at lower costs.

"We got the impression a lot of people wanted us to fail," said Second Lieut.
Paul Tamburrino, a 23-year-old account executive for J. C. Penney in Atlanta. "I
expect in our unit at least 35 to 40 percent will get out, not because they were
mobilized but because of the way we were treated. We were supposed to be a
roundout, but they threw that out the window."

Top Leadership Faulted

Nearly all the men of the brigade agree that their readiness was not the equal
of Regular Army troops, particularly at top leadership levels.

First Lieut. Chris Nichols, a 30-year-old sheriff's deputy in Cobb County, near
Atlanta, said: "You take a guy that's been a banker or a security guard or
something, and then he's all of a sudden in charge of this huge logistical
operation. It's hard for him to pick it up right off the top of his head."

Sgt. Jimmy Bridges, a 38-year-old veteran of the Vietnam War, said he was glad
the young soldiers in his unit did not have to go to war. "I prayed every night
before I went to bed that those guys did not have to go over there and live
through what I've had to live through," he said.

To many members of the 48th Brigade, the problems began with their deployment.
The 24th was deployed in August, shortly after Iraq invaded Kuwait and President
Bush responded by sending American troops to Saudi Arabia. The 48th, which under
any circumstances would have needed additional time to train, was not called up
until the end of November. This virtually guaranteed that it would not be ready
when the war started, several members said. Then, instead of training in Saudi
Arabia along with the 24th, it trained on its own in California.

There were other problems. When the brigade began desert training at Fort Irwin,
Calif., many troops lost valuable time because the tanks and Bradley fighting
vehicles were in poor condition.

"We took tanks out into the field that shouldn't have been driven across the
street," Lieutenant Tamburrino said.

And many said that from the start they faced a cultural divide in which the Army
officers who supervised their training and graded them looked down on them as
weekend warriors.

"It seemed like the Regular Army a lot of times was just giving us bad
information or was just messing with us," Lieutenant Nichols said.

Many members said the troops assigned to roundout units needed more intensive
training to be combat ready, and needed more work with the brigades and
divisions that they were supposed to be augmenting. Some said the early
deployment roundout units might work better if they were assigned to light
infantry rather than to heavy armored units, which require more complicated
skills.

But most members of the brigade came away convinced that the roundout concept is
a good one if it could steer its way through what appeared to them as a tug of
war between a Congress that wants the system and an Army that seems opposed to
the idea.

Mr. Cheney said that the gulf war was a vindication of the "total force" concept
that integrates civilians into a wartime effort, but that reserve units would
probably need three or four more months of training to be ready to fight. Of the
228,000 guardsmen and reservists called to active duty in the gulf war, the vast
majority were in support jobs like transportation or medical care.

Military officials have taken pains to say that the 48th Brigade was combat
ready at the end of its training. But some military observers said Mr. Cheney's
remarks were an indication of lasting harm to the concept of combat reserves,
particularly when the Regular Army and reserve components are competing to avoid
cuts in personnel.

"I think Cheney's remarks are a watershed," said Charles Moskos, a sociologist
at Northwestern University who specializes in the military. "I think it was as
close as you can come to saying this thing is going to be totally scrapped."

Some military analysts, like Martin Binkin, a military manpower expert with the
Brookings Institution in Washington, have long been critical of the concept of
deploying roundout brigades in combat at the start of a war. They contend it is
unrealistic to think that guardsmen who train once a month will be ready for
combat.

But many in Congress who have championed the concept as a more cost-effective
approach say the current deployment has taught some valuable lessons but does
not discredit the roundout concept.

'We've Learned a Lot'

"I think there are people who are going to be advocating that we shouldn't have
counted on them at all, and I think those people are wrong," said Representative
Beverly B. Byron, a Maryland Democrat who is chairwoman of the Military
Personnel and Compensation Subcomittee of the House Armed Services Committee. "I
think we've learned a lot of things about what it takes to get them up to speed
in the time frame we need."

And, in a war that for the United States forces went almost pefectly, the 48th
Brigade's experience ended on a high note, too.

The brigade literally spent its deployment under a cloud. Troops joked that it
rained everywhere they went, from the time they reported for active duty at Fort
Stewart, Ga., to their training at Fort Irwin.

But today, at the end of a balmy spring day, the men of Company A finally got
their own moment in the sun. As flag-waving friends and relatives lined the
streets and with two M-1 tanks leading the way and two helicopters roaring
overhead, the troops marched through downtown Rome, hailed as "some of the best
tankers in the world" and welcomed home.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: National Guardsmen of the 48th Infantry Brigade, a unit that
spent the war in the California desert instead of in combat, found themselves in
the background upon returning home while war veterans received a heroes'
welcome. Sgt. Brian Weldy and his wife, Vickie, walked to armory in Rome, Ga.
(Alan S. Weiner for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 28, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Aldo Ray, Actor, Is Dead at 64; Portrayed Lovable Tough Guys

BYLINE: By PETER FLINT

SECTION: Section D; Page 20; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 344 words


Aldo Ray, a husky, sandpaper-voiced film actor who excelled in military roles
and in comedy, died yesterday at the Veterans Administration Hospital in
Martinez, Calif. He was 64 years old and lived in Crockett, Calif.

He died of throat cancer and complications from pneumonia, the associate
director of the hospital, Sheila Cullen, said.

Mr. Ray specialized in portraying thick-witted but lovable tough guys in combat
epics like "Battle Cry" (1955), "Men in War" (1957) and "The Naked and the
Dead," the 1958 film version of Norman Mailer's World War II novel, and "Green
Berets," John Wayne's 1968 movie about the Special Forces in Vietnam.

He also appeared in "The Marrying Kind" and "Miss Sadie Thompson." He portrayed
a boastful athlete in "Pat and Mike," an escaped convict in "We're No Angels"
and a Georgia rustic in Erskine Caldwell's "God's Little Acre."

But after the 1950's Mr. Ray found good roles hard to come by. "In some ways the
tough soldier role locked me in," he said in a recent interview.

The actor, originally named Aldo DaRe, was born on Sept. 25, 1926, in Pen Argyl,
Pa. He grew up in northern California, where his family moved in his infancy. In
World War II, he was a Navy frogman and took part in many Pacific landings,
including the invasion of Okinawa.

He studied political science at the University of California and was the local
sheriff in his hometown of Crockett when spotted by a Columbia Pictures talent
scout. Harry Cohn, the studio's chief, tried to rename him John Harrison, but he
insisted on retaining a bit of his Italian heritage, and they compromised on
"Ray."

Mr. Ray was married and divorced three times. Surviving are two sons, Eric DaRe,
of Beverly Hills, who plays Leo Johnson in the television series "Twin Peaks,"
and Paul DaRe, of Oakland, Calif.; a daughter, Claire DaRe, of Minnesota; his
mother, Maria, of Crockett; three brothers, Guido, of Crockett; Mario, of Sierra
Madre, Calif., and Louis, of Glendale, Calif.; a sister, Regina Ogando, of
Winers, Calif., and a granddaughter.

NAME: Aldo Ray

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Aldo Ray (Associated Press, 1986)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 29, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Stage, and Off

BYLINE: By Glenn Collins

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words



Out From Under the Refrigerator

Here, alas, comes further evidence of the eroding sense of propriety in the
American theater. When Penn and Teller bring their "International Refrigerator
Tour" to Broadway on Wednesday, they'll inhabit the stage of, yes, the Eugene
O'Neill Theater. "Eugene O'Neill -- a tortured-genius-writer of American
classics ends up with two rip-off artists at his theater," said Penn Jillette,
the larger, more abrasive of the rip-off artists in question. Inexcusably, the
show opens when a major appliance appears to drop on their heads.

It's a 450-pound refrigerator, to be precise; thus the name of the tour (the
"international" part springs from the convenient fact that Toronto has been on
the itinerary). Given the venue, the co-conspirators have taken to calling the
show "The Icebox Cometh."

"We're delighted to be back on Broadway with all this new material that's been
ripening in the provinces," said Teller, the smaller, more lovable one. In six
months of tinkering on the road, Penn and Teller have added six routines to
their wicked amusement, which first came to Broadway in 1987. This time around,
as usual, the fellows behave irresponsibly with sharp objects. "But just a
couple of the oldies-but-goodies are back," said Teller. "Can you ever really
see Penn get stabbed through the hand enough?"

About that refrigerator, the one that drops on Penn and Teller from a height of
11 feet. The appliance is billed as a "frost-free Amana," but it isn't always.
"Our carpenter has to keep going out and locating replacements," said Teller.
"You can only drop a refrigerator on human flesh so many times. Then you have to
go out and get a new one."

New Team of Bosco and Gardenia

Philip Bosco and Vincent Gardenia will be breaking ground in "Breaking Legs" at
the Promenade Theater on April 27. The two have never teamed before, "which is
pretty amazing," said Mr. Gardenia. "But if you just hang around long enough,
you'll work with everyone." They will star in Tom Dulack's comedy about a
playwright whose next production is being financed by the mob. John Tillinger
("The Lisbon Traviata") will direct.

A Stage Role for Dan Lauria

Like the first robin of spring, the migrating actor is nature's reminder that
the Hollywood television season is over. As sitcoms and dramas nod off into
rerun coma, their principals take wing, stageward or movieward. And so Dan
Lauria is on his way. You know Mr. Lauria: he plays Jack Arnold, the "don't push
me too far, kid" father in "The Wonder Years" on ABC. On April 16, he'll replace
Steven Keats in the role of sleazy Lawrence Garfinkle in "Other People's Money,"
the play about Wall Street takeover greed, at the Minetta Lane Theater. Rialto
statisticians will note that Mr. Lauria is to be the show's fourth sleazy
Lawrence Garfinkle.

Next: Shaw's Dim View of Marriage

Amid all the Tony-nomination talk, speculation is rife, as they say, about a nod
to Christopher Benjamin. He plays Roland, the boorish bucket magnate in "Taking
Steps," the Alan Ayckbourn farce at Circle in the Square about a wife's bid for
freedom from her suffocating spouse. Speculation -- rife or unrife -- is
unnecessary, however, in identifying the replacement for "Taking Steps," which
steps out after April 28.

It's a done deal: the next production will be "Getting Married," George Bernard
Shaw's definitive attack on the institution of marriage. The 1908 play "was a
daring experiment at the time," said Stephen Porter, who will direct. "There are
a lot of very good parts," Mr. Porter added, "especially a very flashy role for
a sensual older -- but not aged -- leading lady." Hmmmm. Rehearsals begin in
mid-April for a run in May.

Mason on Iraq and the Oscars



The march of the headlines has been so dizzying lately that a headliner has to
work hard just to keep up. Since "Jackie Mason: Brand New" opened at the Neil
Simon in October, the comedian has replaced more than a fifth of his jokes
"because you can't ignore it when a whole country practically falls over," he
said of the Iraqi debacle.

Though he's already discarded some Gulf war jokes, still risible are the Iraqi
army ("Those pathetic souls look like they didn't have a piece of cake for a
month already"), the prisoners ("They were surrendering to so many people that
my sister-in-law, she got off a bus, and they surrendered to her") and Mr.
Mason's trip to Israel amid the Scud attacks ("Everyone in New York thought I
was a hero, going to Tel Aviv, but everyone in Tel Aviv thought I was a hero for
living in New York! The city was a hundred times more dangerous -- why do you
think Dinkins flew to Israel?").

The last few nights, of course, Mr. Mason has been taking on the Oscars. "Who
would ever think that the most important picture in the entire universe would be
'Dancing With a Wolf'?" said Mr. Mason. "Dancing with a bear, this I might
understand. Now, this Kevin Costner, he directs one movie and he gets the award,
yet this Jewish kid, Spielberg -- how come he never got one?"

Beyond Monodrama, Extravaganza

It is the kind of news that sends seismic tremors of shock and astonishment
through the theatrical community. Many gossips will insist on seeing it in cold
print before they believe it. So here goes: Arthur Cantor is actually producing
a play with more than one character in it.

"Quite a breakthrough for me, don't you think?" mused Mr. Cantor. "A while back,
I turned down a show that had two characters. I said, 'I don't do
extravaganzas.' " Mr. Cantor, the P. T. Barnum of the solo show, is the producer
of that current exemplar of the genre, "A Room of One's Own." The play at the
Lamb's Theater has gathered a flock of rave reviews with Eileen Atkins starring
as Virginia Woolf. Among Mr. Cantor's 10 other monodramas have been "St. Mark's
Gospel," "Acting Shakespeare" and Donal Donnelly as George Bernard Shaw in "My
Astonishing Self."

Unbelievable it may be, but Mr. Cantor's new venture will require six characters
in search of a casting director. Titled "Beau Jest," the comedy by James
Sherman, which ran at the Victory Gardens Theater Company in Chicago, is about a
girl who rents an actor to play her mythical boyfriend. This Cantorial work is
to arrive Off Broadway next September, by which time the theater world may have
recovered from its collective amazement.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "From the Dark to the Dane" -- Stephen Lang will play Lou for
the last time tomorrow night in "The Speed of Darkness," the drama about two
Vietnam veterans. The Broadway play will close after 36 performances.
Lang-lovers can take solace in the knowledge that he returns to the stage next
year as yet another dangerous, unstable type. His first appearance as Hamlet
will be March 11, 1992, at the Roundabout Theater. (Martha Swope)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 29, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Portrait of a Family From Shifting Points of View

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 24; Column 3; Weekend Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 799 words


Now You See It
By Cornelia Nixon
186 pages. Little, Brown & Company. $17.95.

Many of the interlinked stories that make up "Now You See It" first appeared in
such small magazines as Ploughshares, Black Warrior Review and Quarterly West
27, and they announce the arrival of a wonderfully talented new writer.

A teacher at Indiana University, Cornelia Nixon combines Alice Munro's
sympathetic understanding of character with Ann Beattie's radar-sharp eye for
the dislocations of contemporary culture. Ms. Nixon also has a thoroughly
original voice, a voice that moves fluently from the poetic to the visceral,
from the absurd to the mundane.

She's equally adept at capturing the babble of 4-year-olds and the pretentious
effusions of grown-up academics, the stilted exchanges of unhappy lovers and the
wary transactions that take place between parents and children. Though each of
the chapters in this volume can easily stand by itself as a short story, they
work together to form a novelistic portrait of a family as seen from the
shifting points of view of a husband, a wife, two of their four children and the
husband's lover.

When we first meet the Hooper family, they are driving to California, making the
great westward trek of the pioneers in a dilapidated car. "The ground was
littered with burnt stubble," writes Ms. Nixon, "as if it had been planted with
something years before, then cut and left to dry out. It was a landscape that
spoke of dinosaur death, indifferent to the lesser life forms passing over it
since."

Already, the tensions between Edward, a Harvard-trained philosophy professor,
and his wife, Ella, a German immigrant, are all too apparent. She is sick of his
self-absorption and lackadaisical irony. He is tired of her strictness, her
insistence on order and routine. It's not long after they've settled in
Berkeley, Calif., that Ella decides to leave Edward for good: she scoops up her
children, puts them in an oversize stroller and begins walking across the Bay
Bridge to San Francisco. Only when she is arrested as a German spy at a local
military base (World War II is still going on) does she begin hoping that Edward
will track her down and beg her not to leave.

Somehow, the marriage stumbles on. Edward becomes involved with Laura, one of
his philosophy students; Ella starts a career as a photographer. There are signs
of betrayal: Edward fails to come home for dinner one night; Ella is caught
rummaging around in his office; both come down with a sexually transmitted
disease.

Meanwhile, their four children grow up. Charlie, the oldest, becomes an engineer
with an oil company. David, the sensitive one, goes to Vietnam as a medic and
later becomes a professor at Berkeley, like his father. Hank, short, impulsive
and solemn, affects "a grave adult manner" and makes up "multilingual puns,
delivered without a trace of humor." Later he moves to Cuba to study Marxist
agricultural techniques. Jane, the youngest, is still a teen-ager when we last
see her, helping scatter her father's ashes after he dies of a heart attack.

She remembers him as "one of those tall boyish men who look the same way most of
their lives," an inveterate joke-teller who cloaks his real feelings with
acerbic asides. Her mother is described in slightly less affectionate tones --
an energetic, willfully correct woman who "taught us to do things California
children never did, such as stand when an adult came into the room, say 'ma'am'
and 'sir,' and 'lie' instead of 'lay.' "

Writing in deft economical prose, Ms. Nixon gives the reader an indelible
portrait of the Hooper family, delineating the myriad ways in which affection
can sour, blossom, evolve and endure within the confines of a family. One story
(or chapter) titled "Affection" reveals the fracture of the Hoopers' marriage
through the eyes of Jane, who has her first glimpse of the fickleness of emotion
when her cat leaves her to move in with the new neighbors across the street.
Another story, "Assumed Identity," delineates Edward's fumbling efforts to come
to terms with Hank's immersion in radical politics and his abrupt disappearance
into the underground.

In showing us the lives of the Hoopers in all their familiarity and oddness, Ms.
Nixon also creates a finely shaded picture of Berkeley and its noisy embrace of
the 1960's counterculture. Her quick, low-key sentences somehow succeed in
capturing that period's energy, confusion and adversarial passion, while her
sensitivity to light, color and mood enable her to communicate that bay city's
physical beauty and anomalous atmosphere of laid-back idealism and off-kilter
enthusiasm.

This is a luminous and compelling book, a captivating photo album, filled with
vivid verbal snapshots of familial love and disintegration.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cornelia Nixon (Dean Young)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 30, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A Mean Army, Made Leaner

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 575 words


America's victory in the Persian Gulf war brought glory to all branches of the
armed forces. But it provided special vindication for the U.S. Army, which
brilliantly exploited its firepower and mobility and in the process erased
memories of its grievous difficulties in Vietnam.

The question now is how the Army chooses to capitalize on success. Will it waste
time and energy in a futile struggle with the Defense Secretary, who is starting
to put the cold war behind him and hold down spending? Or will it take a wiser
course -- addressing weaknesses that remain, particularly in its reserve units,
to maintain its strength?

Vietnam left America divided and disturbed, and left the Army even more so. The
Air Force and Navy fended off most of the blame; the Army absorbed most of the
casualties and costs. It spent years begging for funds to attract qualified
recruits and to modernize its weaponry.

Compared with high-tech weapons, recruitment, readiness and logistics lack
glamour and cost plenty. Most members of Congress would rather watch missile
launches than maneuvers. Still, the Army persevered. And that paid off in the
gulf. True, the gulf wasn't Vietnam, where the Army was ill prepared for
counterinsurgency warfare. Iraq, with its Soviet-style strategy and Soviet-made
arms, was the kind of opponent the Army has spent decades preparing to fight.

The Army also put the Reagan years of budgetary excess to good use. It took
advantage of the pay raises and recession of the early 1980's to recruit and
train qualified volunteers. It spent billions on exercises that devour equipment
and ammunition but yield huge dividends in terms of readiness. And it beefed up
its ability to deploy forces to remote spots and keep them supplied. Meanwhile,
the Army broadened the social base of its leadership, with the Reserve Officers
Training Corps securing at least equal billing with West Point.

Colin Powell typifies the new general officer. He was born in the Bronx to
Jamaican immigrants and graduated from City University -- and is the first
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs to receive his commission from the R.O.T.C. Gen.
Norman Schwarzkopf took a more traditional path to the top, by way of West
Point. But Gen. Gus Pagonis, who directed the massive gulf supply effort, earned
a B.S. in transportation and traffic at Penn State, along with a reserve
commission.

Oddly, the reserves themselves have been neglected. The reserves provide many of
the Army's specialists, from doctors and nurses to supply officers. Yet if the
Army of the future is to be as successful as it was in the gulf -- with reduced
Defense spending -- the reserves will also have to fill out the fighting units.

At the moment, they're not up to it. Three brigades of combat reserves in the
National Guard stayed home because the army judged them unready for the gulf
war. That's because the top brass has preferred to beef up the regular army.

The Army's first response to victory was not encouraging. It continued to fight
planned manpower cuts as though the Russians were still coming. Mr. Cheney
wisely stood his ground. Even after the cuts, the Army will have 18 divisions in
1995, 12 on active duty. It sent about eight divisions to the gulf, more than
most third world contingencies would require. Reserve units, kept in tip-top
shape, could provide ample insurance. Instead of greener, tomorrow's Army is
better off meaner, and leaner.


LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 31, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Children's Books: Bookshelf

SECTION: Section 7; Page 29; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 195 words


A CHILD'S FIRST BIBLE. By Sandol Stoddard. Illustrated by Tony Chen. Dial.
$14.95. (Ages 4 to 8) Each of 40 stories from the Old and New Testaments is told
in a double-page spread. The brief texts are pleasant to read.

APPLEBLOSSOM. By Shulamith Levey Oppenheim. Illustrated by Joanna Yardley.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $14.95. (Ages 6 to 12). Naphtali has his heart set on
keeping the cat he found under an apple tree and named Appleblossom. His father
is adamantly opposed. In this charming holiday story set in Eastern Europe, a
small miracle occurs during the Passover Seder when the door is opened for the
prophet Elijah.

EVERYBODY COOKS RICE. By Norah Dooley. Illustrated by Peter J.Thornton.
Carolrhoda. $12.95. (Ages 4 to 9) Before dinner Carrie tours the neighborhood
looking for her little brother and, just incidentally, checking out what's
cooking. Rice. Everywhere, and from everywhere. The children end up at home with
risi e bisi, a dish from their Italian great-grandmother. Carrie has already
tasted rice dishes (recipes included at the end) from Barbados, Puerto Rico,
Vietnam, India, China and Haiti. Nifty neighborhood. Nifty book.


LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing: Illustration from "A Child's First Bible."

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 31, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

American on Their Own Terms;
Feeling American -- Sort Of

BYLINE: By Jay McInerney; Jay McInerney, a former Princeton-in-Asia Fellow, is
the author of the novels "Ransom," "Bright Lights, Big City" and "Story of My
Life."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1375 words



TURNING JAPANESE
Memoirs of a Sansei.
By David Mura.
376 pp. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press. $22.95.

The literature of Western encounters with Japan has, in recent years, become a
thriving subgenre of the English-language coming-of-age story, Tokyo and Kyoto
having lately replaced Paris as hot stops on the Wanderjahre. In his memoir
"Turning Japanese," the poet David Mura brings an intriguing perspective to the
New World quest for enlightenment from this ancient and ascendant culture, being
himself a sansei -- a third-generation Japanese-American.

Mr. Mura's curiously reluctant voyage begins when he applies for a U.S./Japan
Creative Artist Exchange Fellowship, "mainly because I wanted time to write."
For reasons that become clearer as the journey progresses, he initially protests
too much his lack of interest in the country where his grandparents were born.
Growing up in a largely Jewish suburb of Chicago, Mr. Mura ate Japanese dishes
mainly on holidays, cheered from the sofa the G.I.'s who mowed down advancing
hordes of fiendish Japanese on television. His parents seldom spoke about their
roots, or about their years in relocation camps during the war. The son
cultivated a Eurocentric world view, immersing himself in Sartre, Barthes,
Benjamin, Foucault and Levi-Strauss -- all copiously quoted here. But his poems,
he tells us, were about relocation camps, his Japanese grandfather, Hiroshima
bomb victims. "My imagination," he writes, "had been traveling there for years,
unconsciously swimming the Pacific, against the tide of my family's emigration,
my parents' desire, after the internment camps, to forget the past."

Still, like the schoolboy who feigns indifference to the ponytailed object of
his affections, the author seems to have to drag himself and his wife, Susie, to
Tokyo for a year -- fiercely pretending to be just another Yankee. He
immediately confronts the difference between his Caucasian wife's perspective
and his own (with what might have been disastrous consequences for their
marriage, except that Susie's patience and devotion seem nearly boundless and
saintly). For the white American visitor the dichotomy is simple, but Mr. Mura
is stuck somewhere between them and us. He looks Japanese; he can blend in if he
keeps his mouth shut. When they meet another young American couple who are
overwhelmingly critical of Japan, Mr. Mura feels the need to defend the
Japanese. Later, on a train, he whispers to his wife, not wanting the commuters
around them to know that he's a foreigner. "To speak English on the train
created an island, separated me from the people around us," he writes. In this
context, the tall, slim, hakujin wife is the equivalent of the shiksa spouse in
the fiction of writers like Philip Roth; Mr. Mura is both proud of her as a
trophy and ashamed of the way she sticks out and blows his cover.

Drawing on his own history of repressed racial self-consciousness, Mr. Mura is
quite good on the sexual politics of race. Good liberal though he is, he is not
afraid to talk about racial stereotypes, and even, finally, about race itself.
The Japanese themselves are unabashed racialists. When Mr. Mura begins to study
Noh drama, he finds that his teacher expects more from him than from his friend
Daniel, who is a trained mime. " 'You have Japanese genes,' Okinaka would tell
me. 'You are Japanese in your blood. You should understand these things.' My
ingrained American outlook rebelled at this. Blood had nothing to do with
ability; blood was a racist, a fascist notion." And yet, even before this
conversation, Mr. Mura has begun to consider the claims of race, as he finds
aspects of his own character in the local demeanor.

His general observations on the landscape and customs can be fresh and
revealing, as when he describes a meal consisting of sushi, quiche Lorraine,
seafood salad, fish, squid, fried potatoes, roast lamb, finger sandwiches and
beef stroganoff, noting that the socio-gastronomic clashes are "quintessentially
Japanese. . . . The serendipitous array and sequence reflected an aesthetic
which eschews the center: there is no piece de resistance to a Japanese meal."
This centerless meal is given in honor of an arrogant Italian literary critic
visiting Tokyo, and the critic's condescending attitude toward the Japanese
reminds the poet of his own feeling in graduate school of being an interloper at
the table of Western culture. What Mr. Mura really discovers, and acts out, in
Japan is his own long-repressed feeling of alienation, his desire to belong
somewhere and his anger at never having belonged.

But belonging is a complicated business. After only a couple of months in the
country, Mr. Mura walks down the street with his wife and his friend Daniel, one
moment savoring his sense that he is part of the "glamour of the West" and the
next moment telling his wife and friend -- whom he refers to scornfully as
gaijin, foreigners -- "You Americans. You think you own the world." One hardly
knows which to admire more, the candor of the author or the forbearance of his
wife and his buddy, who somehow manage to refrain from cuffing him smartly
upside the head.

After Mr. Mura speaks at the American Center in Kyoto, a Caucasian woman with a
pillbox hat asks, "Why are you so angry? Don't you feel American?" Mr. Mura says
he "tried to explain how, in Japan, I had come to understand how left out of
American culture I felt, how there was a certain comfort I found in Japan that I
had not experienced in the States." He is self-critical enough to admit "It was
hopeless," to question the validity of his own point of view even as he tries to
clarify it.

Actually it's not hopeless. In "Turning Japanese" Mr. Mura discovers and
articulates a source of his malaise: the subtle sense of difference that has
haunted him growing up Asian in America, even as he discovers the heritage from
which he has been cut off. This is, perhaps necessarily, an unfinished story;
though this year abroad ended some five years ago, one feels that Mr. Mura is
still trying to digest the curriculum. But we sense he has come a long way when,
near the end of his stay, he shows his second-generation parents around his
newly discovered homeland, or when he says one night to a strident Japanese
friend: "You're always so angry, Akiko. Sometimes you ought to take it easy."
Ultimately, Mr. Mura seems to have acquired a sense of ease, and of inspiration
-- like a man who has discovered a fertile atoll in mid-Pacific.




PROUD TO BE HYPHENATED

When David Mura first started writing "Turning Japanese," he envisioned a
collection of essays on Japanese culture. The project did not transmute itself
into a memoir until years later. "It became much more like a novel," Mr. Mura
said, "from about 90 percent about Japanese culture and 10 percent me to about
50-50."

Japan conjured up memories of his childhood in suburban Chicago and the
(partially imagined) struggles of his grandparents in Japan and in the United
States. The book also deals frankly with private aspects of Mr. Mura's marriage
to a medical resident.

"I don't think either of us knew all of these things would be on the record,"
Mr. Mura said of his wife's role in the memoir. "I always say, and she always
knows, that she has veto power. She's never exercised it."

Mr. Mura's conflicts with his parents, especially his father, are also recounted
in "Turning Japanese." "My parents said, 'This is the way you see things, and
while we don't necessarily agree with everything, this is the way you saw it,' "
Mr. Mura said during a recent telephone interview from his home in Minneapolis.
Mr. Mura was a conscientious objector during the Vietnam War, and his politics,
long hair and decision to write earned the disapproval of his Republican father.

"The writing I do now is more and more exploring the issue of identity, the
conjunction of race and identity, race and sexuality," he said. "Japan was in
every way a watershed for me. It was a reaffirmation of pride of being that
hyphenate: Japanese-American. And despite the title, I'm not Japanese. I'm
Japanese-American. My struggle with identity is here, not in Japan." -- JOSEPH
CINCOTTI

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: David Mura. (Atlantic Monthly Press) (pg. 11)

Drawing (pg. 1)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 31, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE MILITARY VS. THE PRESS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 10; Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 260 words


In Malcolm W. Browne's excellent article, "The Military vs. the Press" (March
3), one misconception should be corrected. The panel chaired by retired Maj.
Gen. Winant Sidle in 1984 did not conclude that future wars should be covered by
pools of reporters.

The panel had been convened in response to protests about the blackout of the
press during the Grenada invasion. General Sidle, who had been chief of Army
information in South Vietnam, told the commission, of which I was a member, that
he believed that reporters and photographers should have access to any
battlefield "to the maximum degree possible," so long as the military mission
was not compromised or the safety of the troops endangered.

The panel's report very specifically limited any future pool arrangements to the
first hours of an operation, when it might be unrealistic for the military to
accommodate every reporter who wanted to take part. Otherwise, the panel
endorsed the degree of freedom that the press had enjoyed in Vietnam.

General Sidle recalled that only two reporters had violated the sensible
guidelines that the military had established during the long war in Vietnam.
Both violations were inadvertent; neither caused any casualties.

Politicians and the Pentagon clearly have reasons for the onerous new
restrictions they have put on the press, but they should not invoke the Sidle
commission. Our aim was to promote unfettered access for reporters during
wartime.

A. J. LANGGUTH
Professor of Journalism, University of Southern California
Los Angeles

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 31, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IF THERE'S A WAR, HE'S THERE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 10; Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 195 words


William Prochnau's tribute to Peter Arnett was most welcome ("If There's a War,
He's There," March 3). I would like to comment on the curiously understated
quality of Arnett's own description of his project, when he says: "It's better .
. . to learn this stuff up front so that we don't have surprises and start being
ashamed later for what we didn't know or didn't want to know at the time."

The subdued tone of this statement is particularly noteworthy in view of the
argument made by prosecutors at the Nuremburg trials that, in effect, ignorance
of the facts is no excuse for complicity in war crimes. The problem with
Arnett's statement is that it doesn't go far enough, particularly at a time when
former United States Attorney General Ramsey Clark has asserted the possibility
of criminal negligence in the American air assault on Iraq. Not only is it
"better" for us to be aware of our Government's actions, we have a civic and
moral obligation to know precisely the kinds of things that Arnett has been
criticized for telling us. The current enthusiasm for muzzling the press in
wartime is nothing short of shameful.

LILLIAN CORTI
Tulsa, Okla.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Peter Arnett in Vietnam, 1965. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 31, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Travel Advisory;
Insurance Plan Covers War And Terrorism

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 289 words


Although fears about international travel have subsided somewhat since the end
of the Persian Gulf war, travel industry executives say people going to
politically restive countries remain as nervous as ever about terrorism. One
company, in what it calls a first-of-its-kind service, says it will insure
people against injury or death caused by war or terrorist acts.

The company, WorldCare Travel Assistance Association, based in Los Angeles, said
it started its program in late February, just after the war. The idea, it said,
is to fill a gap in insurance programs that specifically exclude coverage to
victims of war and terrorism. Travelers buying the new service, called WarCare,
are covered for 31 days, and must also subscribe to the company's WorldCare
program, which includes baggage insurance, toll-free telephone assistance, basic
medical insurance and other services. The basic WorldCare package is $86 for
five to eight days' travel.

WorldCare, a subsidiary of the Transamerica Occidental Life Insurance Company,
said the new service would assure travelers who are the victims of terrorism and
war adequate medical treatment, even if they must be taken to another country.
It also provides benefits of up to $150,000 for death or dismemberment.

Although the rates are subject to change, it said WarCare would now cost most
for individuals traveling to Israel or Bahrain ($407). Coverage is less
expensive ($283) for those going to Libya, Lebanon, Bangladesh or Afghanistan or
Pakistan. Less expensive is the WarCare package for people going to Egypt,
Syria, Morroco, Nigeria, El Salvador, Vietnam or Cambodia ($142). For most
European countries, the service costs $71.

More information: (800) 253-1877.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 31, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Agrees to Screen 8 Boat People Again

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 670 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, March 30


Eight Vietnamese boat people who were part of a landmark legal challenge to the
refugee screening process here will be screened again under an agreement reached
with the Hong Kong Government.

The plaintiffs agreed on Wednesday to an adjournment of their court cases in
return for new hearings.

All eight plaintiffs had been denied refugee status under the screening
procedures conducted by Hong Kong Immigration officers and monitored by the
local office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

The eight were among nine cases organized by human rights lawyers in the United
States, Britain and Hong Kong, to challenge the colony's process for determining
who is a refugee eligible for resettlement and who is an illegal immigrant.

In the first case, which was heard in its entirety, the High Court ordered in
February that the plaintiff, Do Giao, be screened again because a decisive error
had been written into his record by an immigration officer.

"Taken together with the Do Giao case, this latest settlement is nothing less
than an acknowledgement by the Hong Kong authorities that the screening and
review procedures used in these cases were not adequate," said Arthur C. Helton,
director of the Refugee Project of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, based
in New York.

But Hong Kong officials have contended that while the Do case overturned a
specific screening decision, it upheld the screening process.

And in a statement on Wednesday, the Government said it had agreed to new
hearings for the remaining eight plaintiffs, "to avoid prolonging a conclusion
at further public cost."

Lawyers for the Vietnamese and several legal experts questioned the Government's
contention that it agreed to the new hearings to save time and money.

"If Government officials were confident of winning, they would never have agreed
to the settlement," said David Clark, a professor of law at Hong Kong
University. "I think this was a decision to minimize political damage by getting
these cases out of court."

He said that through the challenges, "the Government has come to realize that
the courts are willing to review and rule on these Vietnamese cases," adding,
"Once, they thought they could ignore all critics."

But a spokesman for the Government's Security Department, which deals with boat
people, said: "You can say people have won or lost, but I'm not sure that's
wholly appropriate in this case. I think a satisfactory conclusion has now been
reached in the case."

In the past, the screening process has been criticized by international human
rights groups as flawed and often unreliable, sometimes rejecting genuine
refugees fleeing persecution.

New Members for Board

Under the agreement, the Government said, the eight Vietnamese and their lawyers
will be able to present to the refugee review board all of the material that
would have been used in their court case, and their cases will go before new
members of the board, not members who had previously ruled against them. If any
part of the agreement is breached, the Vietnamese can return to court.

Critics have contended that boat people are given little help in preparing and
presenting their cases before the refugee board, and that mistakes are often
written into their accounts of their lives in Vietnam because of unskilled
interpreters and antagonistic immigration officers.

Vietnamese who are screened out are deemed to be illegal immigrants and are held
in detention centers until they can eventually be forced to return to Vietnam.
Currently about 45,000 boat people are held in detention centers here, and since
the process was set up in the summer of 1988, only 20,000 of them have been
screened.

Government officials say the screening procedures have been improved. But
lawyers for the Vietnamese say the reason more people are now being accepted as
refugees -- the percentage has risen from less than 10 to about 17 percent -- is
because the procedures are being challenged in court.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 1, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Pentagon Is Trying Harder to Ease Combat Stress of Returning Troops

BYLINE: By JON NORDHEIMER

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1112 words


If the war in the Persian Gulf broke new ground in weapons and tactics, the
process of bringing home the troops is being carried out with more concern than
ever before for the emotional welfare of servicemen, servicewomen and their
families.

Just as the generals said from the beginning of the crisis that the mistakes of
the Vietnam War would not be repeated in the gulf, so those in charge of the
eventual return of more than 500,000 troops to the United States say the
mistakes made after Vietnam will not happen this time.

"We've prepared from the beginning of the conflict on how to deal with combat
stress and the problems that may show up later at home," said Virginia
Stephanakis, spokeswoman for the Army surgeon general's office.

"So far there have been very few individuals who displayed obvious psychological
problems," she said. "Those that do have been handled very quickly, given a day
or two of rest and usually returned to their units. We let them know that it's
O.K. to be frightened, that it doesn't mean they're crazy."

Preparing for a Homecoming

The Defense Department says each branch of the armed forces has gained knowledge
about preparing the troops for the highs and lows of long-awaited reunions with
family and friends. Nearly 150,00 have already returned from the gulf; that
includes some who are back at their bases in Western Europe, the Pentagon said.

Blunt talk can help the returning veterans. Capt. Chet Lanious, an Army
chaplain, said he gave a number of briefings to members of the 82d Airborne
Division in Saudi Arabia before they returned to their home base at Fort Bragg,
N.C., last month.

"Some of you guys are going to get back to base, your wife is going to drive you
home, fix you a nice meal and tell you over the main course she wants a
divorce," the chaplain said he told the soldiers. "Or some of you may find your
wife is four months pregnant and you've been over here for seven months. Or
everything you own is in a pawnshop and your car has been repossessed."

His advice, he told them, was not to be blindsided by bad news and fly into a
rage. "Don't react physically," he said. "Go for a walk until you calm down.
Find a friend to talk to. Get counseling and support."

A few days after his return to Fort Bragg, the chaplain said he happened to meet
one of the men from his unit who was having family trouble.

On his first night home, the soldier said, his wife admitted having been
unfaithful while he was away. "Sir, I took your advice," he said. "I took a
couple of steps back to see how I should handle this. We've gone for help."

Most of the problems encountered at home will not be this extreme. But gulf
veterans will carry back fantasies of an idealized life that will inevitably
collide with reality, experts say.

"I suspect there will be a big letdown when the flags and ribbons come down and
people face the same old problems," said Martin Phillips, a Staten Island family
therapist who heads a military family support group.

The war was also hard on those who remained at home, glued to television news
round the clock.

"My wife told me while I was over in the gulf that this was the first war in
history that there was battle fatigue among the spouses back home," said Lieut.
Col. Ford D'Segner, chief chaplain of the 24th Mechanized Infantry Division at
Fort Stewart, Ga.

In the gulf, techniques used to soften the return home vary with each branch of
service.

The Navy is the only branch to offer a systematic decompression period.
Psychologists say it helps those coming directly home from the war zone deflate
overheated expectations.

The Navy program evolved from its experience with sending ships on six-month
cruises in peacetime and recognizing that the return to port was usually more
stressful than the departure. A "return and reunion" policy was instituted in
the early 1980's to place specialists aboard homeward-bound ships who advised
sailors on the reception they might face.

Last month Sherry Determan, a civilian specialist who works for the Navy,
boarded the supply ship Sylvania in Spain for a 12-day voyage to Norfolk, Va.
The crew, tense after seven months in the gulf, asked her about everything from
finances to sex.

"The sailors were very aware of some difficulties in re-establishing intimacy
and were very open with their questions," she said.

Message for Married Marines

The Marines say they try to have a sergeant major or chaplain speak to the
troops before their return.

Lance Cpl. Joseph Clark, a 20-year-old marine from Staten Island who fought in
Kuwait and returned home two weeks ago, said his unit heard a brief lecture on
homecoming. "Most of it was about not drinking and driving," Corporal Clark
recalled. "The married guys were told their wives may be more independent now,
and maybe their kids would be more distant. Most of it was directed at the
married guys."

Another category to contend with in a society that has been sensitized to stress
reactions in Vietnam veterans is how to differentiate between behavior that is
considered normal and behavior that is not.

Mild forms of depression and mental letdown, jumpiness at loud noises, and
disturbed sleep and dreams may affect many veterans but will diminish with time.
More pronounced problems like continuing nightmares or flashbacks of terrifying
combat experiences may not appear for months and may require professional help.

Military officials say they recognize that nearly every member of the armed
forces in the gulf has experienced some form of stress -- some of it profound,
but most of it mild.

Critics like Dr. Charles Figley of Florida State University, an expert on stress
disorders, says he is unconvinced that the Defense Department is on target. What
he says may be overlooked in the euphoria over the brevity of the ground war is
that any time people stand in harm's way for prolonged periods, they are subject
to consequences that cannot be easily observed or confidently diagnosed.

"Trauma is trauma, fright is fright, whether you're pulling a trigger or you
believe artillery shells containing poisonous gas or biological weapons can
reach you," Dr. Figley said.

Col. M. Richard Fragala, consultant for psychiatry to the Air Force surgeon
general, said stress caused an unspecified number of men and women to be sent
home during the gulf crisis. Most of the cases involved people whose private
lives had been in turmoil.

"If your life is chaotic at home, it will be that much more chaotic in a war
zone," he said. "It's a lot easier to face unknown dangers in the gulf if you
know your ducks are all in a row back home."

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lance Cpl. Joseph Clark, right, who fought in Kuwait, speaking
to a family support group on Staten Island. The services are making an effort to
show concern for the emotional welfare of returning troops. (Vic DeLucia/The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 2, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Malcolm E. Phelps; Physician, 85

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 85 words

DATELINE: EL RENO, Okla., April 1


Dr. Malcom E. Phelps, a founder of the American Academy of Family Physicians,
died Friday. He was 85 years old.

Dr. Phelps was president of the organization, then the American Academy of
General Practice, in 1957. The organization now has 71,000 members.

In 1966 President Lyndon B. Johnson appointed Dr. Phelps field director of
Project Vietnam, a joint effort of the State Department and the American Mecical
Association to provide volunteer doctors to care for sick and wounded Vietnamese
civilians.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 2, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia May Be Last Vietnam War Casualty

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 425 words


To the Editor:

While I applaud your editorial call to normalize relations with Vietnam ("Good
Morning, Vietnam," March 10), you fail to point out that the irrevocable and
lasting impact of the punitive, 16-year United States policy toward Vietnam has
been to drive neighboring Cambodia to the brink of collapse. The long freeze
between Hanoi and Washington may be thawing, but will anyone remember that the
price has been devastating for the innocent victims in Cambodia?

Under the cruel logic of anti-Vietnamism, the United States continues to
destabilize Cambodia by supporting a civil war there. There are at least 80
amputations every week inside Cambodia from mines laid by the fighting factions,
including Western-supported guerrilla forces. Many of the victims are farmers
and children. Meanwhile, aid and trade between Americans and Cambodians are
illegal; it remains the only country in the world denied United Nations
development aid, despite a desperate need for roads, books and health care.

The Bush Administration may have appeared to shift its policy last July, as you
imply, when Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d intimated the United States
would open talks with the Phnom Penh Government and halt aid to the resistance
forces allied to the Khmer Rouge.

However, recent reports on the BBC and Britain's Central Television document
Khmer Rouge munitions warehouses sitting on United States-leased land and verify
that Khmer Rouge guerrillas have been trained in Malaysia by Americans and other
Western allies in the arts of jungle warfare, including laying mines.

When last fall Congress voted $20 million of aid to go to Cambodian women and
children, the impression again was that the United States was going to end the
brutal embargo that was weakening the Cambodians' resolve to defend against a
return of the Khmer Rouge. Ironically, that money has now been earmarked to go
only to the so-called liberated zones along the Thai-Cambodian border --
territory seized by the Khmer Rouge and their partners; most of that territory
is directed by Pol Pot from command posts within Thailand.

The destruction of Cambodia continues today under the guise of punishing
Vietnam, even as the United States professes to inch toward normalizing
relations with Hanoi. In a grim repetition of a previous decade, Cambodia may be
the final unacknowledged casualty of the Vietnam War.

PETER L. STEIN
San Francisco, March 12, 1991

The writer, a television producer at KQED-TV (PBS), has been a radio reporter in
Cambodia.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 2, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia May Be Last Vietnam War Casualty;
Talk to Phnom Penh

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 489 words


To the Editor:

"Good Morning, Vietnam" (editorial, March 10) has its heart in the right place:
reconciliation with Vietnam can begin, 15 years late, because of the victory in
the Persian Gulf. However, you suffer from misperceptions.

From your statement that the United States "until last year" aided "a Cambodian
resistance coalition incorporating the genocidal Khmer Rouge," you imply that
the United States no longer supports that coalition. However, the United States
is pouring millions of dollars into an area of Cambodia controlled by the
Cambodian resistance, widely known to be dominated by the Khmer Rouge.

You were in all likelihood referring to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d's
statement of last July 18 in Paris that the United States would no longer
support seating the coalition in the Cambodian seat at the United Nations; but
the two issues are separate.

You state that Hanoi "still backs hard-liners in Phnom Penh who resist
implementing the United Nations peace plan," painting the Government in Phnom
Penh as the villain. The United Nations plan, as currently configured, would
hand administrative power over to a supreme national council (composed of
members of the resistance coalition and the Phnom Penh Government), which would
run the country and assist the United Nations in planning elections.

The council would be run by consensus, unless there were a deadlock, in which
case decision making and executive power would be delegated to a representative
of the United Nations Secretary General. The plan almost guarantees deadlock.
Thus the United Nations-appointed trustee would have absolute control over the
Cambodian Government, including the ability to remove or appoint senior
ministers. As the United Nations representative would not be Cambodian, this
would clearly violate Cambodian sovereignty and, consequently, the United
Nations Charter.

The United Nations plan provides for disarmament and cantonment of military
forces. But as Hun Sen, the Cambodian Prime Minister, has pointed out, how can
the United Nations disarm a shadowy guerrilla force hiding in the jungles and
mountains of Cambodia and Thailand? Phnom Penh's army is easy to find and would
be easy to disarm, but it would be virtually impossible to find and disarm the
three resistance armies in their entirety. The only force preventing the return
to power of the Khmer Rouge would be handed over to the mercy of the Khmer
Rouge.

The United States, now that it has exorcised the ghost of Vietnam, can begin to
deal with issues in Indochina in a constructive and positive manner. The first
step is to normalize diplomatic and economic relations with Vietnam, lift the
trade embargo on Vietnam and Cambodia, and begin to talk directly with the
government in Phnom Penh.

DONAL PARKS
Washington, March 15, 1991

The writer is researcher for the Vietnam Veterans of America Foundation's
Indochina Project.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 2, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia May Be Last Vietnam War Casualty;
We Won on Battlefield

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 203 words


To the Editor:

You state in "Good Morning, Vietnam" (editorial, March 10) that Hanoi "prevailed
against American power on the battlefield." While opinion differs widely about
our role in Vietnam, history will be clear that we, not Hanoi, won on the
battlefield. The best example is the rout of 80,000 North Vietnam Army regulars
during the 1968 Tet offensive -- one Marine division alone knocked out, never to
reappear, four North Vietnam Army divisions. Yet the Tet offensive was reported
as, and to this day is understood to be, a United States defeat. We lost the
war, but for other reasons.

When it was said of the Persian Gulf war that it would not be another Vietnam,
what that meant was that our military would be free to fight. All of us who
fought in Vietnam can supply anecdotal evidence that we were not free to fight,
that we were handicapped beyond belief, strategically and tactically.
Nevertheless, we were never defeated on the battlefield. Yes, the Republic of
Vietnam was defeated after we withdrew, but American forces never lost a
significant battle.

MALCOLM C. GARLAND
Greensboro, Ga., March 13, 1991

The writer is president, Atlanta Vietnam Veterans Business Association.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 2, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Iraqi Agents and Fronts Listed by the Treasury

BYLINE: By JEFF GERTH

SECTION: Section D; Page 6; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1139 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 1


The Treasury Department, hoping to expose and neutralize a hidden financial and
trading network used by Iraq to acquire military technology, released a list of
52 companies and 37 people today that it has identified as being fronts or
agents for Iraq.

Today's action means that the people and companies, about half of them in
Britain, are now subject to the trade embargo and asset freeze imposed by
President Bush last August following the invasion of Kuwait.

The financial impact in the United States is limited because the Treasury's
action affects only transactions under American jurisdiction, and only two of
the 52 companies identified and none of the people are in the United States.

$1 Billion in Assets

As part of the asset freeze, Treasury officials said they had identified about
$1 billion in Iraqi assets held by American institutions, but much of that stems
from commercial transactions that were under way at the time of the invasion,
like oil or grain sales, rather than military-related procurement.

John E. Robson, Deputy Secretary of the Treasury, told reporters today that the
disclosure of the names "will disrupt the ability of Saddam Hussein or a
successor to employ this network to rebuild Iraq's military capacity or to
divert funds that rightfully belong to the Iraqi people for other nefarious
purposes or personal gain."

He said that some foreign governments had moved to freeze assets of some of the
companies named today, but he declined to provide any details.

Many of those named today had previously been disclosed through law enforcement
investigations and news accounts in the United States and other Western
countries. The companies on the list appear for the most part to be small
private businesses, scattered throughout Europe and the Middle East.

Britain was a key base from which Iraqi agents legally and illegally acquired
military goods and equipment over the last decade.

Mr. Robson declined to disclose details about the activities of those listed.
Describing the Treasury's process in naming someone as an Iraqi front, he said
the information was gathered from a variety of official and unofficial sources
and then weighed aginst a number of qualitative tests. Anyone in American
jurisdiction doing business with Iraq or identified as an Iraqi agent is subject
to civil or criminal prosecution unless he or she gets prior permission from the
Treasury.

Called the 'First Step'

Mr. Robson called today's action the "first step in a series of steps" but
declined to discuss how many other companies or individuals might be under
investigation.

The task is complicated because Iraq is a secretive society where the line
between the private and public sectors is often blurred. Furthermore, Baghdad's
covert network often operated in countries with strict bank secrecy laws, making
it harder to trace the flow of money.

Kroll Associates, a New York private investigative firm hired by the Kuwaiti
Government, has identified a Panamanian management company based in Switzerland
as a secret front for President Hussein's money, according to a report last
month on the CBS-TV News program "60 Minutes." Although the Kuwaiti Government
and its investigators worked with Treasury officials, the management company is
not on the Treasury's list. Mr. Robson said the Treasury was investigating such
hidden assets, but declined to elaborate.

The list of 57 companies included Iraq's central bank and Iraqi Airways, as well
as obscure machine tool, electronics, engineering, shipping and trading
companies in Britain, Jordan and Italy. The list also included 160 ships under
Iraqi control, as well as the 37 people, most of whom were based in Britain,
Jordan and Brazil.

One of the American companies listed, Matrix Churchill, a Cleveland area machine
tool company, is now defunct, its assets having been blocked last September. It
was a subsidiary of a British company and turned up in law enforcement
investigations of Iraqi military acquisitions more than a year ago.  The owner
of the other American company, Bay Industries in Los Angeles, also figured in
those investigations. There was no answer today at the telephone of the Los
Angeles company.

The names were compiled by the Office of Foreign Assets Control, a small
Treasury unit that puts into effect and enforces sanctions against Cambodia,
Cuba, Libya, North Korea and Vietnam.

None Well Known

None of the 37 people listed as working for Iraq were well known. They included
12 people with addresses in Britain; eight in Jordan, five in Brazil, three in
Iraq, two in Italy, and one each in Germany and China.

Following are the companies listed:

Admincheck Ltd., London; Advanced Electronics Development, London; Al-Arabi
Trading Company, Baghdad; Al-Rafidain Shipping Company, Bombay, India; Arab
Petroleum Engineering Company, Amman, Jordan; Arab Projects Company, which had
post office boxes in Jordan, Lebanon and Saudi Arabia; Arab Trans Trade Company,
Alexandria, Egypt; Archi Centre I.C.E. Ltd., London; Archiconsult Ltd., London;
Associated Engineers, England; A.T.E. International Ltd., London; Atlas Air
Conditioning Company, London; Atlas Equipment Company, London; A.W.A.
Engineering Ltd., London.

Banco Brasileiro-Iraquiano, Rio de Janeiro; Bay Industries, Santa Monica,
Calif.; Dominion International, England; Endshire Export Marketing, England;
Euromac Ltd., Middlesex, England; Euromac European Manufacturer Center, Monza,
Italy; Euromac Transporti International, Monza, Italy; Falcon Systems, London;
Geodesigns, England.

Investacast Precision Castings, London; I.P.C. International Ltd., England;
I.P.C. Marketing Ltd., England; Iraqi Airways, Baghdad; Iraqi Allied Services,
England; Iraqi Freight Services, England; Iraqi Reinsurance Company, London;
Iraqi State Enterprise for Foodstuffs Trading, postal boxes in Sri Lanka and
India; Iraqi State Enterprise for Maritime Transport, Bremen, Germany and Amman,
Jordan; Iraqi Trade Center, Dubai, United Arab Emirates; Keencloud Ltd., London.

Matrix Churchill Corp., Cleveland; Meed International Ltd., London; Pandora
Shipping Company, Honduras; Petra Navigation and International Trading Company,
Amman and Aqaba, Jordan, and Baghdad; PMK/Qudos (Liverpool Polytechnic),
England.

Rafidain Bank, Baghdad, with 227 branches in Iraq and others in the Middle East
and London; Rajbrook Ltd., England; Reynolds and Wilson, England; S.M.I. Sewing
Machines, Italy; Sollatek, England; Technology and Development Group Ltd.,
London; T.E.G. Ltd., London; T.M.G. Engineering Ltd., London; T N K Fabrics
Ltd., England; Trading and Maritime Investments, San Lorenzo, Honduras; U.I.
International, England; Unimas Shipping, Alexandria, Egypt, and Whale Shipping
Ltd., Basrah, Iraq.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

For Now, Pride Is Enough for These Ohio Voters

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 13; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 899 words

DATELINE: CLEVELAND, March 29


Flags are still flying along the neat blocks of bungalows on the border of
Cleveland and Euclid. Shops still carry signs urging all who pass to "support
our troops."

And for the moment, at least, George Bush seems to be a part of the patriotic
tableau, an ominous sign for the Democrats. Even some who yearn for a stiff
challenge to President Bush are hard put to name the Democrats who could provide
it.

"He stood up for what I would have done," said Michael Brewer, a 48-year-old
technician in Euclid who did not vote for Mr. Bush in the 1988 Presidential
election. Cary Wayne, a 42-year-old executive recruiter, a Democrat who voted
for both Ronald Reagan and Mr. Bush, said the President "made me very proud to
be an American, not that I wasn't before."

Postwar Glow Lingers

Interviews with about 20 people in this working-class area found an edginess
about the faltering economy, but also the expectation that Mr. Bush would now
turn his attention to problems at hoe.

Richard Stegh, 33, who was laid off from his job at a fiberglass products
factory, said he understood that the war in the Persian Gulf "had to take a
front burner."

But Mr. Stegh, whose house was decorated with one of the larger flags in the
neighborhood, said he hoped that now "things are stable enough in the Middle
East that he can start in on unemployment and education." And the father of two
children -- "I'm playing Mr. Mom," he said, watching the children while his wife
was at work -- had nothing but praise for Mr. Bush.

A great unknown in politics these days is how long Mr. Bush's postwar glow will
last, how long he is seen as part and parcel of yellow ribbons and national
pride. Democrats note that Presidential approval ratings can be extraordinarily
volatile, that the 20 months between now and the 1992 election is a lifetime in
politics and that domestic worries will only grow. Republicans contend that the
war has brought lasting benefits to Mr. Bush.

"The message that working-class people in Ohio had was, This is not going to be
another Vietnam, that we're going to do it right this time," said Brian Berry,
executive director of the Ohio Republican Party. "It was a very clear message."

Behind Bush '100 Percent'

Indeed, in Muldoon's Saloon and Eatery and Buettner's Bakery, on street corners
and stoops, people often responded with patriotic fervor when asked about the
President. "I have two brothers in the service, and when he decided to do this I
was behind him 100 percent," said Laura Barry, a 30-year-old homemaker with two
children and a husband who is a fireman. "You can't let somebody like that take
over a country," she said, referring to Iraq's President, Saddam Hussein.

The Democrats, Mrs. Barry said, seemed "passive.'

Mike Lynch, a 22-year-old employee of an appliance service shop who voted for
Michael S. Dukakis, the Democratic nominee in 1988, said of Mr. Bush: "I think
he's shown his ability to lead in the gulf. Everything else, I really haven't
thought that much about."

This is an area where many people are accustomed to voting Democratic in state
and local races and Republican for the President. Tim Hagan, a Democrat who is a
Cuyahoga County Commissioner, said, "These people are very, very patriotic and
would rally to the flag and to the President." The glow from the war, he said,
"has not diminished dramatically."

Still, there is some concern here that the war may not be completely over, or
that the allied forces may have stopped too soon. "They should be going after
Saddam," said Mary Szasz, behind the counter of Northshore Video. "What I
thought they should have done is gone all the way to Baghdad."

And many people here voiced the discontent with conditions on the the home
front.

Ed Savol, a 40-year-old manager of a Sunoco service station who voted for Mr.
Bush, said the allied success left a lot of good feelings here. But he was quick
to respond when asked what Mr. Bush should be doing now.

"Take care of his own," Mr. Savol said. "Take care of his own people. Come up
with an educational program, a job program. Take care of the people here."

A 'Forgotten Party'

The Democrats hope to capitalize on Mr. Bush's domestic shortcomings. But their
weakness was apparent here.

For instance, Glynn Douglas, the vice president of United Auto Workers Local
2262 and a fierce critic of Mr. Bush, nevertheless had some difficulty listing
the Democrats who could beat him next year. "I hate to say this, but in all
honesty, I don't see anybody on the horizon right now," he said, adding that he
still had hopes.

Nelson Whales, a 51-year-old machinist, said: "It seems like the Democrats are
turning into a forgotten party, almost a joke. Like, 'Who are they going to come
up with this time?' "

Mr. Whales, who considers himself a Democrat, said with a trace of sadness:
"Democrats have always been blue-collar worker, gung-ho. And it seems like
nobody's there anymore."

And Ann Shaughnessy, a 39-year-old sewing machine operator, said she worried
about jobs' going to foreign workers; the trade issue was probably where Mr.
Bush would lose her vote, she said.

But Mrs. Shaughnessy, an 18-year employee of the General Motors Corporation,
added that the Democrats "haven't offered me anybody yet."

"Give me somebody who shows me they're going to help people who want to work,"
she said.


LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "He stood up for what I would have done," said Michael Brewer.;
"I have two brothers in the service, and when he decided to do this I was behind
him 100 percent," said Laura Barry.; "In all honesty, I don't see anybody on the
horizon right now," said Glynn Douglas.  (Roger Mastroianni for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Pop;
A Rock Pioneer of the 50's And Her Rhythm-and-Blues

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 328 words


Recognition of her historical place in rock-and-roll has come belatedly to
LaVern Baker, the pioneering rhythm-and-blues singer who is appearing at the
Village Gate on Friday and Saturday evenings through next weekend. More than 20
years ago, Miss Baker, whose 1950's hits included "Tweedlee Dee," "Jim Dandy"
and "I Cried a Tear," left the United States to entertain American troops in
Vietnam and remained abroad.

In 1988, she resurfaced at Atlantic Records' 40th anniversary show at Madison
Square Garden. It turned out she had been running a nightclub in the
Philippines. Last spring, she replaced Ruth Brown in the Broadway revue "Black
and Blue," and this January she became the second solo female performer
(following Aretha Franklin) to be inducted into the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame.

Like Miss Brown, Atlantic Records' other leading female star of the 50's, Miss
Baker was a transitional figure between the earthy blues of Bessie Smith and the
somewhat less declamatory style of Motown's early pop-soul singers. Although her
vocal strength is less than roof-raising, Miss Baker, who is now 61, remains in
firm command of a blunt, declarative rhythm-and-blues style that over the years
has acquired a calmer, statelier air. What helped her keep in shape, she joked
at Friday's early show, was all the shouting that accompanied bringing up four
children and three dogs.

Most of Miss Baker's early show on Friday was spent reprising her hits. Playful
numbers like "Tweedlee Dee" and "Jim Dandy" had plenty of rhythmic bounce but
lacked the raw timbral scoops that made the original recorded versions so
irresistibly frisky. The singer, who was backed by an able soul quintet,
reserved her full concentration for songs like "Shake a Hand," "Nobody Knows You
When You're Down and Out" and a slow, grinding rhythm-and-blues rendition of
"Body and Soul" that demonstrated her ability to deliver extended phrases in
full voice without faltering.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Graham Greene, 86, Dies; Novelist of the Soul

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 3596 words


Graham Greene, the British author whose novels of suspense and moral ambiguity
plumbed the sordid politics of the modern world and the inner torments of
mankind, died yesterday at La Providence Hospital in Vevey, near Lake Geneva in
Switzerland. He was 86 years old.

The official cause of death was not immediately known, but his daughter,
Caroline Bourget, told Reuters that her father died of a blood disease. Mr.
Greene lived in an apartment in Antibes, France, but had traveled all over the
world in search of subject matter during his 60-year writing career.

Among Mr. Greene's 24 novels, many of which were adapted into films, were "The
Power and the Glory," "The Heart of the Matter," "The Third Man," "The Quiet
American," "Our Man in Havana," "The Comedians," "The Honorary Consul" and "The
Human Factor."

27 Languages, 20 Million Copies

His plays included "The Living Room," "The Potting Shed" and "The Complaisant
Lover," and he wrote dozens of short stories. His work was translated into 27
languages and sold more than 20 million copies in hard-cover and paperback
editions.

He also wrote travel books, essays and children's stories, and two
autobiographies, "A Sort of Life" and "Ways of Escape." An occasional
contributor to newspapers and magazines, he even found time to write strong
letters to the editor on political and literary matters.

That Mr. Greene never received the Nobel Prize in Literature was a source of
regret and astonishment to many readers and publishing professionals.

In his outspoken comments on world affairs in fiction and in fact -- including
criticism of American military intervention in Vietnam and in Central America --
Mr. Greene felt an obligation to express his views first and foremost as a
moralist. He was a convert to Catholicism but not, he asserted, a Catholic
writer.

"I think a writer ought to be a bit of grit in the state machine," he once said.
"That applies to a democratic state machine, a socialist state machine or a
Communist state machine."

Mr. Greene was a superb storyteller with a gift for provoking controversy by
writing topical novels in political settings. But many of his deepest concerns
were spiritual: a soul working out its salvation or damnation amid the paradoxes
and anomalies of 20th-century existence.

Spiritual problems, however, were frequently overshadowed, especially for
readers in this country, by Mr. Greene's distaste for what he regarded as
American hypocrisy and materialism. "The Quiet American" (1956) and "The
Comedians" (1966), for example, offended some readers because of their criticism
of United States policies in Vietnam and Haiti.

Besides serious fiction, Mr. Greene also wrote what he described as
"entertainments." These -- "Orient Express," "This Gun for Hire," "Brighton
Rock" and "Our Man in Havana," for instance -- were first-rate novels of crime
and intrigue. But they, too, showed a profound interest in the interplay of
morality and abnormal behavior. "Brighton Rock," he wrote in his 1980
autobiography, "Ways of Escape," was "perhaps one of the best I ever wrote."

In addition, Mr. Greene was often labeled a Roman Catholic writer, a description
that annoyed him but that nevertheless colored understanding of his work. He was
indeed a convert to Catholicism and he did deal with doctrinal issues, but he
insisted that he was not a church publicist.

Roman Catholic Ideas But Church Objections

"Only a few of my books have a religious emphasis -- 'Brighton Rock,' 'The Power
and the Glory,' 'The End of the Affair' and 'The Heart of the Matter' -- but I
don't consider myself a Catholic writer, but a writer who took characters with
Catholic ideas as his material," Mr. Greene said in an interview with Alden
Whitman of The New York Times in Paris in 1967. "After all, one of my novels,
'The Power and the Glory,' was condemned by the Holy Office in 1951."

That book, in which the cult of the spiritual holds back the people, whose true
enemies are the priests, shocked many Catholics. "I was not upset," Mr. Greene
said in 1967. "In a private audience, Pope Paul told me he had read the novel
and liked it. 'Parts of your novels will always offend some Catholics, but you
should not bother,' the Pope said."

Later, in a 1978 interview, Mr. Greene acknowledged a lingering skepticism about
religion, and particularly Catholicism:

"I don't like many English Catholics," he said. "I don't like conventional
religious piety. I'm more at ease with the Catholicism of Catholic countries.
I've always found it difficult to believe in God. I suppose I'd now call myself
a Catholic atheist."

The Catholic-writer label was first affixed when "Brighton Rock" was published,
and then more firmly after the publication of "The Heart of the Matter," one of
his most popular books with both critics and public, though Mr. Greene said he
thought it flawed. After the book came out, he wrote in 1980, "at a stroke I
found myself regarded as a Catholic author in England, Europe and America -- the
last title to which I had ever aspired."

At His Works' Center, A Sense of Evil

Yet Mr. Greene did not deny that he viewed the world through a moralist's eyes.
This was also the conclusion of many critics. One critic, Richard Church, a
Briton, summed up the prevailing attitude:

"He sees his characters, and the scenes in which they make their penance, with
an eye that elongates them and draws them into gestures made in a garish light.
He delights to expose the raw nerves of evil, showing it as a force in the
world, a skeletonlike figure working visible mischief in the ordinary everyday
affairs of men and women and children."

Mr. Greene's writer's appeal, however, extended beyond readers concerned with
good and evil to encompass those who liked a good story. He had some of the
narrative flair of Robert Louis Stevenson, to whom he was related. He had,
moreover, a talent for depicting local color, which he gathered at first hand; a
keen sense of the dramatic; an ear for dialogue, and skill in pacing his prose.

Mr. Greene's backgrounds and situations often grew out of his own wanderings. In
the late 1930's, he wrote, "a restlessness set in then which has never quite
been allayed; a desire to be a spectator of history, history in which I was
concerned myself."

Again and again in his autobiography, Mr. Greene stressed this desire to be on
the edge of danger; writing of his visits to Indochina, he mentions being
attracted by the women, the evening light and, "above all, by the feeling of
exhilaration which a measure of danger brings to a visitor with a return
ticket."

Prose That Traveled Too Swiftly to Stall

"The average Greene novel," wrote the critic Adam de Hegedus, "seems to be based
on a theory which is not unlike that principle of aerodynamics according to
which the aircraft must maintain a specific speed or else it would tumble down.
This speed Greene achieves by a masterly selection of detail, by a splendid
economy of language and by swift and frequent changes of scene."

Mr. Greene had a somewhat puffy face and eyes that looked down warily from his
6-foot 2-inch height. His manner was generally affable but shy. In talking, he
had a tendency to skip over his R's.

He had an obvious fondness for order and quiet that contrasted with his
adventurous life. Born Oct. 2, 1904, in Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, England, he
was one of four sons of Canon Charles Henry Greene and the former Marion Raymond
Greene, who were cousins. Graham attended Berkhamsted School, of which his
father was headmaster, and then Balliol College, Oxford. His childhood, he said,
was unhappy.

The Deadliest of Games Becomes a Habit

The biographer Norman Sherry, in "The Life of Graham Greene, Volume I:
1904-1939" (Viking, 1989), described a crisis that the future author went
through in his second-to-last year at Berkhamsted: two classmates persecuted him
-- among other things, for being bad at games -- and he suffered a nervous
collapse.

His family then sent him to a psychoanalyst in London, prompting an experience
that in the long run, Mr. Sherry wrote, "may well have established his life's
pattern of escaping from the impossible or the boring into unknown and dangerous
environments which would stimulate, offer fresh experiences and also provide
copy for his novels."

Mr. Greene himself wrote later that "the psychoanalysis fixed the boredom as
hypo fixes the image on a negative." So he took to playing Russian roulette with
an elder brother's revolver.

"I slipped the bullet into a chamber and, holding the revolver behind my back,
spun the chambers round," he recalled. "I put the muzzle of the revolver to my
right ear and pulled the trigger. There was a minute click, and looking down the
chamber I could see that the charge had moved into place. I was out by one."

Mr. Greene took the revolver with him to Balliol and continued to play Russian
roulette until he found that "I was beginning to pull the trigger about as
casually as I might take an aspirin tablet."

Later on, Mr. Greene experimented with opium, marched across Liberia and went,
in wartime, into Malaya, Kenya and Indochina.

Out of Oxford, where he had briefly been a member of the Communist Party, Mr.
Greene worked as a copy editor on The Times of London from 1926 to 1930. "I am
journalistically minded," he once said. And he fiercely took issue with those
who questioned the journalistic accuracy of his fiction, especially in "The
Quiet American."

"Some critics have referred to a strange violent 'seedy' region of the mind (why
did I ever popularize that last adjective?) which they call Greeneland, and I
have sometimes wondered whether they go round the world blinkered," he wrote
later. " 'This is Indochina,' I want to exclaim, 'this is Mexico, this is Sierra
Leone carefully and accurately described. I have been a newspaper correspondent
as well as a novelist. I assure you that the dead child lay in the ditch in just
that attitude. In the canal of Phat Diem the bodies stuck out of the water. But
I know that argument is useless. They won't believe the world they haven't
noticed is like that."

His Fiancee's Religion Becomes His Own

It was just before he joined The Times that he became a convert to Catholicism
from Anglicanism. Summarizing the experience, the psychiatrist and author Robert
Coles wrote in 1989, in The New York Times Book Review, that it came about
through Mr. Greene's relationship with his future wife, Vivien Dayrell-Browning,
herself a convert to Catholicism. Her "moral and religious preoccupations became
very much his," Dr. Coles wrote, and "at the age of 22, he was received into the
Roman Catholic Church."

In an interview published in 1983, Mr. Greene said a first step in the process
was the day when, while attending a Catholic service, "I slipped a note into a
collection box, asking for instruction because my fiancee was Catholic.

"I wanted a better grasp of the nature of her faith. I had no thought of
becoming a convert myself."

His subsequent conversion, he said, "was purely intellectual," because of the
arguments of a priest, a Father Trollope, "which persuaded me that God's
existence was a probability."

On another occasion, Mr. Greene wrote that it was not until years later, when he
had first traveled to Mexico, that he found "emotional belief" as opposed to
intellectual acceptance of his religion.

A year after his conversion, Mr. Greene married Miss Dayrell-Browning. The
couple had a son and a daughter and then separated in the 1960's. His daughter,
Caroline Bourget, lives in Jongny, Switzerland. His son, Francis, lives in
Devon, England.

Mr. Greene's first two novels, "The Man Within" and "The Name of Action," were
written while he was on The Times. He left that newspaper in 1930 to become a
movie critic, first for the periodical Night and Day and then for The Spectator,
for the next 10 years. Early in this period he began his entertainments ("The
difference between an entertainment and a novel is about 20,000 words") with
"Orient Express," which was titled "Stamboul Train" in Britain.

This thriller almost immediately became popular, as were most of his in that
genre. His reputation as a novelist soared with "Brighton Rock," published in
1938, which deals with homicide in the British resort town of Brighton.
International renown came in the years after the war, especially with "The Heart
of the Matter" in 1948.

The scene of this novel, considered among his best, is in West Africa, where Mr.
Greene did intelligence work for the British Government during World War II. The
protagonist is Maj. Henry Scobie, an essentially commonplace man capable of pity
to the point of obsession. It is pity that does the major in. Although a Roman
Catholic, his sympathy for, and understanding of, his wife and his mistress lead
him to commit suicide to keep from hurting their feelings. The burden of love
proves too much for him.

'The Quiet American' Is an American Success

Among Mr. Greene's big successes in this country was "The Quiet American,"
published in 1956. The novel is a tart study of an American Government do-gooder
in Saigon during the anti-French uprisings of the mid-1950's. The writer
insisted that he was not anti-American and that his novel recorded only what he
saw in Saigon, where he was the correspondent, in 1954, for The New Republic.

Mr. Greene was especially fond of "The Power and the Glory," a novel published
in 1940. It is the story of a manhunt in the jungles and mountains of Mexico.
The hunted is the last priest in a state where religion is outlawed: an
imperfect priest, prey to alcohol and lust, yet a humble man who loves God.

Many of Mr. Greene's books were made into movies, but he said he felt the movies
did not serve him well. "I hate the adaptations of my books, except when I do
them myself, and then I don't always like them," he said.

Once he had attained success, Mr. Greene spent much of his time traveling. But
he worked during these journeys, too, dictating and revising. "I like writing
after breakfast," he explained, "and revising after a good dinner, when I have
Dutch courage."

He was a steady writer who was not afraid to discard projects, even when they
were well advanced, if they failed to satisfy him. "I hope I'm an artist," he
told a visitor in 1967; on another occasion, in a bleaker mood, he remarked, "I
have no talent; it's just a question of working, of being willing to put in the
time."

The Effects of Place And of Henry James

Mr. Greene was often asked what other writers had influenced him, and for this
he had a ready reply:

"What one reads doesn't influence one as much as where one is. Still, a great
many writers have had their effect on me. The serious ones, I guess, were Ford
Madox Ford, Joseph Conrad and Henry James. He was my idol, but to say he
influenced me is a bit absurd -- like saying a mountain influenced a mouse."

Mr. Greene's structuring of his novels seemed ideally suited to the camera and
the stage. "I have a theatrical mind," he once said. But his own plays --
including "The Living Room," "The Potting Shed," "The Complaisant Lover,"
"Carving a Statue" and "The Return of A. J. Raffles" -- were not outstandingly
successful.

Mr. Greene's long writing career made him wealthy as well as famous. He was
little affected, because he preferred privacy to basking in adulation. He
enjoyed his income, nonetheless, for it permitted him to live in considerable
comfort and to eat well.

Of his many works, "The Honorary Consul," he said, was especially hard to write,
and "perhaps the novel I prefer to all the others," while "Travels With My Aunt"
was "the only book I have written for the fun of it." "Travels With My Aunt,"
which came out in 1969, is a lighthearted novel about a retired bank employee
traveling around the world with 75-year-old dowager who has a black lover named
Wordsworth.

Mr. Greene's literary fame was recognized formally in 1966, when he was named by
Queen Elizabeth II as a Companion of Honor. In 1986, he received one of the
highest British honors, the Order of Merit.

Critical enthusiasm waned for Mr. Greene's later works. "The Honorary Consul"
(1973), "The Human Factor" (1978) and "The Captain and the Enemy" (1988) all
received uneven reviews.

Mr. Greene himself had long since taken a detached view of questions of literary
success or failure. Striking the understated note of guilt and gloom that was
catnip to his loyal readers, he told an interviewer in 1971: "One fails in all
sorts of ways in life, doesn't one, which are much more important than writing
books. In human relations and that sort of thing."

But another estimation of his feelings about his work came in "Ways of Escape,"
when he wrote, "Writing is a form of therapy; sometimes I wonder how all those
who do not write, compose or paint can manage to escape the madness, the
melancholia, the panic fear which is inherent in the human situation."

Opening Words on the Moral Anxieties of an Anguished Century

In the course of a career that spanned more than six decades, Graham Greene
wrote 24 novels, along with many short stories, essays and plays and two volumes
of autobiography. Here is a sampling from the opening chapters of some of his
novels and a list of some major works.

Mr. Tench went out to look for his ether cylinder: out into the blazing Mexican
sun and the bleaching dust. A few buzzards looked down from the roof with shabby
indifference: he wasn't carrion yet. A faint feeling of rebellion stirred in Mr.
Tench's heart, and he wrenched up a piece of the road with splintering
fingernails and tossed it feebly up at them. One of them rose and flapped across
the town: over the tiny plaza, over the bust of an ex-president, ex-general,
ex-human being, over the two stalls which sold mineral water, towards the river
and the sea. It wouldn't find anything there: the sharks looked after the
carrion on that side. Mr. Tench went on across the plaza.

He said "Buenos dias" to a man with a gun who sat in a small patch of shade
against a wall. But it wasn't like England: the man said nothing at all, just
stared malevolently up at Mr. Tench, as if he had never had any dealings with
the foreigner, as if Mr. Tench were not responsible for his two gold bicuspid
teeth.

-- From "The Power and the Glory" (1940, Viking)

Wilson sat on the balcony of the Bedford Hotel with his bald pink knees thrust
against the ironwork. It was Sunday and the Cathedral bell clanged for matins.
On the other side of Bond Street, in the windows of the High School, sat the
young negresses in dark-blue gym smocks engaged on the interminable task of
trying to wave their wirespring hair. Wilson stroked his very young moustache
and dreamed, waiting for his gin-and-bitters.

Sitting there, facing Bond Street, he had his face turned to the sea. His pallor
showed how recently he had emerged from it into the port: so did his lack of
interest in the schoolgirls opposite.

-- From "The Heart of the Matter" (1948, Viking)

One never knows when the blow may fall. When I saw Rollo Martins first I made
this note on him for my security police files: "In normal circumstances a
cheerful fool. Drinks too much and may cause a little trouble. Whenever a woman
passes raises his eyes and makes some comment, but I get the impression that
really he'd rather not be bothered. Has never really grown up and perhaps that
accounts for the way he worshiped Lime." I wrote there that phrase "in normal
circumstances" because I met him first at Harry Lime's funeral. It was February,
and the gravediggers had been forced to use electric drills to open the frozen
ground in Vienna's Central Cemetery. It was as if even nature were doing its
best to reject Lime, but we got him in at last and laid the earth back on him
like bricks.

-- From "The Third Man" (1950, Viking)

After dinner I sat and waited for Pyle in my room over the rue Catinat: he had
said, "I'll be with you at latest by 10," and when midnight had struck I
couldn't stay quiet any longer and went down into the street. A lot of old women
in black trousers squatted on the landing; it was February and I suppose too hot
for them in bed. One trishaw driver pedaled slowly by towards the river front,
and I could see lamps burning where they had disembarked the new American
planes. There was no sign of Pyle anywhere in the long street.

Of course, I told myself, he might have been detained for some reason at the
American Legation, but surely in that case he would have telephoned to the
restaurant -- he was very meticulous about small courtesies. I turned to go
indoors when I saw a girl waiting in the next doorway. I couldn't see her face,
only the white silk trousers and the long flowered robe, but I knew her for all
that.

-- From "The Quiet American" (1956, Viking)

Novels

Orient Express (1932)
This Gun for Hire (1936)
Brighton Rock (1938)
The Confidential Agent (1939)
The Power and the Glory (1940)
The Ministry of Fear (1943)
The Heart of the Matter (1948)
The Third Man (1950)
The End of the Affair (1951)
The Quiet American (1956)
Our Man in Havana (1958)
A Burnt-Out Case (1961)
The Comedians (1966)
The Honorary Consul (1973)
The Human Factor (1978)
The Tenth Man (1985)

Travel

Journey Without Maps (1936)

Plays

The Living Room (1953)
The Potting Shed (1957)
The Complaisant Lover (1959)

Autobiography

A Sort of Life (1971)
Ways of Escape (1980)

NAME: Graham Greene

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Graham Greene in 1985. (David Montgomery) (pg. A1); Graham
Greene in 1931 (The New York Times); Mr. Greene after "The Comedians" was
published in 1966 (Karsh Ottawa); Mr. Greene, right, gathering material for "The
Quiet American" in French Indochina in 1951. (Black Star) (pg. B15)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 5, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR;
U.S. URGES TURKEY TO OPEN BORDERS TO FLEEING KURDS

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1374 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 4


Despite domestic and foreign pressure to help thousands of Kurds attempting to
flee the Iraqi Army, the United States limited its actions today to calling on
Turkey to open its borders to the refugees.

In talks with the American Ambassador, Morton I. Abramowitz, the Turkish
Government refused the American request, saying it could not afford to permit a
mass entry of perhaps as many as 500,000 refugees.

Saying that Turkey could not afford to deal with a mass migration and would keep
its borders closed, the Turks called for international relief to help them cope
with the refugee crush they expect. In comparison, Iran said it would admit more
than a million Kurds who it said were on its border with Iraq, and also appealed
for international aid. [Page A8.]

No Iraqi Response to U.N.

Iraq today did not formally respond to the United Nations Security Council
resolution, approved Wednesday, that links an end to the war and the lifting of
most sanctions to Baghdad's acceptance of tough military and financial
conditions. [Page A9.]

At a news conference today in Newport Beach, Calif., after meeting with Prime
Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan, President Bush said, "I condemn Saddam
Hussein's brutality against his own people." But he swept aside criticism of his
handling of the civil war by reiterating that he wanted to guarantee that
American ground forces did not get bogged in the conflict.

Without specifying what action he would take, he added, "We will do what we can
to help the Kurdish refugees."

Attacks Still Reported

Kurdish refugees continued to jam roads leading to Turkey and Iran and there
were reports that Iraqi soldiers were still attacking them. The Kurdish revolt,
now quelled by forces loyal to President Saddam Hussein, originated after
American-led forces drove Iraq out of Kuwait and after repeated calls by from
President Bush for the removal of Mr. Hussein. The Administration then decided
not to intervene in the Iraqi domestic conflict.

Despite Mr. Bush's decision, the Voice of Free Iraq, an opposition radio station
broadcasting from Saudi Arabia that is widely believed to have American
financial support, has repeatedly appealed to the Iraqi people in recent weeks
to stage armed revolts against Mr. Hussein.

As recently as March 29, according to the British Broadcasting Corporation,
which monitors the station, the Voice of Free Iraq called for the "formation of
the unified field command of all sides of the patriotic opposition movement" to
strengthen the effort to "swoop on the regime of the Saddam Hussein gang and
destroy it."

It is unclear whether the station's broadcasts have been approved by the United
States or coordinated with Washington.

American officials, who appeared to be groping for a response to the latest
developments in Iraq, said they were not planning to provide much new money for
refugee aid beyond the $36 million already pledged to international relief
organizations helping people in the region who have been displaced since Iraq
invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2. They also said there was little else they could do
immediately to help the Kurds.

Meeting With Kaifu

With President Bush and many of his senior foreign policy aides in California
for the meeting with Mr. Kaifu, the Administration did not seem to be focused on
Iraq today, despite mounting criticism here and abroad that it has blundered
since the war ended by not aiding Kurdish and Shiite insurrections against Mr.
Hussein. The rebellions appear to have been crushed this week by the Iraqi Army.

Democrats and Republicans in Congress added to the criticism today.

Senator Al Gore, Democrat of Tennessee, said the Administration's policy of
refusing to "risk undermining the viability of Saddam's Government is a cruel
irony and mistake in judgment."

'Moral High Ground'

Representative Henry J. Hyde, Republican of Illinois and an influential member
of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, warned that "Democrats could gain the
moral high ground if the Administration plays out Hungary in 1956 and Prague in
1968 all over again."

Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York said, "The Administration is
so paranoid about getting sucked into another Vietnam. that we fail to realize
the desperate need for food, transportation, clothing and getting Turkey to open
their doors."

Other members of Congress said they wanted to give the Administration the
benefit of the doubt.

'A Correct Policy'

Representative Lee H. Hamilton, Democrat of Indiana, said "the policy of
non-intervention is basically a correct policy. It's a very tough judgment."

Prime Minister John Major of Britain sent a message to Mr. Bush today urging a
"massive international effort" to aid the Kurds. The British Government
announced that it was granting $1.77 million in emergency relief for Kurdish
refugees.

In an effort to prod the White House into following the British example, some
State Department planners worked today on a proposal to be submitted to the
National Security Council to send food and other supplies to Kurdish refugees
already in Turkey, but officials conceded that such assistance would do little
for the vast majority of Kurds still trying to escape Iraq.

Explaining Administration policy, a State Department spokesman, Richard Boucher,
said: "We are acting with other countries in the United Nations to get
international condemnation. I think we've been talking all along about the
refugee programs that have been put in place in neighboring countries to Iraq,
the efforts that we have made to support the international assistance effort to
refugees -- the camps that have been set up."

The State Department held a second day of talks today with Iraqi dissidents, but
in a sign that the discussions were not influencing the Administration's policy
of not intervening in the civil war, the Americans who attended were lower-level
officials.

"We are still not happy," said Najmaldin Karim, one of the Kurds who met with
Edmund Hull, the State Department's director of Northern Gulf Affairs. "We feel
the Kurds have been betrayed. The Kurdish leaders were cautious until President
Bush called on the people and army to rise up."

Dr. Karim, a surgeon who lives in the United States, said he stressed that the
Kurds need humanitarian assistance for resettlement. "They said we had a point,"
he said, but the Administration did not offer anything specific.

'Murderous Reprisals' Feared

"These meetings are too little too late," said Representative Nita M. Lowey,
Democrat of New York. "I'm very concerned there could be another round of
murderous reprisals. We still have an opportunity to use influence as an
occupying power. The Administration has to clarify its goals."

Other Kurdish leaders, fearing that what they call "genocide" is about to befall
their people, expressed bitter resentment at the Administration.

"History is repeating itself," said Bakhtiar Amin, secretary general of the
Kurdish Institute, a human-rights organization based in Paris. "The
Administration encouraged the Iraqi people to rise up against the tyrannical
regime and called Saddam Hussein the new Hitler. Now they have turned their back
on us and given a green light to the regime to massacre the people."

British Appeal to Bush

LONDON, April 4 (Special to The New York Times) -- The British Government,
America's staunchest European ally in the war against Iraq, has appealed in
growing consternation to President Bush and the United Nations to help hundreds
of thousands of Kurdish refugees fleeing from defeat by Iraqi forces.

Prime Minister John Major broke off an Easter holiday tonight and publicly
pledged about $35 million to an expected United Nations appeal. Earlier in the
day, an emergency $1.77 million British contribution was announced for two
planeloads of tents, blankets, and clothing to be flown to Turkey.

Stung by a call by his predecessor, Margaret Thatcher, on Wednesday for
political leaders to do something quickly to save the Kurds from reprisal and
starvation, Mr. Major sent an urgent message to the White House at 2 A.M. today
calling for a "massive international effort" to help them.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Kurdish refugees from Iraq trying to cross the border into
Turkey, which has barred a mass migration. (Agence France-Presse) (pg. A1);
Prime Minister John Major announcing that Britain plans to send aid to Kurdish
refugees. (Associated Press) (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 5, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Washington at Work;
Clark Clifford, Symbol of the Permanent Capital, Is Faced With a Dilemma

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1557 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 4


To many, Clark M. Clifford is the political equivalent of the ballplayer who
stays in the game long after he is unable to hit a fastball, or the boxer who
finds he can no longer duck the blows.

To others, the man who is a symbol of the permanent Washington also stands for
something else -- someone who heeds the call to public service and ends up using
that experience to enrich himself handsomely.

At a time when he was expected to savor the autumn of a remarkable half century
at the intersection of government and the practice of law, with his memoirs to
be in the bookstores next month, the 84-year-old vizier of Democratic Presidents
and politicians is struggling to uphold his reputation. Mr. Clifford is faced
with the dilemma of appearing either to have been duped by Middle Eastern money
men or to be guilty of deceiving Federal regulators.

"I have a choice of either seeming stupid or venal," he said with a glum
resignation in an interview in his richly paneled office here.

2 Investigations Under Way

The issue is this: Did Mr. Clifford knowingly mislead Government regulators
about a bank holding company of which he been chairman for 10 years? The Federal
Reserve and the Manhattan District Attorney are both investigating whether the
Arab investors in the bank, First American Bankshares Inc., were illegally
fronting for the Luxembourg-based Bank of Credit and Commerce International,
which has been involved in laundering money for drug dealers.

Federal regulators approved the charter of First American in 1981, substantially
on Mr. Clifford's assurances that neither the Bank of Credit and Commerce nor
any other hidden interest would be involved.

Denying any knowledge of the link to the Luxembourg bank, Mr. Clifford has been
forced to press the embarrassing case that despite having worked successfully
all his life to create the notion that no one else could grasp a situation as
clearly as he, he had been totally gulled.

"I have been deceived and I view this all with a deep sense of grief," he said,
appearing the essence of pained earnestness. "This is the first time in 62 years
that I've had any doubt cast on my character, any cloud attached to my
behavior."

Surrounded by Counselors

The man whose advice was avidly sought by so many corporate and political
leaders is now obliged to surround himself with a bevy of counselors of his own.
He has lawyers in New York and Washington, as well as a public relations
consultant.

Clark McAdams Clifford began as a junior naval assistant in the White House
under President Harry S. Truman in 1945, and rose to mastermind Mr. Truman's
come-from-behind victory over Thomas E. Dewey three years later.

Mr. Clifford served as President John F. Kennedy's personal lawyer, advising him
on public and deeply private matters. As Defense Secretary under President
Lyndon B. Johnson, Mr. Clifford's growing doubts about the Vietnam War became
the Johnson Administration's and eventually the President's doubts.

Mr. Clifford said it was especially painful that investigation of his role in
the bank comes just before the publication of his memoirs, "Counsel to the
President." Excerpts of his book, to be published by Random House, have recently
appeared in the New Yorker magazine. He has felt obliged to add a footnote. No
event in his career, he writes, "has caused me greater anger and outrage" than
the bank investigation.

Some Well-Timed Luck

People who achieve astounding success like Clark Clifford usually have a variety
of gifts, including charm and intelligence, but the mix almost always includes a
bit of well-timed luck. Mr. Clifford's good fortune was having a friend from his
native St. Louis who had him assigned to the White House as a junior naval aide.

In his memoirs he recounts how his first chores included tasks like redesigning
the Presidential seal. The rest of the book is an account of how he went on to
affect the institution symbolized by that seal. Indeed, the Washington of today
is in some ways a creation of Clark Clifford. He helped shape the modern
Department of Defense, the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence
Agency and the role of White House counsel.

Mr. Clifford arranged Truman's card games. In one of the most delightful
passages in the book, he recounts a poker game with the President and Winston
Churchill on a train ride to Fulton, Mo., where Churchill gave his famous "Iron
Curtain" speech in 1946. Churchill was a poor poker player, but Truman
instructed the other players to be sure that he lost but not too badly. Several
hands were thrown, and Churchill left the train only $250 poorer.

While Mr. Clifford is usually associated with his role in the Government, he
served in it for fewer than six years. In this he is emblematic of a special
breed of Washington lawyer-lobbyist. They wield great influence because of their
familiarity with how the Government works, and are paid handsomely to see that a
law or regulation favors a client.

Business executives typically find Congress and the Federal bureaucracy a
puzzling, chaotic institution. It is in this area that Mr. Clifford's rich
resume and dazzlingly confident manner have served him well.

Kennedy once joked that Clark Clifford was someone who did not want to profit
from his his public service as did so many others. "All he asks in return," the
President said, "is merely for us to advertise his law firm on the backs of
one-dollar bills."

Even without the benefit of such advertising, Mr. Clifford has represented many
of the nation's largest corporations.

Charles Peters, editor of the Washington Monthly, said Mr. Clifford and lawyers
like him were typical of those who came to Washington as idealists and moved on
to selling influence. "The betrayal of the public interest was set by those guys
who sold the knowledge they had acquired through public service," he said.

Their greatest disservice, Mr. Peters added, "was to make to make it a perfectly
respectable career for young lawyers to emulate."

Lloyd Cutler, another venerable Washington lawyer, said Mr. Clifford's success
was "not as an influence person, but as a very good lawyer -- people value his
very good judgment and his judgment about how Washington works."

Tall, with a deeply lined face and a shock of white hair, he is an extraordinary
physical presentation, typically attired in a dark double-breasted suit and
serious neckties. While many men look like popinjays in white tie and tails, Mr.
Clifford looks as if the outfit were designed around him. These days, he
conserves energy by taking a nap after lunch.

Mr. Clifford, a onetime drama student at Washington University, exudes a
strikingly theatrical manner. He often puts his hands together at the fingertips
to form what some call "the Clifford tent," a posture that suggests deep
contemplation.

Joan Claybrook, who headed the National Highway and Transportation Safety
Administration in the Carter Administration, recalled how Mr. Clifford
introduced himself on the phone in 1978, saying, "I'm a Washington lawyer and
I've been asked by Harvey Firestone to represent the company, and I'd like to
come see you." She refused, believing it would have been improper because she
had to decide a case involving Firestone.

In a separate incident involving a recall of Firestone tires that were found
unsafe by the Government, Ms. Claybrook said Mr. Clifford, whose primary
interest seemed to be keeping the issue out of the news, did not turn over some
documents until ordered to do so by a court.

When they negotiated the tire recall "his bottom line was financial," she said.
"He said the company would spend only $300 million even if that didn't cover all
the tires."

In the bank matter, Mr. Clifford has offered a two-tiered defense. First, he
said, neither he nor his junior partner, Robert Altman, knew that the Bank of
Credit and Commrce held any interest in First American. His second line of
defense is that is even if the Luxembourg bank secretly owned more than 25
percent of First American in violation of the law, it was only a technical
violation. The law exists, he said, to prevent an outside interest from
controlling a bank; even if there was a hidden interest, it exercised no
control.

That was because neither the Bank of Credit and Commerce's shareholders nor
those of First American could exercise any control without going through him, he
said, and they never did.

"At no time has there been money laundering at First American," he said. "No
depositor has ever lost a cent." If there was a crime, he added, "it was a
victimless crime."

Hovering over the entire matter is the question as to why he became involved
with the bank at all at the age of 75. One friend said that the man who,
according to his memoirs turned down offers to be a Supreme Court Justice and
Secretary of State, loved being chairman of a bank.

Mr. Clifford's explanation is that he had worked all his life and was eager to
take on a new challenge. "The suggestion of retirement is total anathema to me,"
he said. "I didn't want to go to Florida and rot."

His venture into banking, he said, proved to himself that he could take on a new
task late in life.

Of his his involvement with First American, he said, "I actually think it has
kept me alive."

NAME: Clark M. Clifford

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I have a choice of either seeming stupid or venal," said Clark
M. Clifford, who is faced with either appearing to have been duped by Middle
Eastern money men or appearing to be guilty of misleading Government regulators
about a bank holding company of which he had been chairman. (Paul Hosefros/The
New York Times)

Chart: "Clark McAdams Clifford"

Born: Dec. 25, 1906

Hometown: St. Louis

Education: LL.B., Washington University

Career highlights: 1928-44, private law practice in St. Louis; 1946-50, Special
Counsel to the President of the United States; 1950-68, senior partner, Clifford
& Miller, 1968-69, Secretary of Defense; 1969-present, senior partner, Clifford
& Warnke.

Hobby: Poker.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Boeing-Sikorsky Gets Copter Pact

BYLINE: By RICHARD W. STEVENSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 628 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, April 5


The Pentagon chose a team headed by the Boeing Company and the United
Technologies Corporation's Sikorsky Aircraft division today to build a new
generation of combat helicopters for the Army. The contract could ultimately be
worth $34 billion.

The award, one of the largest up for grabs in the military contracting business
this decade, ended an intense six-year competition between the Boeing-Sikorsky
team and a team headed by the McDonnell-Douglas Corporation and Textron Inc.'s
Bell Helicopter division.

While it is not yet known whether Congress will ultimately provide money for the
Army to buy all of the 1,292 new helicopters it wants, the award provides the
winners with needed business at a time of declining military budgets.

The helicopter, known as LH, for light helicopter, is designed to serve as the
Army's lightweight combat and scout aircraft. It will replace 3,000 Vietnam-era
helicopters, including the Cobra. The LH is intended to complement the Army's
primary heavy attack helicopter, the Apache, which was used extensively in the
Persian Gulf war.

Under the initial $2.8 billion contract, Boeing and Sikorsky will build six
prototype machines over the next four years. Full-scale production will probably
begin in 1996 or 1997.

The winning contract will initially bring a modest number of new jobs to
Sikorsky's helicopter factory in Stratford, Conn., and to Boeing's helicopter
operations in Ridley Township, Pa., south of Philadelphia. Sikorsky expects to
add about 150 engineers to the project in the coming year, although some of them
may be transferred from other programs within the company. Boeing expects to add
about 300 people, primarily engineers, this year.

In the long run, both companies can add significantly to their employment, and
will certainly be well protected against having to trim their work forces as
current programs wind down. Sikorsky, for example, is in the final years of its
contract to build UH-60 Blackhawk transport helicopters for the Army.

In awarding the contract to Boeing and Sikorsky, the Army was clearly sensitive
to the fate of other technically advanced military programs in recent years.
Many have encountered large cost overruns and a few have had to be canceled
because of budget concerns. Defense Secretary Dick Cheney earlier this year
canceled the Navy's A-12 attack plane when its development costs jumped to
levels far higher than agreed to by the contractors, McDonnell Douglas and the
General Dynamics Corporation.

"We made a big deal about this in the beginning of getting the contractors to
bid realistically, and we told them we weren't going to look at how low their
prices were -- we were going to look at the realism of their prices," said
Stephen R. Conver, an Assistant Secretary of the Army.

Analysts said the deal also suggested that the Pentagon had responded to
industry complaints that the contract terms imposed by the military during the
Reagan Administration were too tough. Instead of requiring Boeing and Sikorsky
to develop the aircraft under a fixed-price contract, as was imposed on many
companies for big programs in recent years, the LH will be developed under a
contract that guarantees the contractors a certain profit margin above its
costs, and adds incentives to meet cost goals.

"Both companies are going to be in a position to make a profit from the start,
which is a major improvement from the waning years of the Reagan
Administration," said Howard A. Rubel, an analyst at C. J. Lawrence Inc.

The LH contract is the first of two big aircraft competitions to be decided this
month by the Pentagon. The Air Force plans to select a winner at the end of
April in the competition to build the next generation of fighter planes.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing: A Boeing-Sikorsky team was selected to develop a new combat
helicopter like the one proposed in a cutaway drawing released by the Army last
year. The Government contract could ultimately be worth $34 billion. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Backgrounds of Astronauts On the 39th Shuttle Mission

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 362 words



Steven R. Nagel
Mission Commander

Colonel Nagel, a 44-year-old Air Force pilot, made his first trip into space six
years ago as a mission specialist. Later that same year, he piloted the West
German space lab mission.

A graduate of the University of Illinois, he also received a master of science
in mechanical engineering from California State University at Fresno in 1978. He
is from Canton, Ill. He and his wife, Linda, have a daughter.

Kenneth D. Cameron
Pilot

Lieutenant Colonel Cameron, a Marine Corps pilot, is making his first space
flight. He was selected as an astronaut in 1985.

He received bachelor's and master of science degrees from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. In Vietnam, he commanded a Marine platoon and served as
a guard of the United States Embassy in Saigon.

Colonel Cameron, 41, considers Cleveland to be home. He and his wife, Michele,
have two sons.

Linda M. Godwin
Mission Specialist

Dr. Godwin was selected as an astronaut in 1985, after serving five years as a
flight controller and shuttle cargo officer at the Johnson Space Center. This
will be her first trip into space.

She graduated from Southeast Missouri State University in 1974 and received a
doctorate in physics from the University of Missouri.

Dr. Godwin, 38, was born in Cape Girardeau, Mo. She is single.

Jerry L. Ross
Mission Specialist

This will be the third space mission for Lieutenant Colonel Ross, of the Air
Force, where he was also chief flight engineer of flight tests for the B-1
bomber.

Colonel Ross, 43, received bachelor's and master's degrees in mechanical
engineering from Purdue University. Crown Point, Ind., is his hometown. He and
his wife, Karen, have a son and a daughter.

Jerome Apt
Mission Specialist

Dr. Apt, 41, who is called Jay, is making his first shuttle flight. He joined
NASA in 1980, working for the Jet Propulsion Laboratory on planetary research
based on the Pioneer spacecraft's flight by Venus.

He graduated from Harvard in 1971 and has a doctorate from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Pittsburgh is his hometown. He and his wife, Eleanor,
have a daughter.

NAME: Steven R. Nagel; Kenneth D. Cameron; Linda M. Godwin; Jerry L. Ross;
Jerome Apt

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 7, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Sandinista Decade

BYLINE: By Linda Robinson; Linda Robinson is the Latin America correspondent for
U.S. News & World Report.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1062 words



BLOOD OF BROTHERS
Life and War in Nicaragua.
By Stephen Kinzer.
Illustrated. 450 pp. New York:
G. P. Putnam's Sons. $24.95.

If the decisive United States military action in the Middle East marks the end
of America's "Vietnam syndrome," no conflict better illustrates that syndrome
than the decade-long controversy over Nicaragua's Sandinista revolution. The
American public readily believed that Saddam Hussein threatened United States
interests, but during the 1980's it was deeply divided over the Reagan
Administration's effort to force Nicaragua's Marxist Government from power
through the limited means of funding the contras.

Even now that the Sandinistas are out of power, ousted in elections last year,
no consensus exists on what danger they actually posed or what the United States
should have done about them. No American reporter is better qualified than
Stephen Kinzer, the author of "Blood Brothers," to conduct a post-mortem on
United States policy and Sandinista rule. He opened The New York Times's bureau
in Managua in 1983 after covering the 1979 Sandinista revolution for The Boston
Globe, and stayed until 1989.

Mr. Kinzer, who now heads The Times's bureau in Bonn, believes that American
policy makers wildly exaggerated the danger posed by the Sandinistas and failed
to understand that they represented a genuine desire for change in Nicaragua.
"Here," he writes, "was the living result of a foreign policy process in which
factual assessments by professionals in the field had been systematically
ignored, while lurid rumors were accepted as gospel."

The author's firsthand experience of the contra war convinced him that its main
effect was to inflict suffering on civilians and harden Sandinista rule. For
instance, in July 1987 he went to investigate what the contras claimed was a
major military victory in the northern town of San Jose de Bocay. He found no
evidence that the army command post or airstrip had even been damaged, and saw
only the corpses of nine militiamen, three children and a pregnant woman.
"Another trip in search of the 'new' contras had been in vain," he concludes.

Mr. Kinzer makes vividly clear that this was not a low-intensity war, as
Pentagon strategists dubbed it. Six years of covering a conflict in which 30,000
Nicaraguans died took its toll on him: "Even my sleeping hours were filled with
images of dead bodies and sobbing peasants." In the best tradition of reporters'
books, "Blood of Brothers" takes us inside the lives of Nicaraguans humble and
powerful, without the rhetoric that so often confounded efforts to understand
what was really going on in that tiny country.

Mr. Kinzer was the first journalist to stumble on a contra camp in Honduras, and
he defied the Sandinista authorities to travel to Nicaragua's remote Rio Coco
region, where he witnessed the emotional homecoming of Miskito Indians displaced
by the war. Most intriguing is his account of the power struggles among the top
Sandinista comandantes, notably President Daniel Ortega Saavedra's
outmaneuvering of his chief rival, the Interior Minister, Tomas Borge. Although
the Sandinistas did send arms to their revolutionary brethren in neighboring El
Salvador, Mr. Kinzer reports, they were far more occupied by internal conflict,
which was fueled but not created by the United States.

"Blood of Brothers" is a graphic account of a country torn in half over the
Sandinistas' efforts to build a new political and economic order. Early on, Mr.
Kinzer saw that Sandinista policies were alienating ordinary Nicaraguans. "In
1983 most Nicaraguans had still not fallen to the depths of deprivation and
despair which they would reach in later years, but many were already unhappy and
restive. . . . When the Sandinistas decreed that foreign trade was to be a state
monopoly, they effectively declared war on these small-scale entrepreneurs. . .
. [And] by trying to transform [the existing system of food production] so
completely and so suddenly, they were underestimating the deeply ingrained
conservatism of Nicaraguan peasants."

While Mr. Kinzer in no way sees the Sandinistas' actions as justifying the
United States intervention by proxy, he does recognize that they fed the contra
resistance: "As years passed, the nature of the contra force changed. Most of
its members were young Nicaraguan peasants and workers, driven by Sandinista
policies to the point of rebellion."

Moreover, it was these policies that led to the Sandinistas' crushing electoral
defeat in February 1990. Until the day after the elections, most Americans
believed that Nicaraguans blamed the United States, not their own Government,
for their misfortunes. "Blood of Brothers" raises the unanswerable question of
whether the Sandinistas might have moderated their rule had the United States
not sponsored a war against them. "No one will ever be able to say what the
comandantes would have done with their historic opportunity in Nicaragua if they
had not been confronted with civil war," the author writes.

Yet Mr. Kinzer's own critique of what he calls the regime's "colossal
misjudgments" suggests that the Sandinistas' policies were not just tactical
responses to outside aggression but reflections of their deep political
convictions. His catalogue of their "errors" is long: their rejection of
free-market economics, their militarism and arrogance, their antagonism toward
the Roman Catholic Church hierarchy, the "suffocating social and political
controls" they imposed, their embrace of an obsolete Communist political model
and of "Fidel Castro's outlandish dream" of spreading revolution throughout the
hemisphere.

Reflecting his penchant for steering clear of polemics, Mr. Kinzer balances that
criticism by pointing out that the Sandinistas were willing to put their
revolution to the test of the ballot box, and kept that bargain when to their
great surprise they lost. Just as important, he notes, without the revolution
the Somoza dictatorship would not have been dismantled.

"Blood of Brothers" might have ended with a more definitive judgment, but it is
without doubt the best contemporary history of the Sandinista decade to appear.
We finally have a welcome antidote to reams of literature about Nicaragua
treating the Sandinistas and their country as nothing more than a cold war
battleground.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Daniel Ortega Saavedra speaking at a rally in Managua,
Nicaragua, 1989. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 7, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'Miss Saigon' Flirts With Art and Reality

BYLINE: By ROBERT STONE; Robert Stone is the author of "Dog Soldiers," a novel
set partly in Saigon, which won a National Book Award. His latest novel,
"Outerbridge Reach," will be published next year by Ticknor & Fields.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2808 words


Art is the only method we have for stopping time, so it's our principal means of
coming to terms with history. The popular arts go a long way toward forming a
general perception of the common experience. This process can be seen at work in
"Miss Saigon," a musical that seems derived in unequal parts from "Madama
Butterfly," "West Side Story" and "South Pacific" and is set in wartime Saigon.
It comes almost exactly 18 years after the last American troops left Vietnam and
on the heels of another American overseas engagement with a far different
outcome.

Colorful, noisy, shrewdly designed to work its audience into emotional
overdrive, "Miss Saigon," which opens Thursday at the Broadway Theater, will
likely elicit a variety of responses. Onetime sojourners inSaigon may find
themselves contemplating the show's rendering of that tragic and sordid city in
the light of their recollections. Americans generally might reflect on what such
a show, conceived abroad but designed in this production for New York audiences,
suggests about present perceptions, foreign and domestic.

The basic plot of "Miss Saigon," which begins in April 1975, involves Chris
(Willy Falk), an American marine, and Kim (Lea Salonga), a Vietnamese "bar
girl," who rather suddenly find themselves in love amid the squalor. Chris tries
to take Kim home to America, but in the confusion of the evacuation she is left
behind. When Kim gives birth to a boy, the parallel with "Madama Butterfly" is
further advanced.

It's an old story, and of course such things happened. Saigon during the Vietnam
War was a sad place, and the G.I. bars on To Do Street or in the suburb of
Cholon were as sad a scene as any in town. By night they were whirls of noise
and adolescent concupiscence. To be properly understood they were best seen by
day, in the morning, after the brutal Indochinese sunlight had dried the night's
rain and driven man and beast alike to cover.

As the last enormous drunken cockroach scurried under the bar, a weary young
woman in smudged Cleopatra eye makeup might be seen wandering across the soiled
cement dance floor, one palm upraised against the blinding daylight in the
doorway, searching for a piece of costume jewelry detached in some G.I.'s
embrace. Her last night's lover would have gone off to take his place in the
war, which was very probably beside the office Coke machine in an
air-conditioned compartment of the American presence.

Everything was stolen, illegal, or somehow spurious. The American beer on sale
had been pilfered from the post exchange system, as had the floor-to-ceiling
refrigerators in which it was stored, the freezers, the electric fans, even the
records in the Japanese jukebox. The Vietnamese beer, called "33," was believed
by American servicemen to be made with formaldehyde. The cigarettes were
similarly stolen, except for locally manufactured ones called Park Lanes, which
contained marijuana of uneven quality. The Army radio announcer who broadcast
daily traffic reports from a helicopter over the city blithely called himself
"Parker Lane," until someone informed the brass on him; his subsequent
helicopter rides may have been less agreeable.

Some bars served cheeseburgers made of water buffalo and bootleg Velveeta. In
others, heroin was available, so readily that by the early 70's it was a major
problem and no one had to bother with needles. The stuff was smoked in various
ways, often simply laced in marijuana cigarettes. It was asserted, sometimes
hopefully or even proudly, that a few of the Vietnamese women employed in the
bars -- always called bar girls -- were intelligence officers of the Vietcong.
Cynics derided this notion as vain romance. Little serious intelligence might
seem forthcoming from the young clerks, technicians and mechanics who frequented
the joints.

In one bar, a G.I. hung a sign that read: "There Is More Information Available
Than There Is Stuff Loose to Know About." Its savor of vaguely narcotic
skepticism epitomized the time and place. No one would have said as much about
the war in the Persian Gulf.

The youthful customers of these Saigon bars were usually seeking relief from
boredom and prolonged expatriation rather than from the strains of combat. It
was military policy to allow a minimum number of troops in the capital, so the
soldiers, sailors and marines who partied in Saigon tended to be those employed
there. Very few of the combat units, whose members referred to rear-echelon
support personnel by a scalding and obscene acronym, ever saw the bright lights
of Saigon.

For their part, the women who worked as bar girls were seeking relief from
poverty. Many were refugees from areas made unlivable by war. Their way of
coping with history's misfortunes set them at odds with the ancient Vietnamese
Confucian morality but was very much in keeping with the city's entrepot
traditions. Fancifully called the "Paris of the Orient," Saigon more resembled
the riverine cities of old France d'outre mer, Brazzaville or New Orleans. A
commercial center and colonial seaport, she had been for more than 100 years a
place in which a vast demimonde served imperial desire.

In "Miss Saigon," the impresario of local sin is a superserviceable Eurasian
called "The Engineer," played by Jonathan Pryce. In Vietnam generally, the
movers and moguls of low life tended to be women, often of the rough and ready
matriarchal type whom G.I.'s, speaking the language of postwar Japanese garrison
life, called Mama-sans. Some of these were memorable individuals -- salty,
Mother Courage figures.

Under the French, "the life" had been institutionalized. Often the Cholon bars
catering to black G.I.'s (rear-echelon life was rigidly self-segregated in an
atmosphere of rising tension) were the same ones that had welcomed the African
troops of the French Army. It was not unusual in those places to encounter women
who were partly Senegalese. Many of the Mama-sans could bring a little Croatian
or German to bear, picked up from Foreign Legionnaires. Some seemed to speak
every tongue history had loosed along the river -- Slavic, Arabic, French,
Wolof, German, English, Chinese, Japanese, Corsican.

The characters in "Miss Saigon" speak a dizzy G.I. English, rather pleasant and
humorous. The actual lingua franca of the bars was horrible, dehumanizing,
obscene, a childish, braying pseudo-Oriental pidgin that made cartoon figures of
its speakers. To get around it, sensitive G.I.'s in search of romance would
sometimes trot out their high school French to match whatever metropolitain
phrases their admired might command. Under the spell of legend, many aspiring
souls pretended to speak French in Saigon and fondly imagined themselves doing
so.

As early as 1971, plenty of the G.I. bars stood empty. Mama-sans found
themselves in a bear market; American troops had started for home. The bar girls
sat on their high stools playing bezique or checkers, all dressed up and waiting
for a party the smart money understood was over.

In "Miss Saigon," the Engineer finds himself trying to operate a G.I. bar in
April 1975, when the American presence in Saigon consisted largely of alcoholic
contractors gone native and the 60 marines at the embassy. The real local
operators, who left G.I. bars to Mama-sans and dreamers, had got their money out
long before. They had enjoyed seven or so of the fattest years ever allotted on
earth, amassing fortunes by trading in military scrip or heroin or gold. Such
persons were characteristically adept at foretelling the future. Saigon night
life never recovered after Vietnam's top acid-rock band, the CBC, left for
Bangkok in 1973.

One of the most interesting aspects of the musical, conceived by Alain Boublil
and Claude-Michel Schonberg, the French creators of "Les Miserables," is that it
might be said to represent a kind of European pop memory of the Vietnam War. As
they demonstrate in "Les Miserables," Mr. Boublil and Mr. Schonberg have a
weakness for historical encapsulation. Their slam-bang, flag-waving, hip-hooray
version of Paris at the barricades during the French revolution of 1830 is a
major way point in "Les Miz"; the production all but stages a tableau vivant of
the Delacroix painting "Liberty Leading the People."

New York audiences, not all of whose members can have been up on their French
history, practically stood and cheered that scene to the rafters, carried away
by the production's skillful exploitation of any crowd's nonspecific
revolutionary impulses. As pop historians, these authors are sensitive to
iconography, and the informing icon of "Miss Saigon" is the CH-46, in a tableau
that might be entitled "Chopper on the Roof."

Younger theatergoers may be excused for forming the impression via the action in
"Miss Saigon" that the entire American Army left Vietnam by helicopter from the
United States Embassy roof. In fact, the last troops left by chartered airliner
in March 1973. During March and April 1975, in the wake of the disintegration of
the South Vietnamese Army, 50,000 American civilians and Vietnamese with
American connections flew out of Saigon. All through the latter month, United
States Ambassador Graham Martin continued to resist pressure from Washington to
strike his flag. Finally, on April 29 and 30, 1975, 81 Chinook helicopters
landed in the city from carriers in the South China Sea to evacuate the last
vestige of the American presence.

The evacuation, called Option IV and the largest helicopter operation ever
mounted until the recent gulf war, took approximately 6,000 people to the
waiting carriers over a period of 18 hours. Most of these were flown out from
the airport at Tonsonhut. At one point, arrangements to bus civilians to the
airport, made unrealistically, came apart under pressure of the mass panic
created by advancing Communist columns.

The final 2,000, including the ill ambassador, left mainly from the embassy
parking lot. The last marine guards were picked up on the roof. Of the 6,000
evacuated, approximately 1,000 were American and 5,000 Vietnamese. Nevertheless,
untold numbers of America's supporters were abandoned to the victorious regime.
"Miss Saigon" understandably makes the most of the drama and the tragedy
involved.

The sense of contemporary European popular memory is further illustrated by two
of the show's biggest musical numbers, which seem to dramatize the contending
poles of the war in something of an "a pox on both your houses" spirit. The
Vietcong side is represented by an Orwellian statue of Ho Chi Minh, 21 feet high
and quite intimidating. Masked dancers perform a kind of totalitarian ballet at
its feet, complete with red banners and rhythmic chants. The personification of
the North Vietnamese side is Thuy (Barry K. Bernal), the heroine's fanatical and
merciless betrothed and the closest thing the show has to a villain.

As for America, one encapsulated insight comes when Chris, a decent young
marine, cries: "Christ, I'm an American/ How could I fail to do good/ All I made
was a mess, just like everyone else/ In a place full of mystery/ That I never
once understood."

There, as they used to say in Vietnam, it is. And in rhyme.

The shortcomings of American materialism are suggested, to say the least, in a
number called "The American Dream," replete with blowzy, brassy blondes, colored
lights and a gleaming white Cadillac from hell. Although the singspiel lyrics of
"Miss Saigon" may evoke Nashville more than "Mahagonny," Jonathan Pryce's
performance seeks to pursue a deeper Brechtian dimension.

Thus the European pop memory, amid the waning century and the ruins of the
Berlin Wall, celebrates its own self-regard by cheerfully consigning both Asian
revolution and America's bungled good intentions to the hereafter of musical
drama. For the record, the phrase "the American dream" is attributed to a
historian named James Truslow Adams, who in 1931 wrote a treatise called "The
Epic of America." "It is not," Adams wrote of his American dream, "a dream of
motor cars and high wages merely, but a dream of a social order in which each
man and woman shall be able to attain to the fullest stature of which they are
innately capable, and be recognized by others for what they are, regardless of
the fortuitous circumstances of birth or position."

Since then the phrase has taken on an adventurous life of its own.

"We defend and we build," said Franklin D. Roosevelt in one of his fireside
chats in 1940, "a way of life, not for ourselves alone, but for the world."
Surely the days are long gone, victory in the gulf or no, since anyone would say
such a thing publicly. The younger contemporary American audience is likely
never to have heard the phrase "the American dream" used other than ironically.

In engaging so fraught and charged a topic as the late war, "Miss Saigon" runs a
considerable risk, and there is more at stake than audience discomfort. Just as
artistic kitsch exists, so there is moral kitsch -- witness the contemporary
wave of heresy-hunting right-mindedness. Works that dare to take the fate of
millions as their theme must risk descending to it. Paradoxically, artistic
quality is what makes the difference. Musical dramas no more deserve to be
judged on the basis of their good intentions than American foreign policy.

In "Miss Saigon" domestic audiences get to see American characters and an
American reality fashioned abroad rather than at home, an unfamiliar
development. The distanced attitude has a novel savor; the treatment of things
American may be a little patronizing but it's far more benign than it would have
been 10 or 20 years ago. There's reason to hope that being just another country
in the world may turn out to be less demeaning than we feared.

What is the experience of a contemporary American audience watching "Miss
Saigon"? Is its response colored by the recent victorious conclusion of the gulf
war? Will it be complacent in the face of painful reminders? If so, does this
mean that the country has come to terms with Vietnam? Or is that war all too far
in the past now to be painful?

Many of the films and novels dealing with the war have been agonizing and
somehow inchoate, elaborately respectful of a grim experience. "Miss Saigon"
seems to present itself as an agreeable candidate for Vietnam's musical of
record at a time when both Europe's romance with the left and America's
self-criticism are in eclipse. History has been defined as a fiction agreed
upon; in the case of popular history this is often literally true. With the New
York opening of "Miss Saigon," the Vietnam experience begins its final slide
into the past, into history, make-believe and melodrama.


CHOPPER MAGIC

The helicopter, its headlights blazing, arrives noisily in Act II of "Miss
Saigon," surrounded by the glare of revolving searchlights and the din of
Vietnamese refugees futilely seeking its sanctuary. A line of singing American
soldiers disappears into its darkened belly, amid the chaos and confusion of the
evacuation of the American Embassy during the fall of Saigon in 1975.

As the audience in the Broadway Theater watches, this particular piece of
theater magic, much remarked upon in the London production, lifts off into the
waiting void and disappears. But don't look too closely.

"Basically, it's a piece of traveling fairground equipment," says John Napier,
the production designer of the $10 million musical as well as such visual
extravaganzas as "Cats," "Nicholas Nickleby," "Starlight Express" and "Les
Miserables." "The natural helicopter sensation is derived by using centrifugal
force. So that what looks like rotor blades are not really rotor blades.
Instead, they are half-inch-thick pieces of string that come out from a central
core. As the motor winds up, they spin further out; as it slows down, they
retract."

The helicopter itself, attached to large steel columns fixed to the back wall of
the stage, is raised and lowered hydraulically as it slides up and down the
columns. The familiar wobbly motion of landing is created by a series of
gimbals, mechanisms that make an object rock from one direction to another while
being held at a central point. All the movements are computerized, so they are
the same at each performance.

Mr. Napier declined to reveal the cost of the setup but said it is "one of the
less expensive items in the show."

What is on stage, of course, is only the front section of a helicopter, the
cabin. The soldiers enter it but do not get a lift -- they leave immediately out
the back, in the dark.

And, despite appearances, there is no pilot. Instead, a dummy has been attached
to gimbals to make it lifelike. But apparently some people are fooled. There has
been a request from at least one reporter to interview the pilot. -- Mervyn
Rothstein

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Barry K. Bernal, Lea Salonga and Philip Lyle Kong in a scene
from "Miss Saigon"--coping with history's misfortunes (Joan Marcus/"Miss
Saigon"); scene from "Miss Saigon" (Joan Marcus/"Miss Saigon") (pg. 30)


Chart: " 'Miss Saigon' by the Numbers"

"Miss Saigon" in London

* Opened Sept. 10, 1989, at the 2,188-seat Theater Royal Drury Lane, where it is
still running.

* The production, with 46 actors and 30 musicians, cost $5 million to mount and
had an advance sale of $8 million.

* The original London cast recording was released worldwide on Feb. 13, 1989; to
date, about 500,000 copies have been sold.

"Miss Saigon" in New York

* Opens Thursday at the 1,752-seat Broadway Theater after 19 previews.

* The production, with 45 actors and 25 musicians, cost $10 million to mount and
has an advance sale of more than $35 million.

* Ticket prices range from $100 for front mezzanine to $15 (for students),
although most seats are $60.

Ticket Availability *

* Orchestra seats for Friday and Saturday nights are sold out through 1991.

* Orchestra seats are available for most performances, starting in late July.

* Front mezzanine seats are available starting in July, except on weekends.

* Tickets are being sold through Dec. 31, 1991.

* Information provided by the Fred Nathan Company, the general press
representative for "Miss Saigon."


Drawing of Jonathan Pryce as a bar proprietor, Lea Salonga as a "bar girl" and
Willy Falk as her lover in "Miss Saigon," opening Thursday at the Broadway
Theater--a kind of European pop memory of the Vietnam War (al Hirschfeld) (pg.
1)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 7, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sunday Outing;
Chinatown: More Than Restaurants

BYLINE: By ELAINE LOUIE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 44; Column 4; Style Desk; Lifestyle Page

LENGTH: 961 words


Manhattan's Chinatown is for the adventurous shopper who delights in a treasure
hunt and considers a babel of foreign dialects -- Shanghai-ese, Cantonese,
Mandarin, Fukienese, Toisan and more -- music to the ear.

Chinatown is hustle: vendors hawking umbrellas, children's pajamas, pancakes
filled with fried scallions. It is also bustle: people jostle one another in the
streets and don't bother to excuse themselves in any dialect.

Some sights are predictable: the roasted ducks hanging in the windows, for
example, or the cars double-and triple-parked for lack of spaces.

But Chinatown is mainly about flux. As new immigrants from China, Hong Kong,
Vietnam and Thailand move in, each day brings change. For the shopper who prizes
serendipity, the change is revealed in unfamiliar products: a porcelain fishbowl
with painted carp inside, or oolong tea at more than $100 a pound.

The heart of Chinatown is Canal Street. The N, R, No. 6, J and M subway lines
stop at Canal Street near Broadway. From there, walk east from Broadway toward
the Bowery.

Delicious Finger Foods

The sidewalks are lined with one of the area's prized resources: the vendors who
sell delicious finger foods at recession prices. Fifty cents buys a plump
steamed bun, three inches in diameter, filled with cabbage and ground pork; or a
rolled wide rice noodle made with dried shrimp and scallions, or a
scallion-filled pancake six inches across, fried to golden crispness.

"Many of the food vendors are from Wenzhu, an old seaport on the coast south of
Shanghai where the people have a history of going overseas," said Peter Kwong, a
professor of political science at the State University of New York at Old
Westbury, L.I., and the author of "The New Chinatown" (Hill & Wang, 1987).

Armed with pushcart licenses, the vendors prepare their ingredients at home and
cook them on the street.  To find the best food, look for the carts with the
largest crowds of eager, noisy customers.

For more substantial fare, there is Kam Man, one of the neighborhood's most
popular supermarkets. In addition to addictively juicy strips of barbecued pork,
soy-sauce squab and roasted duck, the two-floor market sells homemade joong,
which are to the Chinese what tamales are to Mexicans. Inside the lotus-leaf
wrapper is a mixture of glutinous rice, black beans, a Chinese sausage, black
mushrooms and pork. There are also joss sticks, teas and dried plums. Kam Man is
at 200 Canal Street, near Mulberry.

Tea and Ginseng

Where there is Chinese food, there is also tea. Ocher-colored tins hold a dozen
varieties of tea at Ten Ren Tea and Ginseng Company at 176 Canal Street, near
Mott Street. A pound of oolong can cost $7.20 to $118.80. "The difference is
bitterness and sweetness," said Alfred Liu, a salesman at the store.

Wood cabinets also hold ginseng from Korea, the United States, China and the
Soviet Union. A teak table designed for serving tea has a hole through its top
with a container underneath for discarding tea leaves.

To brew the tea and cook the food, there are Chinese utensils like bamboo
brushes for scrubbing woks and a cleaver that, held sideways, flattens a clove
of garlic in a split second. A wide assortment of utensils is at Hong Chong
Imports, 14 Bowery near Doyers Street.

24-Karat Treasures

A literal treasure, found more readily in Chinatown than in uptown jewelry
stores, is 24-karat gold, the soft, deep-yellow gold like that buried with
pharaohs, fought over by pirates, and sewn into the hems of robes when the
Chinese had to flee from one place to another. A tiny horse charm sells for $90,
and a rectangle with a raised Chinese character that translates to "long life"
sells for $240 at May Cheong Jewelry, 175 Canal Street near Mott Street.

Two old stores in Chinatown specialize in porcelains. Quong Yuen Shing at 32
Mott Street, near Bayard Street, was founded in 1891 by Lee Lok, who came to the
United States from Canton. Today, the store, which has its original wood
cabinetry, still sells porcelains -- and also tickets to Yankee baseball games
and other events from a Ticketmaster machine.

Nearby, at 26 Mott Street, is Wing On Wo & Company, which first sold porcelains
in 1901. Large porcelain urns painted on the outside with peonies and inside
with gold-colored carp, were originally used by the Chinese as fishbowls. Nancy
Seid, the store's owner, suggests a different use for the reproductions, which
sell for $350 to $650. "Put glass on the top and use it as an end table," she
said.

At Pearl River China Resources Products Inc., a child might find joy in a
plastic pencil box ($4) with four buttons that, when pushed, open four different
compartments. For an adult who wants a note of Chinese sybaritism in the
bedroom, there are shocking-pink silk comforters filled with silk wadding ($230
for one 70 by 80 inches). The store is on the second and third floors at 277
Canal Street, near Broadway.

For a different glimpse of Chinatown life, look skyward. Walking along Elizabeth
Street north of Canal recently, Peter Kwong noticed dozens of pairs of navy blue
slacks flying like pennants on a line stretched from a rooftop to a truck parked
on the street.

When clothes are finished in the Chinatown garment factories, which are often in
tenements that don't have elevators, the workers string a nylon cord from the
factory roof to a truck across the street. The clothes, wrapped in plastic and
placed on wire hangers, are then hung on the nylon cord. A gentle push from the
workers on the roof sends the clothes sailing down the cord.

Occasionally a few fall on the ground, where another worker casually picks up
the garments and shakes them out. A little dirt never hurt a pair of navy blue
slacks.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Canisters, some holding teas costing more than $100 a pound,
line shelves at Ten Ren Tea and Ginseng Company in Chinatown. The ginseng comes
from the United States, Korea, China and the Soviet Union. (Photograph by Vic
DeLucia/The New York Times)

Map: Chinatown is centered on Canal Street east of Broadway.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 7, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

China Province Forges Regional Trade Links

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 554 words

DATELINE: KUNMING, China


After watching for years as coastal China prospered because of its links with
Hong Kong and Taiwan, the remote southwest of China is hoping to build a future
on international trade as well, by cultivating growing exchanges with Myanmar,
Laos and Vietnam.

So far the trade is tiny -- less than one percent of China's overall trade --
but it is growing steadily as China improves its relations with its southwestern
neighbors, after many years of feuding over politics and boundaries.

Prime Minister Li Peng paid a state visit to Laos in December, signifying a full
normalization of relations, and China's relations with Myanmar, formerly Burma,
have also improved considerably. Diplomatic ties with Vietnam, broken after the
1979 border war, have not been restored, but some cross-border trade is allowed
and smuggling is rampant.

Here in Yunnan Province, in the corner of China and the terminus of the Burma
Road in World War II, officials speak enthusiastically of trade prospects with
Myanmar and Laos. They also hope to trade with Thailand, downriver from China on
the Mekong River.

"We're very optimistic that border trade has a bright future," said Zhu
Chenghua, a trade expert at the Yunnan Province Economic Commission. "The
Government has decided to develop border trade, and already local authorities
are building roads to connect to the border."

Yunnan is a mountainous region with no clear demarcations for borders, and poor
roads and communications to the rest of the world. Exports now must be shipped
by rail to Hong Kong, more than 1,000 miles away, and it takes nearly six weeks
for goods to reach Thailand. That could be cut to a few days if goods could be
shipped down the Mekong River through Laos.

The river here is narrow and too shallow to carry large boats, particularly in
the dry season. Tian Jiaxiang, deputy governor of the Xishuangbanna District in
southern Yunnan, took a boat down the river to Vientiane, the Laotian capital,
last year, and he said there were plans to dredge the river and introduce cargo
shipping.

"Xishuangbanna will be a window to southeast Asia," Mr. Tian said in an
interview in Jinghong, the capital of Xishuangbanna. "We'll also improve our
overland routes to Laos, and build roads to connect with Burma."

The principal problem with the international-trade strategy is that Myanmar and
Laos are even poorer and even shorter of foreign exchange than China. Both
countries would like more Chinese consumer products, ranging from thermos
bottles to underwear, but have no hard currency to pay for them. Nor do they
have efficient ports, like Hong Kong's, that could easily re-export the goods to
other countries.

Yunnan Province's cross-border trade in 1990 was valued at only $200 million,
about 90 percent of it with Myanmar and the remainder split between Laos and
Vietnam. Most trade with Myanmar is conducted by barter, handled principally by
state-owned companies on the Chinese side and by private traders on the Burmese
side.

Vietnam is potentially the biggest market, and officials in Hanoi are eager to
expand links, but Beijing seems intent on curtailing trade until the Cambodian
conflict is resolved. At the moment, Yunnan for the most part allows people
crossing the Vietnam border to carry only what they can use for themselves.


LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map: Depicts China and indicates Yunnan Province.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 7, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Heard on the Street

BYLINE: By Kurt Eichenwald; Kurt Eichenwald covers Wall Street for The New York
Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 827 words



RAINMAKER
The Saga of Jeff Beck, Wall Street's Mad Dog.
By Anthony Bianco.
Illustrated. 486 pp. New York: Random House. $25.

Wall Street's deal makers of the 1980's created for themselves the aura of
supermen, individuals who were worthy of millions of dollars a year in
compensation. They saw themselves reshaping the course of American economic
history through their financial wizardry. It was a glorious story, one that
served the interests both of the subjects and of the many writers and
journalists who latched on to it to symbolize the money era. But since the
beginning of 1990, as once-mighty companies hobbled with alarming frequency into
bankruptcy court, the story has come to an abrupt end.

Anthony Bianco, a senior writer for Business Week, has chosen to tell this story
one more time. Readers may wonder why he bothered.

"Rainmaker" chronicles the travels through Wall Street of Jeff Beck, an
investment banker with a reputation for irreverence. He was a man who lived the
money myth of the 1980's, as well as a number of myths he created himself.

Mr. Bianco appears to find Mr. Beck worthy of a biography because, in his words,
"this compulsive liar's peculiarly excruciating fate was to be a man more honest
than the times in which he lived." But Mr. Bianco seems to have lost his own
ability to distinguish between illusion and reality in this deeply flawed book.

Mr. Beck was not content in his false belief that he was a controlling force in
the tumult of economic change. He permitted nothing in his life to be
unexceptional, pouring out a stream of lies to his associates, to his wife, even
to his psychiatrist, about his present and his past. Mr. Beck regaled listeners
with tales of his adventures in the Vietnam War, although his military
experience was limited to the Army Reserve. He told colleagues and Mr. Bianco
that he held "vast hidden interests" worth billions of dollars at the same time
that he was struggling to maintain his princely standard of living on his
multimillion-dollar compensation. When pressed about discrepancies in his
fabrications, he would lie about secret undercover work with the Government,
somehow involving the Central Intelligence Agency.

Mr. Beck told his lies as he, like many others, was rising rapidly on Wall
Street. He attained the position of head of mergers and acquisitions at
Oppenheimer & Company, and eventually landed a job as an investment banker at
Drexel Burham Lambert Inc., the firm whose junk bonds fueled the takeover craze.
Eventually, his manic excitement spread to Hollywood, where he befriended the
actor Michael Douglas. He worked as a consultant for the movie "Wall Street,"
and even won himself a bit part in the film. He left Wall Street in 1990 and is
now "building a superior body" with the goal of competing in Hawaii's Iron Man
Triathlon.

Much of this may sound familiar. Last year, in one of the longest articles in
its history, The Wall Street Journal chronicled Mr. Beck's life and lies on Wall
Street.

Mr. Bianco writes that readers should plow through his 486 pages because the
Journal piece "didn't go nearly far enough in unmasking Beck." But unmasking
does not seem to be Mr. Bianco's real goal. "Rainmaker" reads less like an
effort to uncover a fraud than one to defend a friend and justify the author's
own toil.

Mr. Bianco admits early on that he and the deal maker are good friends who
originally planned to collaborate on a book about Mr. Beck's life. As described
here, that effort collapsed, and Mr. Bianco took up the project on his own. But
the relationship between Mr. Bianco and Mr. Beck became so close that it is
difficult to understand how the author expected to remain objective.

In one of several disturbing scenes, Mr. Bianco travels with Mr. Beck to the
Hotel du Cap d'Antibes in the south of France, one of the most expensive hotels
in the world. While it is not clear who paid for this trip, Mr. Bianco indicates
that the exclusive resort would not have allowed him to come were it not for Mr.
Beck. The many episodes of the two men playing tennis, sunbathing and relaxing
certainly raise questions about Mr. Bianco's objectivity.

In one of these scenes, Mr. Bianco and Mr. Beck notice a beautiful woman
swimming in the pool. Through his connections at the hotel, Mr. Beck finds out
the woman's identity, sends her a bottle of champagne and invites her and a
friend to dinner. Soon, Mr. Bianco is "wooing" the woman Mr. Beck helped him
meet.

Mr. Bianco takes his closeness with his subject one step further when he attacks
those who have criticized Mr. Beck, at times without answering their arguments.
And he accepts many anecdotes and accusations at face value from a man he calls
a liar.

Details piled on details give "Rainmaker" its heft. But Mr. Bianco recently
condensed the essential elements of his book into 12 pages for New York
magazine. The sad part is, nothing of significance was lost.

NAME: Jeff Beck

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 7, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Washington at Work;
Side by Side by Solarz and Schumer: A Rivalry

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 30; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1420 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 6


If not good friends, Steve Solarz and Chuck Schumer should at least be allies.
They're both New York boys made good, standout members of the House of
Representatives, and they represent adjoining districts in Brooklyn. Driven by
ambition and skilled at self-promotion, the two liberals are counted among the
brightest lawmakers in Congress.

But in politics as in families likeness breeds competition as much as
friendship. In fact, calling their rivalry a competition does not do justice to
the Stephen J. Solarz-Charles E. Schumer feud: the two thought they were in a
showdown for political survival in 1982, when it looked like their district
would be melded into one, and their onetime friendship soured into downright
contempt. The hard feelings are more subtle now, but they are clearly there.

Nina Solarz says the rocky relationship between her husband and Mr. Schumer
reminds her of the scene in the 1940 Charlie Chaplin classic, "The Great
Dictator" in which two dictators find themselves next to each other in a
barbershop, and each tries to crank his chair higher than the other guy's.

Not Quite Hatfields and McCoys

Sipping coffee at the dining room table in their sprawling Virginia home, Mr.
Solarz smiles at his wife's comparison. "It wasn't quite like the Hatfields and
McCoys," he says. "But neither were we as close as Richard Nixon and Billy
Graham."

Ever the politician, Mr. Schumer, who only months ago was reluctant to speak for
the record about Mr. Solarz, now plays down the bad blood.

"When it looked like we were going to be thrown together there was some tension,
obviously," he said in an interview in his Capitol Hill office. "But since then
we have been friendly."

Chair a Notch Higher

But the mistrust is unmistakable. Asked if a joint picture could be taken for
this article, Mr. Schumer's press aide first wanted to know whether Mr. Solarz
had agreed to pose. And Mr. Solarz suggested to a reporter that Mr. Schumer was
feeling the heat for voting against the use of force in the Persian Gulf.

For now at least, Mr. Solarz's chair is a bit higher than Mr. Schumer's. As the
most articulate of the Democrats championing passage of the Congressional
resolution to endorse the use of force in the Persian Gulf, Mr. Solarz won
unusual national attention. The name of the man who represents places like
Borough Park and Sheepshead Bay was tossed about as Presidential timber.

"This has undoubtedly been the penultimate experience of my political career and
I tend to doubt I'll ever be involved in something so significant again," said
Mr. Solarz, who started in politics during Vietnam, managing an early antiwar
congressional campaign in 1966.

Like many of the Democrats who opposed the resolution, Mr. Schumer has been
wounded; he recently found himself scrambling to head off a threatened
demonstration to protest his receipt of an award from a Jewish organization in
Flatbush. He insists, though, that his vote was not a mistake.

"I'm at peace with it," Mr. Schumer said. "I wish, in a sense, I had the moral
certitude of some of my friends who were very much opposed to the war and some
of my friends who were very much for the war, but I agonized over it and I think
my district did too."

Mr. Solarz's critics say he was maneuvering for political advantage, trying to
both position himself as the Administration's favorite Democrat on foreign
policy, and score points with his Jewish constituents.

Mr. Solarz dismisses these attacks. If the war had not been so successful, he
could have found himself in grave trouble, he said, and agonizing over it cost
him six pounds. But he said he took the hard line because he thought he knew the
Middle East better than other Congressmen, and took the view that the American
response to the Persian Gulf crisis would shape the post-Cold War age. He also
insists that the move has not been all to his benefit.

Gun Control as a Lever

"I clearly have burned my bridges to many of the people in the peace movement,
and liberal activists within the party, who think of me as a warmonger and a
hawk," he said.

Now Mr. Schumer is trying to ratchet his chair higher. He seized on former
President Reagan's endorsement last week of a seven-day waiting period for
handgun purchases as a way to win approval for the legislation in the House and
elevate his profile.

Sometimes Brooklyn seems not big enough for both of them. Whether or not by
design, the two have gravitated to far different areas of concentration. Mr.
Schumer tirelessly injects himelf as an authority on all the hot domestic
topics, including banking, housing, immigration and crime. Mr. Solarz, his aides
have joked, works exclusively on two issues: anything that involves the world
outside the 50 states and anything that involves Brooklyn.

"They have special interests and capacities that are extraordinarily
complementary," said House Speaker Thomas S. Foley, a Democrat from Washington.
"The fact that they are talked about as potential competitors is ironic."

'A Jealous Business'

"This is a jealous business," said Representative Barney Frank, a Massachusetts
Democrat who has stayed friends with both men. "People make the mistake of
thinking that the more similiar politicians are, the better they'll get along."

Stylistically, the two are different. Though he craves publicity, Mr. Schumer is
an effective inside player who has ingratiated himself with the House leadership
and tempered his brash manner with a quick wit. Mr. Solarz, one of the most
well-traveled members, prefers high-level debates over foreign policy and
relishes his relationships with heads of state.

Shares a Town House

When Congress is in session, the 40-year-old Mr. Schumer shares a Capitol Hill
town house with three more senior Democrats. He spends weekends at home in
Brooklyn with his family.

Mr. Solarz, 50, is more settled into the Washington life style, living across
the Potomac River in Virginia and flying back to the district at least once a
week. He clearly enjoys his place on the social circuit.

Once, Mr. Schumer and Mr. Solarz were close friends. In 1973, as a student at
Harvard Law School, Mr. Schumer worked as a volunteer in Mr. Solarz's campaign
for Brooklyn Borough President. Mr. Solarz lost, but was elected to Congress a
year later. That left a vacancy in the Assembly, and with Mr. Solarz's
endorsement and a vigorous campaign, Mr. Schumer won the seat.

"One minute after election night, tensions started to develop," recalled Michael
Lewin, a longtime aide to Mr. Solarz. "The Solarz crowd said Schumer should have
been a little more grateful and the Schumer crowd said he did not win the seat
because of Solarz's largess but because he worked hard for it. As is true in
politics, there's truth to both of these things."

Mr. Solarz did not make an endorsement in 1980 when Mr. Schumer sought the
Congressional seat being vacated by Elizabeth Holtzman. That, by most accounts,
is when a full blown rift broke out, because it was widely believed that
reapportionment would merge the two districts in 1982.

"How often do you have carte blanche to punch out the Congressman next door?"
Mr. Lewin asked. "For a year and a half we sniped at each other. It was more
like, 'You shouldn't speak in this synagogue! It's in my district!' We were
fighting block by block."

But the two have powerful allies in Albany who will not want to combine their
districts in 1992. And while they aren't going to Mets games together, their
relationship has calmed.

Still, each has stockpiled staggering sums, more than almost all their
colleagues, as insurance against a future faceoff. Mr. Solarz has $1.9 million;
Mr. Schumer, $1.6 million.

Thus far, the bad blood, the incessant fund raising and the suspicion has been a
waste of time. Neither Mr. Schumer nor Mr. Solarz has ever faced a tough
challenge. And at bottom, for all their rivalry, the two don't share the same
dream. Mr. Solarz's ideal job is Secretary of State. Mr. Schumer, more the local
politician, has toyed with the idea of running for Mayor of New York.

But each has also considered running for the Senate -- a more politically
realistic goal.

What if the nightmare comes true and they end up facing each other?

"I think he would be a formidable opponent but not necessarily an unbeatable
one," Mr. Solarz said.

"Who knows?" Mr. Schumer said. "It's something I would like very much to avoid.
I'm sure he feels the same way. It's too big a world."


NAME: Steven J. Solarz; Charles E. Schumer

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "It wasn't quite like the Hatfields and McCoys," said
Representative Stephen J. Solarz, right, of his relationship with Representative
Charles E. Schumer, "but neither were we as close as Richard Nixon and Billy
Graham." The Representatives, who represent adjoining districts in Brooklyn, met
for a rare picture together in Washington. (Marty Katz for The New York Times)

Chart:

Charles Ellis Schumer

Born: Nov: 23, 1950

Hometown: Brooklyn

Education: B.A. and J.D. Harvard.

Career Highlights: 1975-81, member, New York State Assembly, 1981, elected to
U.S. House of Representatives.

Hobbies: Reading, especially history and biography; basketball; listening to
classcial and folk music.

Stephen Joshua Solarz

Born: Sept. 12, 1940

Hometown Brooklyn

Education: A.B., Brandeis University, M.A., Columbia University.

Career Highlights: 1969-75 member, New York State Assembly, 1974, elected to
U.S. House of Representatives.

Hobbies: Tennis and reading.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 8, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING;
New York City Promoting Parade for Veterans of Gulf

BYLINE: By KIM FOLTZ

SECTION: Section D; Page 9; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 432 words


WITH the help of American Express and that company's marketing expertise, New
York City is beginning an extensive campaign today to promote its "welcome home"
parade in June for the troops who served in the Persian Gulf.

The campaign, expected to get at least $10 million in donated media time and
space, is intended to encourage millions of people to attend the parade and to
raise the $3 million needed for the celebration, including an elaborate
fireworks display. Additional money will be used to assist veterans of the gulf
conflict and other wars.

"To be a success, the celebration needed an identity," said Thomas Cash, senior
vice president for worldwide marketing at the Travel Related Services division
of the American Express Company. To that end, the credit card company got
Wunderman Worldwide to devise the advertising and Anspach, Grossman, Portugal to
design a logo.

"Aside from donations, we needed additional ways to raise funds," Mr. Cash said.
So the logo, which pictures the Statue of Liberty with yellow ribbon-like rays
of light coming from its torch, will be used on T-shirts and other souvenir
merchandise.

American Express also donated a toll-free telephone line that the public can use
to charge donations. American Express will allow donors to use Visa and
Mastercard.

The parade on June 10 will include military officials, like Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf and Gen. Colin L. Powell, and military men and women who served in
the gulf. But the ads will not show them or even a brief shot of the war. "We
didn't want to offend anyone who was against the conflict," said Mitch Kurz, the
chairman of Wunderman's North American operations. "We wanted this to be a
celebration of a homecoming."

Instead, the ads show a stark picture of empty streets in lower Manhattan, where
the parade will be held. The print and television ads urge people to "fill the
canyons of New York with pride." After all, the ads reason, referring to the
sacrifice made by the armed forces: "They did it for us, let's do it for them."
The ads also ask for donations and list the toll-free number, 800-382-7000.

The shots of empty streets are also intended to evoke images of another
homecoming, for Vietnam veterans, that Americans were less willing to celebrate.
Mike Becker, chief creative officer at Wunderman, said the ads were bound to tap
into the guilty feelings of some Americans about the way military people
returning from Vietman were treated.

"The guys coming back then got no support," he said. "This celebration is meant
to honor all of our veterans."

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: An ad promoting New York City's "welcome home" parade in June
for the men and women who served in the Persian Gulf war.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 8, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

For Vietnamese, a Wave of Gang Terror

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 917 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, April 7


Roaming the freeways around the country, their weapons in the trunks of their
cars, growing numbers of Vietnamese gangs are terrorizing refugee neighborhoods
with what the police have come to call home invasions.

Rootless, leaderless and often homeless, like their parents fleeing the war a
generation before them, they burst into the homes of refugee families from
Sacramento to Houston to Philadelphia to Toronto, using threats and torture to
uncover their victims' valuables.

"They boil in the front door, wave pistols around and make threats," said
William L. Cassidy, a private investigator who is an expert on Vietnamese crime.
"Some of the threats are very benign, like, 'Hey, I'm going to pull your wife's
pants down,' and sometimes they are very heavy, when they just stick a gun in a
kid's ear and blow him away."

For Mr. Cassidy as for other experts on Vietnamese gangs, the brutality of last
Thursday's hostage-taking in Sacramento was familiar, although other features of
the incident were not. Four young Vietnamese men held about 30 people hostage in
an electronics store for more than eight hours. They made extravagant demands
with political overtones, including safe passage to Thailand to fight
Communists.

An 'Unusual Occurrence'

In the gun battle with sheriff's officers that ended the incident, three gunmen
and three hostages were killed and 11 hostages were wounded, with six remaining
hospitalized today, one in critical condition.

"It's a very unusual occurrence; it just doesn't compute," said Sgt. Thomas
Perdue of the San Francisco police, who is president of the 700-member
International Association of Asian Crime Investigators. "For one thing, it was a
non-Asian business, which is very rare."

For another, the political content was unusual. Experts in Asian gangs said
there was typically very little ideology among the alienated young men who join
Vietnamese gangs.

"Most of these youths don't trust anything or anyone," said Nguyen Huu Liem, a
lawyer who has defended Vietnamese gang members in criminal cases. "They are
pitiful victims of the war who grew up in a Communist society where everything
is bankrupt. Then they come here without any guidance or help."

Experts say the alienation that often leads members of other ethnic and racial
groups into gang membership is heightened for the Vietnamese by the difficulty
of adjusting to American society and by a childhood shaped by the aftermath of
war.

The gangs themselves usually depart from the classic pattern in that their
memberships are small and unstructured and instead of defending their turf the
gangs take interstate highways as their territory.

They travel to distant cities and then pick a target by linking up with local
contacts, often friends from the refugee camps where they spent part of their
childhood, or by ripping the page with the name Nguyen from the local telephone
book, gang experts say. When they invade, they spend one to four hours in a
home, climb back into their cars and move on.

"Everybody's seeing a marked increase in the home invasion robberies," said
Sergeant Perdue, who was attending his association's annual conference in
Seattle when the Sacramento incident unfolded. "But nobody's coming up with
numbers. One reason is, we really don't know."

In some hard-hit communities like San Jose, Calif., he said, there were as many
as 40 invasions in one recent 30-day period.

Few Gang Crimes Reported

For their security, he said, the gangs rely on intimidation and on the refugees'
frequent lack of understanding or confidence in law enforcement. As a result,
the police estimate that as few as 30 percent of such crimes are reported.

Experts in gangs said refugee families make good targets because they are often
not comfortable with banks and keep their savings in gold and jewelry hidden in
their homes, as they did in Vietnam.

The invasions can be astonishingly violent. "I've heard of instances where they
have dipped young children in hot water, or burned the hands and fingers of
people," Sergeant Perdue said. "We had one where they took an infant and threw
it against the wall several times -- literally threw it against the wall --
until the people gave up where they had their stuff hidden."

A result, he said, is that "basically a very large community is being held
hostage, if you will, by a very small percentage of people."

The Motel People

Mr. Cassidy, who lives with his Vietnamese wife in the refugee community of
"Little Saigon" in Westminster, an hour south of Los Angeles, said: "Everyone
here has to bar their doors and take security measures. My wife does not feel
safe. She does not like to go shopping. You live with the very real fear of home
invasion robberies."

Experts on the gangs describe the members' lives as a squalid existence in seedy
motel rooms and the back seats of cars.

"They create little families," Mr. Cassidy said. "They live in motels. The slang
among Vietnamese youth is, 'The mo. I live in the mo.' I call them the motel
people."

Mr. Cassidy said the young men in the gangs were victims both of their past in
Vietnam and of the failure of American society to help them to integrate.

"Our society sees the Vietnamese as losers, as a secret shame representing an
unwelcome part of our history," he said. "These teen-agers rebel. They say, 'I
tried to be a Vietnamese, and it didn't work. I tried to be an American, and it
didn't work. So now I'm a gangster.' "

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 8, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Chronicler of America's Great Black Migration

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1219 words


Driving around sections of Philadelphia in 1980 while researching a newspaper
series about a welfare mother, Nicholas Lemann got to thinking about what he was
seeing out his car window. "I suddenly realized that these communities had gone
through incredibly rapid changes in the space of one generation," Mr. Lemann
says. "They had been white, and they had become black almost overnight. And I
thought there was a story there."

That story is the migration of 6.5 million black people from the rural South to
the urban North between 1910 and 1970, and Mr. Lemann tells it in "The Promised
Land: The Great Black Migration and How It Changed America," which was recently
published by Alfred A. Knopf to much critical praise, for both its history and
its analysis. The book is No. 7 in next week's New York Times Book Review
nonfiction best-seller list.

There were many reasons for the migration, Mr. Lemann says, chief among them the
better job opportunities and higher pay available in the North and the invention
of the mechanical cotton picker in 1944, which eliminated the need for
sharecropping, which had dominated Southern life. And when the move came, it had
enormous ramifications for both whites and blacks.

"It was possible a few decades ago to sit in New York and think of race as a
Southern problem," the 36-year-old author says, sitting in New York in the
office of his publisher. "The whole way of thinking about race was that it was
not a national issue. Among Northern whites, for example, there was a sense of
superiority in discussions of race that now is completely gone. Now almost
everybody in white America, particularly in the Northeast, believes that race is
a difficult, intractable, insoluble problem."

Many aspects of Northern life in the 1990's, he says, are very familiar to
anyone who grew up in the South, as he did. "The twin stereotypes of the white
lynch mob and the black rapist, which dominated the consciousness of the South,
are certainly rising up the charts in the consciousness of New York," he says.

The problem of race relations, Mr. Lemann says, is one of those things, along
with the war in Vietnam, that have given a tragic sense to the United States
that it did not have before. "It's the kind of tragic sense that the South
always had," he says.

Mr. Lemann (pronounced lemon), a native of New Orleans, was a reporter for The
Washington Post when he wrote the welfare series. He is now a contributing
editor to The Atlantic, where portions of the book first appeared. His opinions
are strong and firmly stated, but he presents them in a manner that is relaxed
and soft-spoken and in a voice that shows no trace of his hometown.

He is the scion of a family of lawyers who was brought up with the expectation
that he would join the family law firm. But at any early age, he decided against
law and for journalism. "There was something about the very Southern idea that
my whole path in life had been laid out at the moment of my birth," he says.
"Something about that didn't sit right with me. It was more that than an
aversion to the law. I wanted to make my own way."

His mother, a psychologist, hails not from the South but from New Jersey. "My
father is a conservative," he says, "and my mother is a liberal. So I was raised
getting two different views of the world and having to square them."

And how did he do that?

He laughs. "I guess I'm more of the liberal bent," he says. "I vote with my
mother."

The Ends of the Road

In "The Promised Land," Mr. Lemann focuses on two cities on the migration route:
Clarksdale, in the Mississippi Delta, and Chicago. He chose the Delta, he says,
because it was the epitome of the sharecropper system, site of the biggest
Southern plantations at the time of the migration, and also because it was
famous as the home of the blues. He narrowed in on Clarksdale, he says, "because
Muddy Waters was from Clarksdale, and because the cotton-picking machine was
actually invented in Clarksdale -- and that was good enough for me."

Chicago, he says, was "the most mythic place to write about for this story; in
the period the book covers, Chicago was the capital of black America."

The changes the migration brought about were as great for blacks as they were
for whites, Mr. Lemann says. "Black America before the migration was a
predominantly rural culture," he says. "You can even argue that this doesn't
just apply to black America, but that as far back as time stretches, black
culture had been rural. Suddenly, in the blink of an eye, black America becomes
much more urban than white America."

Despite all the problems the changes created, the results were not all bad, he
says. "Many people tend to think of the migration to the North as a failure," he
says. "But it's not a failure. It has really worked out very well for many of
the migrants. Many of them found a better life and many of them no longer live
in the terrible inner-city ghettos. They have moved to the suburbs or the outer
ring of the cities, to pleasant, safe neighborhoods."

Many people also believe, he adds, that the black migration helped bring about
some of the civil-rights victories of the 1960's by creating critical masses of
enfranchised blacks in the North and thus making blacks a political pressure
group for the first time.

On the other hand, Mr. Lemann says, many blacks are still living in those
inner-city ghettos, which are among the worst places in the world to live:
hellholes of intense suffering, rampant drug dependency, severe crime, gang
warfare and random violence.

What can be done? First, Mr. Lemann says, the country must correct a basic
misconception, must "cast off the shackles of the myth about what has already
happened."

"I found," he says, "that in talking with people about the ghettos, Lyndon
Johnson's War on Poverty was a kind of circuit breaker. At some point in the
conversation, people would say: 'Yes, I agree, what's going on in the ghettos is
really terrible, but of course we can't do anything about it. We've tried
everything. The War on Poverty was a failure. In fact, we only made things worse
by throwing money at the problems.' "

Not so, Mr. Lemann says.

For one thing, he says, the people who have moved out of the ghettos and into
stable middle-class neighborhoods have done so in large part by getting
government jobs, "and many of those jobs were created by the Johnson
Administration." And, he says, much remains to be tried, though there are of
course no easy answers.

He would like to see the ghettos made into "more of a launching pad," he says --
which means spending money on education, crime prevention, social programs,
prenatal care and job training, among other things. "It won't work overnight,"
he says. "But it will help."

But what about money in these budget-crunching days?

It's a matter of priorities, he says: "If we could get to the point where the
country decides it wants to do these things, if the problems of the ghettos are
defined as a pressing national need, if we could develop a sense of trust and
confidence that these programs would help, then I think the money will be found.
Just as it was found for other big projects, such as the war in the gulf and the
savings-and-loan bailout."

As Mr. Lemann says, he votes with his mother.

NAME: Nicholas Lemann

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Nicholas Lemann (Don Hogan Charles/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cairo Journal;
Where Envoys Waltzed, Now the Wrecker's Ball

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 966 words

DATELINE: CAIRO


Glimpsed through wrought-iron gates, the elegant two-story building was just the
sort of thing one might expect of an American embassy somewhere on the far side
of the world: a whitewashed mansion framed by a wide marble staircase, and set
against a deep yard of palm trees and dusty green grass.

But after more than four decades of serving American diplomats, the old
chancellery building in Cairo is gone. Its stone facade has been broken by a
wrecker's ball, and a small army of Egyptian workers is now carting away the
debris, clearing the site for the construction of an eight-story high-rise
inside a walled embassy compound with the sunless feel of a Wall Street canyon.

Like other buildings in other cities all over the world, the aging chancellery
had become a dinosaur. Situated in a neighborhood of looping streets and
mansions, a quiet, tree-lined quarter called Garden City that borders the din
and clamor of central Cairo, the old embassy had great character and style. But
it took up valuable space inside a cramped, three-acre compound that already
houses one of the United States Government's largest overseas diplomatic
missions.

'The Price of Progress'

Diplomats here mourn the passing of the chancellery as an emblem of a simpler,
less complicated era, when staffs were smaller, diplomatic life moved at a more
measured pace and security concerns had not turned embassies into brooding
fortresses.

"It's a shame, especially when you imagine that old building being replaced by
another high-rise," a staff member said. "But that is, sadly, the price of
progress."

What has happened in Cairo is not unique. In other foreign capitals too, the
United States has been forced to abandon the gracious villas and mansions where
it had maintained its diplomatic legations, and to replace them with modern
buildings, wired for computer cables and high-speed electronics and reinforced
to resist terrorist bombs.

In the last few years, American diplomats have moved out of aging buildings in
Georgetown, Guyana, and Sana, Yemen. "Some of the older buildings we have been
in around the world are nice, and they have a lot of character," said a State
Department official in Washington. "But they also are inefficient and -- most
important -- vulnerable. Fifty or a hundred years ago, people were not building
for today's truck bombs."

Tougher Look at Security

After bombings at American embassies in Beirut and Kuwait in the early 1980's,
the United States Government took a much tougher look at embassy security. In
1985 a Federal commission recommended an extensive Government program to beef up
security at all American sites overseas.

In Cairo, the task of redeveloping the embassy property was complicated by the
astounding growth of the embassy. When Arthur Lowrie took up his post as the
embassy's political counselor here in 1975, he recalls, the entire United States
mission consisted of 40 Americans, including the Marine security guards.

Just over 10 years later, the embassy had grown to nearly 600. Today, there are
about 480 American staff members, including 110 members of a United States Aid
to International Development mission, which is the largest since Vietnam.

"It was an elegant old place," said Mr. Lowrie, who now teaches at the
University of South Florida in Tampa. "There were tall windows and high ceilings
with ornate plaster work, and a fireplace in the Ambassador's office. But even
when I was there it was a bit cramped."

Metaphor for a City

In some ways, the passing of the chancellery is a metaphor for the city around
it. Over the last two decades, as modernization has overtaken this tangled,
teeming capital of narrow streets and rich but decaying colonial architecture,
thousands of gracious buildings have fallen into total disrepair, or been swept
away entirely to build new European-style office buildings.

The chancellery building was constructed in 1929 as a private residence by a
wealthy Egyptian family. Across the street on one corner was the British
Embassy, which still occupies the site, overlooking the cocoa-colored waters of
the Nile River. Across another street was El Walda Palace, the residence of King
Farouk's mother.

The United States Army bought the villa and its surrounding grounds in 1946, as
the site of a military mission. A year later it became the United States Embassy
in Egypt.

As the staff inside the embassy grew, the green lawns and shady groves behind
the chancellery were torn up and built over, replaced by marble patios and
parking lots. The open-air courtyard where couples once danced at the annual
Marine ball is now a 15-story building, from the top of which the Ambassador
surveys Cairo, safely protected behind recessed, bulletproof windows.

In designing the look of the new embassy compound, architects have sought to
retain a traditional feel. Drawings of the new embassy high-rise show a
two-story columned portico, overlooking a wide lawn of walks, gardens and palm
trees.

In many ways, the old chancellery building had all but disappeared from public
view several years ago. The wrought-iron gates that used to afford some views of
the interior of the embassy property were pulled down and replaced by steel
plates and 20-foot-high, dun-colored walls, reinforced to withstand bomb blasts
and constantly monitored by surveillance cameras.

Among Egyptians who continue to profess their affection for Americans, and the
strong ties that now bind the two nations, there is little admiration for the
face the embassy compound now presents to Cairo.

"I hate to say it, but the American Embassy these days reminds me mostly of
another embassy that is also built like a prison," an Egyptian woman said. "You
know it, the Russian Embassy, across the Nile."

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The old chancellery building at the U.S. Embassy in Cairo is
being torn down to make way for a new high-rise inside the embassy compound.
(Ingeborg Lippmann for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

OUR TOWNS

BYLINE: By Lisa W. Foderaro

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 819 words

DATELINE: YONKERS


When Yonkers opens the first public housing built under a Federal desegregation
order, the new residents selected by housing officials are likely to be people
from southwest Yonkers, where the city's minority population is concentrated,
spending upward of half their income on rent or living in overcrowded
apartments.

Meet Noemi and Jose Febres. For four years they have been on a waiting list for
public housing, and they and their three daughters are the kind of people who
could qualify for the 200 units ordered by a Federal judge to remedy what he
ruled were 40 years of segregated housing of minorities.

That order has propelled a defiant Yonkers to the edge of bankruptcy, as well as
to the United States Supreme Court, for fear of what the newcomers would do to
the mostly white, middle-class East Side where construction is to begin this
week.

For the Febreses, however, their urge to leave their present surroundings,
filled with teen-age gangs and drug dealing, is as strong as the desire of
housing opponents to keep that element out. They dream of trees and
tranquillity. Not long ago, someone smashed the window of Mr. Febres's car and
stole the Bible on the front seat.

"I keep my head down when I walk home from school because there's too much
trouble," said Jessica, a seventh grader. "People fight outside with knives and
everything, and there's blood all over. Kids play on top of cars."

The parents, both 40 years old and born in Puerto Rico, seem to struggle through
each day. Mr. Febres, a Vietnam veteran, has a long list of health problems,
from depression and hallucinations to seizures and partial paralysis in his left
foot, which he says prevents him from working. The cacophony of music, fighting
and police sirens that waft through the windows tug at his already taut nerves.

He walks with a cane and sometimes needs a wheelchair. His veterans' benefits
and a Federal housing subsidy pay the rent on the family's three-bedroom
apartment in a dingy walkup next to a pizzeria.

Last week, Mrs. Febres, who like her husband is not fully fluent in English,
started taking classes at Pace Business School. A small, roundish woman whose
harsh past is etched on her face, she says she enrolled in the two-year
accounting program so she could provide her children with the accoutrements of
teen-age life.

But their daughters, ages 8, 12 and 16, have already plugged themselves into
American culture, picking up the fashions, idioms and ambitions in the four
years they've lived in the United States. Bright and vivacious, the girls have
already experienced a diversity of cultures and backgrounds through the Yonkers
school system -- desegregated years before the city's neighborhoods -- and
report that it's no big deal. In fact, they like it.

"I have two or three friends who are black and two or three friends who are
white," said 16-year-old Ritzy Viviana, her wavy hair swept back in a ponytail.
"It's a challenge to see how they act and dress and communicate. We try to take
the differences and make them work."

Ritzy Viviana has also taken charge of her future. A member of the Junior
Reserved Officer Training Corps at her high school, she not only enjoys doing
her part for her country but looks forward to a college scholarship granted by
the Marine Corps program. For pocket money, she works several hours a week in a
McDonald's.

The 1980 suit against the city was brought by the Justice Department and later
joined by the N.A.A.C.P. But the case has dragged on for so long that Yonkers
has itself changed; the Hispanic population doubled in the last 10 years, and
Hispanic residents now outnumber blacks.

Yet the gulf between middle-class whites on the East Side and poor minorities in
the southwest quadrant remains considerable. The Febres family, for example, had
not even heard about the housing controversy. Although the issue has dominated
the local news, it had not penetrated their insular world of daily survival and
nightly church services.

When a visitor told them of the vehemence of the protests and the potentially
unwelcoming environment in which the new housing is to be built, the family
seemed surprised but not worried. They agreed that ignorance and misperceptions
were responsible and felt confident that any fears would dissolve once they met
their new neighbors.

"I love everybody," Mrs. Febres said. "I'm going to be nice to them, and they're
going to see that I'm a different person than they think. They will change."

"If they need something," said 12-year-old Jessica, "I'll let them borrow it.
I'd like to share."

Speaking with pre-teen bluntness, Jessica sounded a theme often heard by the
housing opponents on the East Side. Asked if she thought drugs and crime would
necessarily follow public housing, she said, "If they pick the right people, it
won't happen. Just by looking at somebody, you can tell how they are."

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Detroit Strives to Reclaim Lost Generation of Buyers

BYLINE: By DORON P. LEVIN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1785 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, April 8


When Sue Anderson passed her driver's exam 10 years ago, she inherited the
family Mazda. After graduation from college, she bought her family's Saab. Last
year, the 26-year-old graphic designer from Grand Rapids, Mich., bought her
first new car. It was a 1990 Mitsubishi Eclipse.

"I never really considered buying an American car, which is not to say I
wouldn't," said Ms. Anderson, who aspires to buy another Saab. "I guess buying a
foreign car has been kind of ingrained in me."

Foreign Cars Favored

Ms. Anderson is part of the auto industry's "lost generation." A new wave of
young drivers are shopping for their first new cars and trucks, and their biases
spell deep trouble for the American auto industry. In large part, they are the
children of the drivers who first traded their Fords, Dodges and Chevrolets in
the 1970's for Hondas, Toyotas and BMW's. As they were growing up, their family
cars were typically foreign makes, and they knew mostly horror stories about
Detroit's products. Shaped by their parents' tastes, these young adults rarely
set foot in the Big Three's car dealerships.

In the last decade, the American auto industry has invested more than $100
billion to improve quality, develop new designs and make vehicles more
appealing. The General Motors Corporation's $3 billion Saturn project is only
the latest example. But just gaining the attention of what the industry calls
"import committed" buyers is among the most intractable of Detroit's
predicaments -- and among the most critical to reverse.

"If Detroit is not successful in getting these buyers back," warned Robert A.
Lutz, president of the Chrysler Corporation, "market share will experience
further, gradual erosion." Only last month, Lee A. Iacocca, chairman and chief
executive of Chrysler, appealed to President Bush to suppress Japanese imports,
warning that the weak No. 3 auto maker would be "gone" if Japanese auto makers
continued to gain market share.

Change in Buying Habits

The sea change in American car-buying attitudes came about even before foreign
models were being offered in significant numbers. Demographers detected a
radical change in buying habits around the time of the Vietnam War. Before the
mid-1960's, children frequently embraced the brand of consumer products,
including cars, that their parents used. Adults tended to be loyal to one brand,
and their children followed suit.

But the phenomenon of "Chevy families" and "Ford families" faded when children
of the baby boom after World War II reached car-buying age in the 1970's. "Baby
boomers had more money and were better educated," said James Kornas, director of
market assessment for G.M.'s Cadillac division. "They also were rejecting their
parents' values."

One value they rejected was loyalty to their parents' brands. "They could
recognize the value and utility of imports," Mr. Kornas said. "This was the
original BMW and Honda Accord crowd."

As more drivers tried foreign models and liked their fuel efficiency,
reliability and comfort, even for smaller models, they spread the word. Good
word of mouth, automotive marketers say, is by far the best advertising. The
baby boomers were not particularly loyal to individual import brands, only to
the notion of avoiding domestic models. Even if they loved their Honda, they
might be willing to try a Toyota next.

Many of the baby boomers' children -- today's car buyers -- have reverted to
their parents' buying habits. Consider the Gribbin family's history of car
ownership:

David J. Gribbin, 51 years old, of Bethesda, Md., traded his 1978 Mustang II
after just one year for a Honda Accord when the Mustang's transmission burned
out, and later motor oil dripped down a cable and leaked through the dashboard.

"I bought a second Honda Accord because I liked the first one," he said. Since
his first Honda, Mr. Gribbin's wife, Lori, bought a Nissan Maxima, his daughter,
Deborah, inherited Mrs. Gribbin's used Nissan, and their son, D. J., traded a
Subaru for a Toyota Corolla.

"I watched my parents' experience when American cars hit rock bottom," said D.
J. Gribbin, 27, who is a lobbyist in Washington. "It's one thing for a car to
leak oil -- but through the dashboard? Foreign cars might be more expensive, but
the upkeep is less."

Foreign-Made Flops

Of course, there have have been foreign-made flops, too. Renault, the French
auto maker, stumbled in the United States with its Dauphine in the early 1960's
and has never had much success here. Mazda's first cars imported here had faulty
rotary engines and other problems. Even some early Hondas had defects.

Detroit auto makers are trying to build vehicles that will erase the bitter
memories of yesteryear's Pintos and Volares. The Ford Motor Company's Taurus and
Chrysler's mini-vans exemplify models that have demonstrated vastly improved
quality and have also been popular sellers because of innovative design.

But altering the perceptions of young buyers like Sue Anderson, who are not
familiar with domestic models and never grew up with them, or the younger Mr.
Gribbin, who has wanted little to do with American cars, is proving to be a
daunting problem.

Market Share Dwindles

"A lot of people would have trouble admitting to their peers that they bought an
Oldsmobile even if they thought it was every bit as good as a Honda," said Chris
Cedergren of J. D. Power & Associates, an automotive marketing company in Agoura
Hills, Calif.

Over all, the Big Three's share of the United States car market has dwindled to
67 percent. That statistic, however, does not apply to all age groups equally.
Generally, older drivers prefer domestic makes, while younger ones, especially
in their 20's and 30's, prefer foreign makes.

According to a J. D. Power study, 86 percent of the cars bought by people 65
years of age and older are domestic brands while only 14 percent of the people
in that age group buy foreign makes.

The shift is more dramatic in the 25-to-34 age group. There, 54 percent drive
domestic models, while about 46 percent drive cars made by foreign
manufacturers.

Same Old Reason

Of course, many believe United States auto makers are failing to win back import
buyers for precisely the reason they first lost them: Too few of the Big Three's
models are competitive in performance, quality and style. Independent
researchers still give the Japanese models generally higher ratings for quality,
value and reliability.

"I don't think it's snobbism," said Martin Swig, a San Francisco dealer who
sells imported and domestic brands. "Honda and Toyota haven't made many
mistakes. Consumers are acting in a rational way."

Mr. Iacocca disagrees. He blames the nation's "inferiority complex" for causing
consumers to choose Japanese models over Chryslers, Dodges and Plymouths, which
Chrysler asserts are superior to Hondas and Toyotas.

"People think all Japanese products are good and all American products are bad,"
Mr. Iacocca declared last year in a televised advertisement. "Now that's got to
stop."

From the earliest days of the Volkswagen Beetle, Detroit has struggled to
understand why American consumers have flocked to smaller, lighter,
fuel-efficient models imported by foreign auto makers. "The industry had the
utter misapprehension that the people who bought these cars were second-rate
buyers in education and income levels and didn't care about quality," said David
E. Davis, editor of Automobile magazine.

G.M.'s Chevrolet Corvair, Ford's Falcon and Chrysler's Plymouth Valiant were
low-quality vehicles aimed at Beetle buyers of the 1960's. The next generation
of import fighters, the Chevy Vega, which had chronic engine defects; the Ford
Pinto, which was criticized for its propensity to catch fire in rear-end
collisions, and, in the mid-70's, the American Motors Pacer, an odd-shaped
vehicle that used too much gas for a small car, were just more of Detroit's
self-inflicted wounds,

In the 80's, Detroit tried leather-wrapped steering wheels, black molding to
replace chrome strips and European-sounding names, but they did little to
attract import buyers. Nor were buyers won over by the Cadillac Cimarron, a
small, lower-priced luxury car that was essentially a dressed-up Chevrolet
Cavalier.

The Big Three have also renamed several foreign models and sold them as their
own with mixed success. Suzuki's Sprint, for example, also sells as Chevrolet's
Geo Metro and has added some sales for G.M. Ford's attempt to start a Merkur
franchise with two European-made models failed to attract many buyers.

Owners of foreign cars appear to be too savvy to be swayed by such tactics, said
Laurel Cutler, vice chairman of the FCB/Leber Katz advertising agency and a
former Chrysler vice president. "Instead," she said, "they have to hear from
domestic owners, 'It's a wonderful car, I haven't had a lick of trouble.' And
then it will be a long and hard battle before people change."

Joint Ventures Worked

When Big Three auto makers have teamed up with Japanese partners to develop or
build models, they have achieved some hits. Ms. Anderson's $12,000 Mitsubishi,
for example, was designed in Japan but assembled at the Diamond-Star plant in
Bloomington, Ill., a joint venture of Chrysler and the Mitsubishi Motors
Corporation. Her Mitsubishi Eclipse is virtually identical to Chrysler's Eagle
Talon and Plymouth Laser, produced on the same assembly line.

Of the 50 million to 60 million households that buy new cars and trucks every
few years, a quarter already may be solidly committed to buying foreign brands,
according to Charles Stannard of DMB&B in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., the
advertising agency for Cadillac and Pontiac.

"The car makers have to try to go after the very young," he said. "By the time
you get into your 40's, it's too late to win you back." He says he thinks that
more daring styling might win the Big Three some converts, because the styling
of current Japanese models is bland.

Data from the first few thousand sales of G.M.'s new Saturn model, a
front-wheel-drive compact that costs $8,000 to $12,000, are coming in. The car
is built in Spring Hill, Tenn., and went on sale in November in parts of the
United States and will be sold nationwide in coming weeks. G.M. says that about
half the people who have purchased Saturn models said their second choice was a
foreign car.

"All things being equal, I would like to buy an American car," said the younger
Mr. Gribbin. To accommodate his growing family he is considering trading his
Toyota for a domestic mini-van. "It's better for our economy and our trade
balance," he said. "But it's got to hold up." Power, J.D.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  Buying foreign cars has become a tradition for Sue Anderson, front,
and the rest of her family, including, from left, her brothers, Terry and Todd,
and her mother, Joyce.

CLARENCE ANDERSON

   Grandfather, 82
   Current car: Ford Granada
   Has "mostly driven Fords and Mercurys."

MARION ANDERSON

   His wife, 66
   Current car: Ford Mustang

WILLIAM ANDERSON

   Father, 57
   Current car: Volvo
   Last American car: 1981 Buick

JOYCE ANDERSON

   Mother, 58
   Current car: Mitsubishi
   Last American car: 1979 Buick

TODD ANDERSON

   Son, 28
   Current car: Nissan
   Last American car: 1986 Ford

SUE ANDERSON

   Daughter, 26
   Current car: Mitsubishi
   Never owned an American car

TERRY ANDERSON

   Son, 35
   Current car: Nissan
   Also owns: Chevrolet Camaro

Graph: "Finding the Lost Generation" shows the percentage of each age group
buying domestic and foreign 1990 model cars. Based on a survey of 35,000 buyers.
(Source: J.D. Power & Associates) (pg. D4)
Chart: "Passing On a Disregard for the American Car"

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
The Manly Joy of Anguish

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 729 words


The moral argument for intervening against Saddam Hussein's slaughter of
rebelling Kurds and Shiites was never answered by the Bush people. They didn't
have to answer it really. They had the popularity polls on their side.

In politics, government and diplomacy as practiced nowadays, morality can be
invoked when it suits a case and ignored when it is inconvenient, but the need
for strong popularity polls is absolutely vital.

Stalin is said to have laughed away the question of Vatican authority in world
affairs by asking how many divisions the Pope had. George Bush could have
dismissed the moralists with much the same reply. With his great polls, he had
the divisions; he didn't have to justify the morality of letting Kurds and
Shiites die.

The mood music out of Washington during this somewhat ignoble episode is
reminiscent of old Europe's diplomatic cynicism. One imagines diplomatic
gunslingers silently congratulating themselves on their ruthlessness while
speaking words like "realpolitik" and "geopolitical."

When "geopolitical" is on Washington tongues, look out; it usually means another
batch of the earth's wretched will soon be introduced to even greater depths of
misery.

I heard "geopolitical" spoken twice last week by the kind of Washington
reporters who appear on TV panel shows that purport to make everything perfectly
clear. Such reporters soak up the sound and feel of Washington so thoroughly
that they often seem to be as official, and depressing, as the Congressional
Record, the latest White House press release and the Senate cloakroom gossip.

If they are saying "geopolitical," it is because heavy government people are
saying "geopolitical."

Still, the moralists were an embarrassment, and not just because they threatened
to spoil the gala postwar mood. Rising above morality may have been awkward for
the President, for instance, since no one had played the moralizer more
earnestly when he was selling war to the public last winter.

He had led the campaign that painted Saddam Hussein as the embodiment of
diabolical evil. Saddam Hussein was another Hitler, he was "the Butcher of
Baghdad," he was evil itself, and evil had to be destroyed.

It won't do for the President to protest that destroying Saddam Hussein was
never an official war aim. In selling the war, he encouraged the public to infer
that it was. When old-time religion was needed to win public sentiment for war,
the President preached it, all the time fostering the illusion that war would
get rid of old Satan.

And what have we now? Old Satan doesn't look half as bad as he did last winter.
Yes, it would be nice if another military man -- somebody sort of like Saddam
Hussein, only kinder, gentler -- would shoot or export old Satan. But if that's
not in the cards -- well, come on now! Would you really rather have Kurds or
Shiites running Iraq?

Of course you wouldn't, unless you are incredibly naive about geopolitical
realities. So goes the present defense of the indefensible: Enough of this
moralizing! Reducing Iraq to childish simplicities was good for America when war
was being sold.  Now we must realize that it is a cruel and complicated world.
We must resist the temptation to wallow in moral sentimentality. We must be
realistic, etc., etc.

The most awkward question for Mr. Bush flows from the Hitler analogy which the
President himself once articulated: By letting Saddam-Hitler proceed unhindered
in his killing of Kurds and Shiites, wasn't George Bush recapitulating the
failure of Allied leaders in World War II to try very hard to save Hitler's
victims from the Holocaust?

On the other hand, however, the question of military intervention raised
memories of that more recent horror when military intervention in another
nation's civil wars mired a succession of Presidents in Vietnam.

So the Bush people faced a truly dreadful dilemma. With his devastating war,
ostensibly for the high moral purpose of expunging evil in Baghdad, the
President had roused Iraq's discontented peoples to rise against Saddam Hussein.
When it turned out that Satan had not been hopelessly crippled after all, the
President's choice was to let them die or wade into another potential Vietnam.

Thus war's victory leaves us a shame to be forgotten fast. Fortunately, the Bush
polls are excellent. Forgetting proceeds nicely.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Favored Cambodians Lose U.S. Aid

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 475 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 9


Washington has suspended new aid to the non-Communist Cambodian factions,
Administration, Congressional and non-Communist Cambodian officials say.

The officials also say that the non-Communist factions, which Washington has
long supported, are running short of money because aid left over from the
previous fiscal year, which ended last Sept. 30, is now running out.

At least $7 million in American aid to the non-Communists, authorized and
appropriated by Congress for this fiscal year, has not yet been spent, the
officials here and in Washington say, because of disputes with Congress over
allegations that some past American aid might have benefitted the Communist
Khmer Rouge.

The Bush Administration will try to reach a better understanding of its
Cambodian policy with Congress during hearings on Wednesday and Thursday.

The Khmer Rouge, under whose rule from 1975-79 more than one million Cambodians
died, is the strongest partner in a shaky alliance with the two non-Communist
factions, one led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the other by Son Sann, a former
Sihanouk prime minister.

The non-Communists say they have received no new American money since Feb. 1,
and that thousands of hungry refugees who are fleeing to areas under their
control thus cannot be fed. But Western diplomats, while not denying that bad
harvests have created serious hunger in many areas, say that the non-Communists
are using the hunger issue to regain the aid.

"This American aid was never intended to feed refugees," a senior Western
diplomat said. "If people are starving, there will be other resources."

Concern that the non-Communists might be cooperating on the battlefield with the
Khmer Rouge led Congress last year to alter this year's funding. The
Administration has said no aid went directly to the Khmer Rouge, but said there
were incidents of low-level battlefield coordination. It cut out a covert aid
program overseen and administered by American intelligence agencies and required
some money to be spent on aid inside Cambodia, in areas controlled by the
Government, installed by Vietnam after it drove out the Khmer Rouge.

Congress had already banned the executive branch from providing any aid to the
Khmer Rouge or any "lethal aid" to the non-Communists. The old American program
totaled about $24 million a year in both overt and covert aid. This year,
however, Congress stipulated that after $7 million in the old overt spending
category was disbursed, the Administration would have to report back to Congress
and seek approval for up to another $13 million in appropriated spending. The
administration must report on whether there has been cooperation between the
non-Communists and the Khmer Rouge.

In addition, Congress ordered that another $5 million be spent inside Cambodia
on assistance to needy children.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
A Catharsis and Coup de Theatre For Women Veterans of Vietnam

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1132 words

DATELINE: LOUISVILLE, Ky., April 7


As the lights came up on a reproduction of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in
Washington, women who served in that war placed mementoes of their experience as
if they were flowers on a grave. The reaction of the audience at the Actors
Theater of Louisville was palpable. Sobs filled the house in a crescendo that
became a group lamentation. This final scene in Shirley Lauro's new play, "A
Piece of My Heart," is a catharsis as well as a coup de theatre. The women in
the play are the most forgotten among all those who had been forgotten in
Vietnam.

The play itself was the climax of the 15th annual Humana Festival of New
American Plays, seen this weekend in a marathon of seven full-length works and
two one-acts. In previous years, the festival (under the artistic direction of
Jon Jory) has reached individual heights (with plays from Beth Henley's "Crimes
of the Heart" to last season's "2" by Romulus Linney) and collective depths in a
period in which Mr. Jory commissioned plays from celebrities.

This year was an on-season for Actors Theater, as the company resoundingly
expressed its valuable purpose, to encourage playwrights to challenge themselves
and the hundreds of theatergoers who converge on Louisville for the annual
spring festival. Gone was the pretentious symbolism of plays in which
metaphorical hounds of hell seemed to bark at the door of every drama. Instead
there were tangible and meaningful plays by three theater artists. Along with
Ms. Lauro, the Actors Theater offered a striking study of revolutionary Cuba by
Eduardo Machado and, as an audience rouser, a dark comedy about a troupe of
female wrestlers, written by Jane Martin, the first full-length play with
interacting characters by this pseudonymous Louisvillian.

Through these plays and others of varying interest ran the festival's primary
theme: the violence, psychological and physical, suffered by women, and their
valiant attempts at self-assertion. These views ranged from the journey into
madness of a lonely shopkeeper (in Shem Bitterman's evocative but attenuated
interior monologue, "Night-Side") to the serial killer who regards the murder of
women as an extension of seduction (Lee Blessing's disappointing "Down the
Road").

In Ms. Lauro's "Piece of My Heart" (based on Keith Walker's oral history of the
same title), six women, most of them nurses, fly to Vietnam on a wave of
innocence and idealism -- almost immediately replaced by panic. They are
insufficiently trained and totally unprepared for the maimed bodies, the river
of blood that flows through the hospital after it is bombed and the illogic of
the war itself. In the second act, back home, we see the full nightmare of the
war and its aftermath.

There have been a number of plays dealing with Vietnam (most recently Steve
Tesich's "Speed of Darkness") but none with the direct emotional impact of Ms.
Lauro's work. It is, on one level, a model of the art of the dramatic collage.
The playwright has taken true stories and crossthreaded them so that the
monologous nature is completely concealed. In collaboration with the director,
Allen R. Bel knap, and a symbiotic company of actresses (one actor plays all the
male roles), Ms. Lauro has turned firsthand impressions into a disturbing drama
that evokes empathy for survivors as victims, especially the women in the war
zone, whose only weapons are their hearts.

With equal perceptiveness, three of the talented actresses in Ms. Lauro's play
have totally disparate roles in Ms. Martin's "Cementville," directed by Mr.
Jory. The title (pronounced "seementville") is a fictional Tennessee town with a
sports arena that once housed greats like Jake LaMotta but has now fallen on
seedy times. Mock wrestling matches are staged for the rabble, sports descended
to the depths of show business.

In a fiercely funny first act, a border state reversal of David Storey's
"Changing Room," female wrestlers are in a dingy locker room preparing for the
evening's show. As she did in "Talking With," Ms. Martin creates a panoply of
individualized characters, but, in contrast to that earlier anthology of
monologues, these people become an interwoven ensemble.

In the second act, the play spins into an outbreak of locker bashing violence,
which unwisely makes explicit things more effectively encountered as offstage
emanations. But the ending itself knits the play together in a moment of
ruefulness. "Cementville" offers additional confirmation of Ms. Martin's gift
for dialogue, as she captures the local colorfulness of obsessive characters.
There is also a knowing sense of our times, as in one character's prediction
that fantasy entertainment is the growth industry of the 90's.

For Mr. Machado, "In the Eye of the Hurricane" is a long awaited realization of
the playwright's early promise. The success is shared equally with the director,
Anne Bogart, whose visually arresting production offers a tangoesque view of a
Cuban family and Cuba itself (in 1960) in the throes of radical change. Emotions
seethe and flare, as the playwright and the director orchestrate a symphony of
contradictions.

The stage echoes with love-hate, along with outlandish humor akin to that of
Mario Vargas Llosa. When the family's bus line is about to be nationalized by
Castro, relatives agree to lie down in front of the buses in order to safeguard
the vehicles. The confident head of the household takes his prone position in
front of a giant tire, awaiting vindication or death, and then, as the bus pulls
away, realizes that he has forgotten the alternative of reverse gear.

"We are what they want to throw away," he says in reference to the new regime.
This is a disposable nouveaux riche society and to a great extent the characters
have brought about their own downfall with their chicanery and guile. Feminism
emerges in the portrait of the matriarch, still demanding in her old age (a
feisty Lynn Cohen) but a woman submerged in a male heirarchy. The most stylish
performance is given by Christopher McCann as the serpentine son, for whom
compromise becomes a condition of survival.

The other plays included "A Passenger Train of 61 Coaches" by Paul Walker, a
Story Theater style exercise about Anthony Comstock's crusade for censorship.
The work is surprisingly enervating considering the renewed timeliness of the
subject.

"The Death of Zukasky" by Richard Strand brings the repression of women into the
board room, with a funny cartoon about corporate politics and backstabbing
behind the infrastructure. In it, a woman executive becomes the unwitting foil
of the company's con artist. In sitcom fashion, "Zukasky" provides laughs, but
it is the memory of plays by Ms. Lauro, Mr. Machado and Ms. Martin that
theatergoers will take home from Louisville this year.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A scene from Shirley Lauro's new play, "A Piece of My Heart" at
the Actors Theater of Louisville. (Richard C. Trigg/Actors Theater of
Louisville)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By SUSAN HELLER ANDERSON

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 4; Style Desk

LENGTH: 171 words


Playing tough guys on the screen is one thing, but proving toughness in real
life is another. The actor MICKEY ROURKE will make his debut as a professional
boxer on May 23 at the Fort Lauderdale War Memorial Auditorium in Florida. Mr.
Rourke, 34, fought 26 fights as an amateur in the 1970's before he started a
film career that has included "9 1/2 Weeks," "The Pope of Greenwich Village,"
"Diner," "Angel Heart" and "Barfly."

His trainer, TOMMY TORINO, said the actor can still box. "I'm in the boxing
business, not the 'Fantasy Island' business," Mr. Torino was quoted as saying in
The Miami Herald on Monday. "If he couldn't fight, I'd be helping him by not
allowing him to fight."

There will be six or seven fights on the night of Mr. Rourke's debut, said SAL
CHERCH of the Vietnam Veterans Association, which is sponsoring the fights. The
profits, after the fighters' purses and the auditorium rental fees are paid,
will benefit the South Florida Veterans Multi-Purpose Center, which serves
veterans of all wars.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 12, 1991, Friday

CORRECTION:

A report in Chronicle on Wednesday about the actor Mickey Rourke's debut as a
professional boxer misidentified Sal Cherch. He is president of Quest
International, the company promoting the fight, to benefit the South Florida
Veterans Multi-Purpose Center, which serves veterans of all wars. He is not a
member of the Vietnam Veterans Association, the group sponsoring the fight.


                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 11, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Charges Against Homeless Man Are Dropped in Murder in Village

BYLINE: By RONALD SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 540 words


A Manhattan judge yesterday dismissed murder charges against a homeless man
accused of shooting a West Village advertising executive to death last summer.
The prosecution said it did not have enough evidence to convict him.

Standing at the defense table in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, the homeless
man, 42-year-old William Emerson, said the charges and imprisonment had left him
bitter and disillusioned with the criminal-justice system.

"At one time, I believed in our judicial system," he said. "But after being put
in jail for six months for something I did not do, I have lost faith in the
police and the District Attorney's office. This happened to me because I was
homeless and black, which made me a perfect target."

Assistant District Attorney Raymond Castello made no apology for Mr. Emerson's
indictment.

Mr. Emerson was charged with the murder of John Reisenbach, 33, who was shot to
death on July 30 while making a call from a sidewalk pay telephone near his
apartment at 61 Jane Street in an apparent robbery attempt.

Six Months on Rikers Island

Mr. Castello told Acting Justice Carol Berkman that "after an extensive
investigation" he did not have enough evidence to prove Mr. Emerson guilty
"beyond a reasonable doubt." Then, without suggesting that the police had
arrested the wrong man, he asked that the indictment be dismissed.

But David Blackstone, Mr. Emerson's court-appointed lawyer, criticized both the
police and the prosecution. "This case never should have been presented to a
grand jury," he said. "Mr. Emerson, who is an innocent man, could have spent his
life in jail as a result of this unjust prosecution."

Mr. Emerson spent six months on Rikers Island before being released in January.

Mr. Blackstone said that although homeless, Mr. Emerson had a degree in
accounting and was an honorably discharged Vietnam veteran who was looking for a
job but was too embarrassed to stand up in court and ask for one.

Series of Random Killings

Justice Berkman said Mr. Emerson "had no reason to lose faith" in the
criminal-justice system and cited the "commendable effort" by the prosecution to
have the charges dropped once it concluded it had no case against him.

The July 30 shooting, which followed a series of random killings in New York
City last summer, terrorized a tightly knit residential neighborhood that felt
under increasing siege at night by drug dealers and prostitutes. With that in
mind, Mr. Blackstone said the police were "swept up" by the publicity around the
case and under intense pressure to make a quick arrest.

Within three days, the police arrested Mr. Emerson, saying at the time that
another homeless person and a transvestite prostitute had incriminated him. But
the homeless man's evidence was not sustained and the prostitute has apparently
left the area.

Officials in the District Attorney's office said the investigation of the murder
was continuing. But they said they had no immediate new leads.

Since his release, Mr. Emerson has been getting help from an agency in the Bronx
in seeking a home and a job. The victim's widow, Victoria Reisenbach, said she
just hoped that her husband's killer would be caught and convicted.



LOAD-DATE: April 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:
Photo: William Emerson making a statement at State Supreme Court in Manhattan as
his lawyer, David Blackstone, listened. A judge dismissed murder charges against
Mr. Emerson, who had been charged in the shooting of a West Village advertising
executive. (Linda Baron for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 11, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Barrett Scoville, 55, Executive and Scholar

SECTION: Section B; Page 14; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 217 words


Dr. Barrett Scoville, a pharmaceutical executive and medical school professor,
was killed Sunday when his single-engine plane crashed on takeoff at the Great
Barrington Airport in Massachusetts. He was 55 years old and lived in
Washington.

Dr. Scoville, a seasoned pilot who had made a solo trans-Atlantic round-trip
flight in his Comanche aircraft, had been visiting friends in Massachusetts.

At his death he was vice president for clinical development at Otsuka America
Pharmaceutical Inc. in Rockville, Md., and an assistant professor of psychiatry
and behavorial science at the Johns Hopkins Medical School.

Dr. Scoville was a graduate of Yale College and Johns Hopkins Medical School.
After a tour of duty in the Army, in which he was a captain at an evacuation
hospital in South Vietnam, he returned to civilian life and served from 1969 to
1978 with the Food and Drug Administration and the National Institutes of
Health. At the F.D.A. he headed a division dealing with neuropharmocological
drug products and was an expert on epilepsy.


He joined the Johns Hopkins faculty in 1972 and was hired by the Otsuka
organization in 1982.

He is survived by his mother, Emily L. Scoville of Manhattan; a sister, Lisa
Dittrich of Cambridge, Mass., and a brother, Peter of Zillah, Wash.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 12, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Congress Still Uneasy on Cambodia

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 690 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 11


The Administration's freeze on aid to the non-Communist guerrillas fighting in
coalition with the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia has dampened but not silenced
Congressional criticism of the United States role in Cambodia.

Washington announced the suspension of at least $7 million in aid to the
non-Communists on Wednesday because officials had found evidence that the rebels
violated a Congressionally mandated restriction against battlefield coordination
with the Khmer Rouge. The Chinese-supported force has been held responsible for
more than a million deaths from killings and starvation when it held power in
the 1970's.

In a hearing of the Senate subcommittee on East Asian and Pacific Affairs today,
several Senators continued to express criticism of a peace process backed by the
Administration that allows the Khmer Rouge to take part in a Supreme National
Council that would help the United Nations and Government oversee proposed
elections. But the sparks and harsh confrontation that characterized the
hearings on Cambodia last year were absent.

Senator Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska and a leading critic of the
Administration's policy, appeared to express the tone of his colleagues'
opinions when he said, "I do not doubt the wisdom of cutting off aid." But he
added that the Administration should lift its trade embargo on Cambodia as a way
to encourage democracy.

Support for Coalition

Since Vietnam invaded Cambodia and installed the Hun Sen Government in 1979,
Washington has backed a loose coalition of guerrilla groups, including two
non-Communist groups dominated by Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the Khmer Rouge.
That policy became increasingly unpopular in Congress after the withdrawal of
ost Vietnamese military forces in 1989 and as the Khmer Rouge made steady
military progress.

Under Congressional pressure, the Administration last year dropped its support
for a Cambodian delegation at the United Nations that included members of the
Khmer Rouge and began contacts with Cambodian Government officials. Congress
also halted covert aid to the rebels, and approved legislation that pressed the
Administration to broaden ties with the Hun Sen Government.

A senior Senate aide who monitors Cambodia said the Administration's suspension
of aid "has muted the reaction." The official also noted that members were
pleased that the Administration was beginning to accept bids from humanitarian
organizations seeking to distribute more than $5 million in aid for needy
children living in areas governed by Phnom Penh.

Senator Edward M. Kennedy has introduced legislation to cut off aid to the
Cambodian opposition permanently, but few members have expressed support for his
bill so far. But the debate will most likely heat up again should the
Administration reinstate aid to the guerrillas or should the Khmer Rouge open a
major military offensive. There is currently a lull in the fighting.

Accord 'Within Reach'

Richard H. Solomon, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific
Affairs, testified today that the diplomatic process to bring about a
cease-fire, an interim government supervised by the United Nations, and free
elections was making progress despite reports that it had stalled.

"A comprehensive settlement agreement is now within reach," he said, "if the
Cambodian parties and others -- including Vietnam -- will cooperate."

That assessment was contradicted by several Senators.

"The Administration says that it wants to isolate the Khmer Rouge through the
settlement process," said Senator Alan Cranston, Democrat of California and
chairman of the subcommittee. "Let us be clear about what the proposed
settlement does: It gives the Khmer Rouge political legitimacy."

Senator Frank H. Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, asked rhetorically, "Why are
we indirectly supporting the Khmer Rouge by supporting the non-Communist allies
of the Khmer Rouge while trying to defeat the only Cambodian force fighting the
Khmer Rouge?" Mr. Murkowski suggested that the Administration was wrong to
isolate the Hun Sen Government given that it had begun to privatize the economy.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 12, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
'Miss Saigon' Arrives, From the Old School

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2008 words


THERE may never have been a musical that made more people angry before its
Broadway debut than "Miss Saigon."

Here is a show with something for everyone to resent -- in principle, at least.
Its imported stars, the English actor Jonathan Pryce and the Filipino actress
Lea Salonga, are playing roles that neglected Asian-American performers feel are
rightfully theirs. Its top ticket price of $100 is a new Broadway high, sprung
by an English producer, if you please, on a recession-straitened American
public. More incendiary still is the musical's content. A loose adaptation of
"Madama Butterfly" transplanted to the Vietnam War by French authors, the "Les
Miserables" team of Alain Boublil and Claude-Michel Schonberg, "Miss Saigon"
insists on revisiting the most calamitous and morally dubious military adventure
in American history and, through an unfortunate accident of timing, arrives in
New York even as the jingoistic celebrations of a successful American war are
going full blast.

So take your rage with you to the Broadway Theater, where "Miss Saigon" opened
last night, and hold on tight. Then see just how long you can cling to the anger
when confronted by the work itself. For all that seems galling about "Miss
Saigon" -- and for all that is indeed simplistic, derivative and, at odd
instances, laughable about it -- this musical is a gripping entertainment of the
old school (specifically, the Rodgers and Hammerstein East-meets-West school of
"South Pacific" and "The King and I"). Among other pleasures, it offers lush
melodies, spectacular performances by Mr. Pryce, Miss Salonga and the American
actor Hinton Battle, and a good cry. Nor are its achievements divorced from its
traumatic subject, as cynics might suspect. Without imparting one fresh or
daring thought about the Vietnam War, the show still manages to plunge the
audience back into the quagmire of a generation ago, stirring up feelings of
anguish and rage that run even deeper than the controversies that attended "Miss
Saigon" before its curtain went up.

Challenged perhaps by the ill will that greeted their every move, the evening's
creators, led by the director Nicholas Hytner, have given New York a far sharper
version of "Miss Saigon" than the one originally staged in London. The much
publicized (and inane) helicopter effect notwithstanding, this is the least
spectacular and most intimate of the West End musicals. The most stirring
interludes feature two or three characters on an empty stage or in a bar girl's
dingy hovel, and for once the production has been made leaner rather than
fattened up for American consumption. (Though the Broadway Theater is among the
largest Broadway houses, it seems cozy next to the cavernous Drury Lane, where
the show plays in London.) If "Miss Saigon" is the most exciting of the
so-called English musicals -- and I feel it is, easily -- that may be because it
is the most American. It freely echoes Broadway classics, and some of its
crucial personnel are Broadway hands: the co-lyricist Richard Maltby Jr., the
choreographer Bob Avian, the orchestrator William D. Brohn.

Without two legendary American theatrical impresarios, David Belasco and Harold
Prince, there would in fact be no "Miss Saigon." It was Belasco's
turn-of-the-century dramatization of the Madame Butterfly story that inspired
Puccini's opera, and it was Mr. Prince who, inspired by Brecht and the actor
Joel Grey 25 years ago, created the demonic, symbolic Emcee of "Cabaret," a
character that is unofficially recycled on this occasion in a role called the
Engineer and played by Mr. Pryce. These two influences are brilliantly fused
here. Altered substantially but not beyond recognition, the basic "Butterfly"
premise of an Asian woman who is seduced and abandoned by an American military
man is affectingly rekindled in "Miss Saigon" by Mr. Schonberg's score and Miss
Salonga's clarion, emotionally naked delivery of it. Whenever that tale flirts
with bathos, along comes the leering, creepy Mr. Pryce to jolt the evening back
into the hellish, last-night-of-the-world atmosphere that is as fitting for the
fall of Saigon as it was for the Weimar Berlin of "Cabaret."

The theatrical poles of "Miss Saigon" represented by its two stars are equally
powerful. Miss Salonga, whose performance has grown enormously since crossing
the Atlantic, has the audience all but worshiping her from her first appearance
as Kim, an open-faced 17-year-old waif from the blasted Vietnamese countryside
who is reduced to working as a prostitute in Saigon. As her romance with an
American marine, Chris (Willy Falk), blossoms "South Pacific"-style in a
progression of haunting saxophone-flecked ballads in Act I, the actress keeps
sentimentality at bay by slowly revealing the steely determination beneath the
gorgeous voice, radiant girlish features and virginal white gown. Once Chris and
his fellow Americans have fled her and her country, the determination transmutes
into courage, and the passages in which Kim sacrifices herself for the welfare
of her tiny child, no matter how hokey, are irresistibly moving because Miss
Salonga's purity of expression, backed up by the most elemental music and
lyrics, simply won't let them be otherwise.

Mr. Pryce, a great character actor whose nasty streak has been apparent since
his memorable Broadway debut in Trevor Griffiths's "Comedians" 15 years ago,
makes disingenuousness as electrifying as Miss Salonga's ingenuousness. The
Engineer is a fixer, profiteer and survivor who can outlast Uncle Sam and Uncle
Ho: a pimp, a sewer rat, a hustler of no fixed morality, sexuality, race,
nationality or language. Wearing wide-lapelled jackets and bell bottoms of
garish color, he is the epitome of sleaze, forever swiveling his hips, flashing
a sloppy tongue and fluttering his grasping fingers in the direction of
someone's dollar bills or sex organs. With his high-domed forehead and ghoulish
eyes, Mr. Pryce is also a specter of doom, and he manages to turn a knee-jerk
number indicting the greedy "American Dream" into a show-stopper with the sheer
force of his own witty malice.

As choreographed by Mr. Avian in demented parody of an old-fashioned Broadway
song-and-dance turn, "The American Dream" looks like the Fellini-esque
"Loveland" sequence in the 1971 Stephen Sondheim musical "Follies," and no
wonder, given the song's imitation Sondheim lyrics and the fact that Mr. Avian
was Michael Bennett's associate choreographer on "Follies." Among the other old
favorites in "Miss Saigon" are a balcony scene out of "West Side Story," a
departing refugees scene out of "Fiddler on the Roof," an Act II song for Mr.
Pryce that recalls Fagin's equivalent solo in "Oliver!" and some dancing North
Vietnamese who seem a cross between the Peronists in "Evita" and the ritualistic
Japanese dancers of "Pacific Overtures." It is only when "Miss Saigon" imitates
West End musicals of the 1980's, however, that it goes seriously astray. The
helicopter stunt, which will most impress devotees of sub-Disney theme parks, is
presented out of historical sequence in an Act II flashback, for no good reason
other than to throw Andrew Lloyd Webber fans a pseudo-chandelier or levitating
tire. A neon-drenched Bangkok nightlife spectacle in the same act is a grim
reminder of the ill-fated "Chess."

Of all the failings of modern British musicals, the most severe has been their
creators' utter bewilderment about what happens between men and women
emotionally, psychologically and sexually. "Miss Saigon" is not immune to this
syndrome, either, and it shows up most embarrassingly in the lyrics
characterizing Chris's stateside wife, who, despite a game portrayal by Liz
Callaway, induces audience snickers and giggles in her big Act II solo. Chris
himself is nearly as faceless, and Mr. Falk, a performer with a strong pop voice
and a Ken doll's personality, does nothing to turn up the hero's heat.

If anything, "Miss Saigon" would be stronger if Mr. Battle, who plays Chris's
best friend, had been cast instead as Kim's lover. Mr. Battle's grit and passion
are far more redolent of the marines who fought in Vietnam than Mr. Falk's
blandness, and his one brief encounter with Miss Salonga has more bite than any
of her scenes with her paramour. Mr. Battle, who has heretofore been better
known as a dancer than a singer, also rescues the sanctimonious opening anthem
of Act II -- a canned plea for homeless Amerasian children -- with a gospel
delivery so blistering and committed that he overpowers an onslaught of cliched
lyrics, film clips and a large backup choir.

With the aid of his designers, especially the lighting designer David Hersey,
who uses John Napier's fabric-dominated sets as a floating canvas, Mr. Hytner
usually keeps the staging simple. An opening "Apocalypse Now" sunrise that
bleeds into a hazy panorama of a Saigon morning is as delicate as an Oriental
print, and the Act I climax, in which boat people set off for points unknown, is
stunning because it relies on such primal elements as an outstretched helping
hand and the slow exit by the characters to the rear of a deep, darkened stage
stripped of most scenery.

To be sure, the hallucinatory view of Vietnam familiar from the films of Oliver
Stone, the journalism of Michael Herr and the fiction of Robert Stone, among
many others, is beyond Mr. Hytner's mission, if not his considerable abilities,
just as any thoughtful analysis of the war is beyond the libretto. The text of
"Miss Saigon," second in naivete only to "Nixon in China," says merely that the
North Vietnamese were villains and that the Americans were misguided, bungling
do-gooders. Facts and haircuts are fudged, the corrupt South Vietnamese regime
is invisible and any references to war atrocities are generalized into
meaninglessness.

Yet the text is not the sum of a theatrical experience, and however sanitizing
the words and corny the drama of "Miss Saigon," the real impact of the musical
goes well beyond any literal reading. America's abandonment of its own ideals
and finally of Vietnam itself is there to be found in the wrenching story of a
marine's desertion of a Vietnamese woman and her son. The evening's
far-from-happy closing tableau -- of spilled Vietnamese blood and an American
soldier who bears at least some responsibility for the carnage -- hardly
whitewashes the United States involvement in Southeast Asia. "Miss Saigon" is
escapist entertainment in style and in the sense that finally it even makes one
forget about all the hype and protests that greeted its arrival. But this
musical is more than that, too, because the one thing it will not allow an
American audience to escape is the lost war that, like its tragic heroine, even
now defiantly refuses to be left behind.

Miss Saigon

Music by Claude-Michel Schonberg; lyrics by Richard Maltby Jr. and Alain
Boublil; adapted from original French lyrics by Mr. Boublil; additional material
by Mr. Maltby; directed by Nicholas Hytner; orchestrations by William D. Brohn;
musical supervision, David Caddick and Robert Billig; sets by John Napier;
lighting by David Hersey; costumes by Andreane Neofitou and Suzy Benzinger;
sound by Andrew Bruce; musical staging by Bob Avian. Presented by Cameron
Mackintosh. At the Broadway Theater, 53d Street and Broadway.

The Engineer . . . Jonathan Pryce
Kim . . . Lea Salonga
Gigi . . . Marina Chapa
Chris . . . Willy Falk
John . . . Hinton Battle
Thuy . . . Barry K. Bernal
Ellen . . . Liz Callaway
Tam . . . Brian R. Baldomero
WITH: Zar Acayan, Alan Ariano, Tony C. Avanti, Raquel C. Brown, Annette Calud,
Eric Chan, Mirla Criste, Francis J. Cruz, Imelda de los Reyes, Paul Dobie,
Michael Gruber, JoAnn M. Hunter, Sala Iwamatsu, Leonard Joseph, Darren Lee,
Jason Ma, Paul Matsumoto, Sean McDermott, Thomas James O'Leary, Gordon Owens,
Christopher Pecaro, Matthew Pedersen, Kris Phillips, W. Ellis Porter, Ray
Santos, Jade Kaiwalani Stice, Melanie Mariko Tojio, Alton F. White, Nephi Jay
Wimmer and Bruce Winant.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jonathan Pryce ad Lea Salonga in the musical "Miss Saigon," at
the Broadway Theater. (pg.C1); Willy Falk, left, and Hinton Battle. (Joan
Marcus/Miss Saigon) (pg. C26)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 12, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At the Movies

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 8; Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1031 words


Spader's Third Lawyer

"This would be a very opportune time for me to get jury duty, I think," James
Spader said.

One way or another, Mr. Spader is headed back to the courtroom this month. And
jury duty, he indicated, wouldn't be a bad way of steeping himself in the
atmosphere appropriate to his next film. As he has twice before -- in "Wall
Street" and in the current "True Colors" -- Mr. Spader is taking on the role of
a lawyer.

This time, the vehicle is "Storyville," a mystery involving murder, politics and
family ties to be directed in New Orleans by its writer, Mark Frost, who created
"Twin Peaks" with David Lynch.

In the role of Cray Fowler, Mr. Spader said, "I play a young man whose father
committed suicide several years ago, and his uncle has now married his mother.
He has worked as a public defender, and his family has been involved in local
politics for the last few generations, and he's pursuing a seat in Congress when
he finds himself embroiled in a murder plot.

"In any case, the family is intertwined in all of this. That's the specter at
the end he really has to face.

"My character has been out of the courtroom for several years and takes on the
case for his own self-protection because he's sort of embroiled in this murder
as well in a strange way. He first takes the case in hopes he can control what
comes out and what doesn't in the course of the trial, and partway through it
becomes more of a vindication."

Mr. Spader said he was looking forward to working with Jason Robards, who is
cast as an uncle, the family patriarch, and to the twists and turns in the plots
and subplots of the film, which is destined for distribution in the United
States by 20th Century Fox.

And there was one more thing that attracted him to the role of Cray Fowler, Mr.
Spader said: "I sort of like this guy because he's an awful lawyer."

'Sammy' to the Screen

"The book has been around so long that everybody thinks they've seen the
picture," Budd Schulberg said of "What Makes Sammy Run?" "But actually when it
first appeared," he said, recalling his novel's chilly reception in Hollywood,
"it was a no-no."

It has been 50 years since "What Makes Sammy Run?," Mr. Schulberg's classic
about a Hollywood heel on the make, was published, and once again the property
is stirring toward life on the screen.

"We did it on Broadway with Steve Lawrence," Mr. Schulberg noted, "and it ran
for a couple of years. It was a musical version, and then in the last seven or
eight years, there have been feelers about it."

Lately, Mr. Schulberg has been in discussions about his screenplay with Warner
Brothers and Michael Caton-Jones, the director of "Scandal," "Memphis Belle" and
the coming "Doc Hollywood." And if all goes well, he said, "What Makes Sammy
Run?" might actually turn into a movie before long.

Meanwhile, Mr. Schulberg, who grew up in Hollywood (his father was the producer
B. P. Schulberg), has also been updating another of his enduring properties, the
screenplay for "A Face in the Crowd," the cautionary tale of a television star
who develops delusions of political grandeur. Mr. Schulberg, who said he had
talked with Richard Gere about the role played in the 1957 Elia Kazan film by
Andy Griffith, said of the story: "My feeling now is that we were a little ahead
of the time. The power of television is now so great that our elections are
basically TV shows, basically ratings contests between the networks, so that the
power of the medium is greater than ever."

The story would be taken more seriously today, he said. "At that time, the
feeling was that it was almost like a farce situation that really couldn't
happen. Now we know, in the age of Reagan, that it can happen and it has
happened."

Although Mr. Schulberg also looks upon "What Makes Sammy Run?" as a cautionary
tale, he's not so certain that young people share his view. "I have a fear it is
accepted as some sort of how-to book, how to be more like Sammy than Sammy," he
said. "I would like it to be otherwise. I haven't changed in my attitude, but
I'm afraid the world has."

In addition to "Sammy" and "A Face in the Crowd," Mr. Schulberg has been working
on a story called "All My Boys," for development into a screenplay about a
boxing manager. He has also handed in the first two hours of script for "Moving
Pictures." The six-hour mini-series based on his 1981 autobiography, "Memoirs of
a Hollywood Prince," is a co-venture involving PBS, the "American Playhouse"
series and Zenith, an English company owned in part by Paramount Pictures.

And, he said: "In what we laughingly call my spare time, I am working on a book.
It would have a Hollywood background. It's hard for me to get away from that."

Classic Documentaries

Documentaries will be in the spotlight at the American Museum of the Moving
Image during an eight-week retrospective titled "The Art of Reality: Innovators
of the Documentary," which opens on April 26.

The series, running through June 23 at the museum in Astoria, Queens, comprises
32 films and appearances by 10 film makers.

Among the films to be screened are "Hearts and Minds," Peter Davis's critique of
the United States involvement in Vietnam; "Harlan County, U.S.A.," Barbara
Kopple's chronicle of a Kentucky coal-mining community; "Don't Look Back," D. A.
Pennebaker's 1967 portrait of Bob Dylan; "The Brooklyn Bridge," by Ken Burns,
the acclaimed director of "The Civil War," and "Sherman's March," Ross McElwee's
romantic odyssey through the new South.

On May 5, a panel discussion, "Pioneers of Direct Cinema," will bring together
some of cinema verite's leading figures, Robert Drew, Alan and Susan Raymond,
Albert Maysles and Frederick Wiseman. On that day, Mr. Drew will introduce a
screening of "Primary," his record of the 1960 Wisconsin Presidential primary
contest between John F. Kennedy and Hubert H. Humphrey; and Mr. Maysles will
introduce the Albert and David Maysles classic, "Salesman," which follows four
Bible salesmen across a bleak American landscape.

More information about the series, which is sponsored by Home Box Office, may be
obtained by calling (718) 784-0077.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: James Spader (Jurgen Vollmer/Paramount)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 12, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 64 words


A report in Chronicle on Wednesday about the actor Mickey Rourke's debut as a
professional boxer misidentified Sal Cherch. He is president of Quest
International, the company promoting the fight, to benefit the South Florida
Veterans Multi-Purpose Center, which serves veterans of all wars. He is not a
member of the Vietnam Veterans Association, the group sponsoring the fight.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE GUIDE

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 13; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1163 words





MASTERPIECES


 "Mocking of Christ," a newly restored painting by Jusepe de Ribera that was
once thought to be a copy, is in an exhibition of Renaissance, Baroque and
Rococo masterpieces opening today at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford.

The works, part of the museum's permanent collection, include Caravaggio's
"Ecstasy of St. Francis," Rubens's "Return of the Holy Family from Egypt," and
Zurburan's "St. Serapion." In addition to the paintings, a selection of
sculpture, Meissen and Sevres porcelains, Majolica and silver-gilt objects of
the three periods will be on view.

An introduction to the exhibit will be offered in a lecture, "Baroque Masters at
the Wadsworth Atheneum," scheduled for 2 this afternoon in the Courant Room.
John Rupert Martin, professor of art at Princeton, is the speaker.

"Renaissance to Rococo" will run through June 16. Viewing hours are Tuesday
through Sunday from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. Admission is $3, $1.50 for students, free
to children. No admission is charged on Thursdays and from 11 A.M. to 1 P.M. on
Saturdays. Lunch is served in the museum cafe Tuesday through Friday from 11:30
A.M. to 2:30 P.M., and weekends from noon to 3 P.M. Sunday tea is served from 3
to 4 P.M. Call 278-2670 for more information.

JAZZ CONCERTS

The Galvanized Jazz Band is celebrating its 20th anniversary of Sunday night
sessions at the Millpond Taverne in Northford with two special concerts. On
Saturday at 8 P.M., the group will perform with the World's Greatest Jazz Band
at the Palace Theater in New Haven. Players include Yank Lawson, Bob Haggart,
George Masso, Kenny Davern, Johnny Bunch, Bobby Rosengarden and Howard Adler.
Joel Schiavone, Herb Gardner and Janie Campedelli will join in as guest
performers. Tickets are $15 and $20 and may be reserved by calling 624-8498 or
(800) 922-2030.

More jazz can be heard on Sunday from 6:30 to 10:30 P.M. back at Millpond
Taverne, on Route 17, when the Galvanized Jazz Band will have George Masso,
Kenny Davern and Janie Campedelli as guest performers. Admission is $5, plus a
$5 minimum. Call 484-9316 for reservations.

URBAN LOCUS

"Out of New York, Out of It?" is the theme of an artists' panel discussion at 4
P.M. today at the Silvermine Guild of Artists in New Canaan. Participants will
be James Jackson Burt, sculptor; Dorothy Mayhall, director of art at the
Stamford Museum and Nature Center, and Maureen McCabe, professor of art at
Connecticut College in New London. Bonnie Voit, a painter, will moderate.

The guild is at 1037 Silvermine Road, and admission is $5. Call 966-5618 for
more information.

END OF A SEASON

"Play With Your Food," the lunchtime productions of Company One Theater in
Hartford, presents as its final offering of the season a work worthy of the pun.
It is called "Tantalus," adapted by John McDonough from P. Morton Shand's 1928
British treatise "A Book of Food."

Mr. McDonough, expounding on the joys of consuming epicurean food in lavish
amounts, is costumed in an elegant dressing gown and reclines on a capacious
bed. Also on stage is Robert Black, who provides accompaniment on the double
bass.

Performances at the Cathedral Theater, 45 Church Street, are at 12:15 P.M. on
Wednesday and Thursday, and 8:15 P.M. on Friday. Noontime tickets are $9, or $12
with lunch, and the evening price is $12, including a post-performance
reception. Discounts are available for students and the elderly.

A benefit performance on Saturday at 8:15 P.M., followed by a reception at
Gaetano's, will cost $35. Call 233-4588 for reservations or more information.

FILMS FROM THE PACIFIC

Six movies from Asia and the Pacific Rim will be shown this week during the 1991
East-West Center International Film Tour at Central Connecticut State University
in New Britain.

"Flying Fox in a Freedom Tree," made in New Zealand, is scheduled today at 8
P.M. and Tuesday at 6:30. "Tjoet Nja'Dhien," from Indonesia, will be shown today
at 1 P.M. and Friday at 6:30; "When the 10th Month Comes," from Vietnam, today
at 5 P.M. and Wednesday at 7:30. "The Elephant Keeper," from Thailand, will be
shown on Monday at 7 P.M. and on Wednesday at 10 A.M. "The New Morning of Billy
the Kid," from Japan, will be shown on Tuesday and Friday at 3 P.M. The final
offering in the series is "A City of Sadness," from Taiwan, which will be shown
on Tuesday at 10 A.M. and Thursday at 11 A.M.

All films will be screened in Welte Hall on Wells Steet, introduced by film
makers and scholars and followed by discussions on the films and the cultures
they represent. Free tickets are available by calling 827-7491 or 827-7846.

ISRAELI DAY

A concert honoring Israel Independence Day will be performed by the Connecticut
Chamber Orchestra on Thursday at 7:30 P.M. at Congregationa Mishkan Israel, 785
Ridge Road in Hamden.

Benjamin Shapira, an Israeli cellist, and Elly Zimmerman, a pianist, will be the
soloists in the Haydn Cello Concerto in C major and Bloch's Concerto Grosso No.
1. Songs by Jewish composers will be sung by Cantor Jonathan Gordon and by the
Ezra Academy Chorus, and "Dedication" by the Israeli composer Sergiu Shapira
will have its American premiere.

Tickets are priced from $18 to $36 and may be obtained by calling 288-3877.

DONNER PARTY

"Devour the Snow," opening Friday at the Little Theater of New Milford, is based
on diaries, letters and published interviews with survivors and rescuers of a
wagon train that foundered in the Sierra Nevada mountains during the winter of
1846-47.

The author, Abe Polsky, has constructed a courtroom drama around the 98 men,
women and children lumped together as the Donner Party, after the families who
were a large part of the group. A trial that took place at Sutter's Fort, now
Sacramento, a few weeks after the last survivor was found, attempted
unsuccessfully to establish whether the ordeal led to incidents of cannibalism
and murder, as suspected at the time.

Mr. Polsky's play does not resolve the question but leaves the audience to draw
its own conclusions. Performances are at 8 P.M. on Fridays and Saturdays through
May 18, and tickets cost $10. Call 350-6863 for reservations. The theater is on
Brookside Avenue off Route 202.

PANDAS AND YAKS

George B. Schaller, science director of Wildlife Conservation International, the
global conservation arm of the New York Zoological Society, will show slides and
discuss "Giant Pandas and Wild Yaks: Conservation in the Tibetan Highlands"
today at 7 P.M. in the Roxbury Congregational Church.

Dr. Schaller has recently returned from the Qian Tang region of China, where he
was instrumental in planning what is believed to be the world's largest wildlife
reserve, providing a haven for wild yaks, lyre-horned Tibetan antelopes,
gazelles, blue sheep and snow leopards. From 1980 to 1985, he worked on a
cooperative project with the Chinese Government to protect the giant panda.

Admission to the lecture is free.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Campus Life;
Mole-Dissection Course Is Statecraft, Not Biology

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 35; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 765 words


A few years ago a roving spokesman for the Central Intelligence Agency, Arthur
S. Hulnick, appeared at a University of Washington forum in Seattle "to try to
explain who we are and what it is we do." A woman threw a pot at him.

Now, still employed by the agency, he lectures at least twice a week at Boston
University, teaching students about spies and spooks and the art of
intelligence. "The only thing I have to avoid is confirming whether or not
things are true," Mr. Hulnick said.

To be sure, the C.I.A. has not had a charmed reputation on the nation's college
campuses in recent years, but Mr. Hulnick and others like him are trying to
change that and in the process perhaps shed some light on the shadows of the
secretive Government agency. The lecturers are part of an "officer in residence"
program, created in 1985 to send some of the best and brightest agents to
colleges and universities on one- or two-year teaching sabbaticals.

 Teaching and Research

"A lot of people have misconceptions about the agency, largely based on what
they read in spy novels and what they watch on television," said Mark Mansfield,
a spokesman for the C.I.A. at its headquarters in Langley, Va. The teaching
program, he said, is part of an effort "to dispel some of those misconceptions."
Twenty-three agents have taken part in the program since its inception.

It is modeled on the State Department's long-running "diplomat in residence"
program. At present 10 C.I.A. agents are posted at universities from Harvard to
Jacksonville in Florida. They are paid by the C.I.A. While not disclosing the
agency's secrets, they teach and research topics in their specialties, not all
of which directly involve intelligence work.

For example, Graham T. Richardson, an analyst of Soviet military affairs,
teaches introductory geology courses at Purdue University and is compiling a
layman's dictionary of scientific and technical terms for the C.I.A.

"People are so surprised that I don't own a trench coat," said Mr. Richardson,
who has worked at the agency since 1977. "I don't own a hat. I don't own an
Aston-Martin. In my job, I sit at a desk, gather information and write about
it."

Mr. Hulnick, a career agent who has worked as an analyst in Latin American
intelligence, an officer in the operations command center and a spokesman,
arrived at Boston University in 1989. He teaches two classes: "Intelligence in a
Democratic Society," for undergraduates in the fall, and "Problems in Strategic
Intelligence," for graduate students in the spring.

A Part of History

"The history of intelligence dates to the pharaohs of Egypt," said Mr. Hulnick,
who has written several academic papers on the subject. "The Trojan horse, after
all, was a covert action."

Intelligence and counterintelligence, he said, have "always been a part of
America's political fabric" -- from George Washington's spying on Hessian
soldiers at the Battle of Trenton to Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf's water-landing
feint and end run that overwhelmed Iraqi troops in Kuwait.

"I can't teach students to be spies," he said. "But I can teach them the theory
of it. Any student studying history, political science or international
relations ought to know about intelligence."

But the agency's critics contend that while the study of intelligence has a
place on campus, the intelligency agency itself does not. When the C.I.A. began
openly and aggressively recruiting graduating seniors in the early 1980's, some
university students responded with angry, sometimes violent protests.

Resistance Amid Interest

The "officer in residence" program has stirred similar sentiments. At the
University of California at Santa Barbara, some students and teachers protested
the two-year appointment of an officer in 1987. When the faculty committee of
the political science department voted to deny the officer a lecturing post, he
withdrew.

John Stockwell, a former C.I.A. agent in Vietnam and Angola who has become an
outspoken critic of the agency, said the nature of its covert actions at home
and abroad contradicted academe's spirit of intellectual freedom and openness.

Still, interest in intelligence studies is growing, said Roy Godson, coordinator
of the Consortium for the Study of Intelligence, an academic research
organization in Washington. More than 100 college courses on aspects of
intelligence are offered each year, he said.

Intelligence agencies, in turn, have become more frank about what they do. Even
the K.G.B., Mr. Godson pointed out, has opened a public-relations office in
Moscow.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Social Events

BYLINE: By Thomas W. Ennis

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 48; Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1685 words



Fashion Workshop

April 15 -- The Lenox Hill Group of Hadassah will benefit from a fashion
workshop starting at 6:45 at the Casteneda women's clothing shop, 1298 Lexington
Avenue (74th Street). Classes will be offered in four aspects of grooming and
dressing, from which ticket buyers may choose two. There will be refreshments
and a raffle. Tickets $15; (212) 644-9340.

Gulf War Refugees

April 16 -- Cocktails at 6 P.M. at the Chase Manhattan Bank at 410 Park Avenue
(55th Street), and black-tie dinners at 8:15 at the homes of representatives to
the United Nations, will benefit the United States Association for International
Migration, a private organization providing relief for refugees in the Persian
Gulf area. Participating dinner hosts are the representatives of Australia,
Egypt, Hungary, India, Japan, Pakistan, Britain and the Soviet Union. Tickets
$100 for the reception only; $250 for reception and dinner; (212) 265-8111.

For Vietnam Veterans

April 16 -- An 8 P.M. performance of "Miss Saigon" at the Broadway Theater,
Broadway and 53d Street, followed by a buffet and dancing at Roseland, 239 West
52d Street, will benefit Vietnam Veterans of America and the Vietnam Veterans
Ensemble Theater. Tickets $50 and $150 for performance only; $150, $300 and $500
for performance and party; (212) 971-8724.

Men of Boys Harbor

April 17 -- Men who were helped by Boys Harbor, an educational agency focusing
on children in Harlem and the Bronx, will return as guests of Boys Harbor at a
lunch at noon at the Pierre. Eighteen of the men -- now police officials,
doctors, lawyers and politicians -- will receive Salute to Achievement Awards
presented by Tom Wolfe, Marian S. Heiskell, J. Peter Grace, Bishop Paul Moore
Jr., Dr. Lee Salk and other prominent New Yorkers. George Plimpton is the master
of ceremonies. Tickets $250; (212) 595-5585.

From Christie's to Maxim's

April 17 -- The Diller-Quaile School of Music's programs for preschool children
in Harlem and other parts of upper Manhattan will benefit from a cabaret party
at 7 P.M. at Christie's, Park Avenue at 59th Street, followed by dinner and
dancing at 8:30 at Maxim's, Madison Avenue at 61st Street. Songs of the 1930's
and 40's will be sung at the cabaret by Gloria Parker, Jonathan Green and Sharon
Douglas. Black tie. Tickets $150 for the cabaret only; $250 for the cabaret and
dinner dance; (212) 369-1484.

French-American Ties

April 17 -- The French-American Foundation's exchange programs will benefit from
a dinner and dance at the Plaza. The party starts with cocktails at 7 P.M. Black
tie. Tickets $350; (212) 838-2660.

Common Cause

April 17 -- New York State Common Cause will raise money for its efforts and
celebrate 20 years of lobbying for good government with a reception at 7 P.M. at
the Fordham Law School, 140 West 62d Street. The guest of honor will be John D.
Feerick, the dean of the school and a former chairman of the State Commission on
Government Integrity. There will be entertainment by Comedy Airlines, an
improvisational group. Tickets $35; $25 each for two or more people in groups;
(212) 349-1755.

Briefly Noted

April 18 -- The youth programs of the New York chapter of Hadassah will benefit
from a lunch at noon at the New York Hilton. Guests of honor will be A. M.
Rosenthal, a columnist for The New York Times, and Sister Rose Thering, the
executive director of the National Christian Leadership Congress for Israel.
Tickets $75; (212) 765-7050.

April 18 -- The 10th annual literary lunch sponsored by the Volunteers of the
New York Public Library will be at noon at the library, followed by a
discussion, "Can You Believe Everything You Read?" Jeff Greenfield, Doris Kearns
Goodwin, Don Hewitt, Kati Marton and Hugh Sidey will take part to benefit the
library. Tickets $100; (212) 930-0501.

April 18 -- Women in Need, which provides housing and other help for abused
women, will benefit from a fashion show by six Swedish designers at 7 P.M. at
the Parsons School of Design, Seventh Avenue and 40th Street. Tickets $35; (212)
213-2111.

April 18 -- The Parks Council's awards dinner at the Plaza will honor Gov. Mario
M. Cuomo, Mayor David N. Dinkins, the investment banker Michael J. Del Giudice
and Arthur Levitt Jr., the chairman of the New York City Public Development
Corporation, for their help in bringing the projected Hudson River Waterfront
Park to the drawing board. Proceeds will benefit the council. The evening begins
with cocktails at 7. Black tie. Tickets $350, $500 and $1,000; (212) 838-9410,
extension 227.

April 18 -- Twelve Brooklyn professional women will be honored at the "Brooklyn
Power Luncheon" of the Y.W.C.A. of Brooklyn. The luncheon, which is the
organization's major fund-raising event, will start at 11:45 A.M. at the
Y.W.C.A., at Third and Atlantic Avenues. The guest speaker will be Dr. Gwendolyn
Calvert Baker, the president of the New York City Board of Education. Tickets
$150; (718) 875-1190, extension 203.

April 18 -- The Children's Defense Fund will benefit from an 8 P.M. performance
by the Cirque du Soleil, the French-Canadian circus, at Pier A and West Street
in Battery Park City. There will also be a show of circus costumes designed by a
team headed by Geoffrey Beane and Carmelo Pomodoro. Tickets $50, $100, $250 and
$500; buyers of $250 and $500 tickets may attend a champagne reception at 6.
(212) 349-4266.

April 18 -- The Home Care Council's fund-raising awards dinner at 7 P.M. at the
Grand Hyatt Hotel, on 42d Street at Grand Central Terminal, will honor
Assemblyman Richard N. Gottfried, Democrat of Manhattan, the chairman of the
Committee on Health, and City Councilwoman Mary G. Pinkett, Democrat of
Brooklyn. The council represents 60 nonprofit home-care agencies under contract
to the city. Tickets $75; (212) 481-4429.

April 18 -- A concert by the mezzo-soprano Maureen Forrester, the baritone Louis
Quilco and the soprano Andrea Gruber at Steinway Hall, 109 West 57th Street,
will celebrate the signing of an exchange agreement between the Manhattan School
of Music and the Royal Conservatory of Music in Toronto. Proceeds will benefit a
scholarship fund for the two schools. The concert at 7 P.M. will be followed by
a reception. Tickets $200; (212) 749-2802.

April 18 -- Pediatric immunology research at the Mount Sinai Medical Center will
benefit from a dinner dance at the Plaza sponsored by the Jeffrey Modell
Foundation, which helps support the research. The party starts with a reception
at 7. Black tie. Tickets $350; (212) 575-1122.

April 19 -- The Russian Easter Ball at the Plaza, sponsored by the Russian
Nobility Association in America, will benefit the association's charities. There
will be a showing of Russian haute couture based on Russian folk themes by
designers in Moscow. The party starts with cocktails at 7:30 P.M. Dinner is at
8:30 and dancing begins at 9:30. Black or white tie. Tickets $150; (212)
249-2578.

April 19 -- An 8 P.M. preview performance of "The Secret Garden," a musical with
Mandy Patinkin at the St. James Theater, 246 West 44th Street, will benefit St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan. The performance, sponsored
by the hospital's auxiliary, will be preceded by cocktails at 6 and a buffet at
6:30 at the Marriott Marquis, Broadway at 45th Street. Tickets $125 for the
performance only; $175 and $225 for the performance and buffet; (212) 790-8684.

April 20 -- A performance of the Ringling Brothers and Barnum & Bailey Circus at
2:30 P.M. at Madison Square Garden, sponsored by the City Parks Foundation, will
benefit summer recreation programs at public playgrounds in New York City.
Tickets $100 for two people; $175 for four; the purchase of six tickets for $500
includes a backstage tour of the circus; anyone who buys six tickets for $1,000
will have the chance to be a guest clown in a circus performance; (212)
360-1399.

April 20 -- Jersey Battered Women's Service in Morris Plains will benefit from a
dinner dance at the Harborside Financial Center, at Exchange Place in Jersey
City. John Gambling will be the master of ceremonies and the actress Meryl
Streep will sing. Cocktails at 7. Black tie. Tickets $350; (201) 762-3730.

April 20 -- Autographed books donated by Richard Nixon and Caroline Kennedy
Schlossberg, and a commemorative invitation to the 1989 inauguration donated by
Barbara Bush, are among the items to be offered in a celebrity auction to
benefit Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn. The auction will take place at
the hospital, Atlantic Avenue at Hicks Street. The items will be on view from 11
A.M. to noon, when the auction will start. Information, (718) 780-1899.

April 20 -- A cruise on the yacht Princess of New York, with cocktails, dinner
and dancing, will benefit the Westchester chapter of the Juvenile Diabetes
Foundation. Board at 7 P.M. at Pier 62, on the Hudson near 23d Street. Black
tie. Tickets $175; (914) 238-9208.

 Children's Art Carnival

April 21 -- "Gourmet Gents," with music, magic and art, from 2 to 7 P.M. at
International House, 500 Riverside Drive (122d Street), will benefit the free
art instruction provided by the Children's Art Carnival for New York City
public-school children. The program has been found to improve reading and
writing abilities. The food will be provided by 200 men who are amateur cooks.
Among the entertainers will be Jon Lucien, Christa Victoria, Brenda Joyce and
Tamm E. Hunt.  Tickets $45; (212) 234-4095, or $50 at the door.

A Family Gathering

April 21 -- A fund-raising Broadway revue and party for Planned Parenthood of
New York City at the Waldorf-Astoria is called "A Family Gathering." Alexander
Cohen and Hildy Parks produced the event, which will feature Lauren Bacall,
Barbara Cook, Jonathan Pryce, Tony Randall and Bobby Short, among others. Mayor
David N. Dinkins and Walter Cronkite will conduct an auction. Festive clothes.
Tickets $350, $500 and $1,000 include supper at 6, followed by revue and
auction; $175 and $100 (for people under 35) for revue and auction only; (212)
777-2002.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Undercount No Surprise in the Shacks

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 27; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1132 words


In a converted guardpost propped atop a scraggly lot on the Brooklyn waterfront,
Jesus Ramos spends his days and nights watching television, drinking and
waiting.

"I don't bother nobody," rasped the trim 34-year-old former construction worker,
who has been homeless for two years. "And nobody bothers me."

If Mr. Ramos is to be believed, that includes the Census Bureau enumerators who
fanned out throughout the country on the night of March 20, 1990 to count the
nation's homeless. Mr. Ramos said he was not counted, even though he spends most
nights in his cramped shack.

In New York State, the tally from the homeless count turned up 32,472 people in
shelters and 10,732 on the street, most of them in New York City.

Advocates for the homeless, who believe there are more than 60,000 homeless in
New York City alone, derided the results, saying enumerators went only to
shelters and selected streets, skirting anyplace that made them nervous and thus
overlooking people who seek refuge in abandoned buildings or are tucked away in
hidden spots.

High, Confused, Vague, Cynical

Census Bureau officials said they never intended an exhaustive count, only a
supplementary one. But advocates for the homeless fear the numbers will be used
to minimize the plight of the homeless and justify cuts in aid to programs that
help them.

Trying to check how exhaustive the census was, even by seeking out the hidden
homeless and asking them, is nearly impossible. Some are too high or too
confused to remember whether or not they were counted on one night more than a
year ago. Some said they thought some officials came by, but never talked to
them. And, after months or years of existing invisibly on the street, most are
deeply cynical about the Government's ability -- or even willingness -- to seek
them out.

"What does it matter to them? They don't care about anything," said Mr. Ramos,
nodding towards the glimmering sliver of the Manhattan skyline that peeked
through his open front door. "They're over there all warm and comfortable eating
lobster."

He leaned back, his outspread arms nearly touching the shack's walls, which were
decorated with a wrinkled photograph of a girl playing with a kitten and a tiny
mirror with a picture of Saint Theresa pasted to it. His friend Maximo Eduardo
Zapatel stood in the doorway, waiting to get a bite to eat and a drink from the
half-empty bottle of wine that lay on the floor.

In 10 Years. If We're Alive'

"Maybe the Census will re-evaulate things for the next time," Mr. Zapatel
suggested cheerfully.

"In 10 years," Mr. Ramos reminded him. "If we're alive."

Wilfredo Rodriguez filled out his Census form last year while he was working as
a butcher in Philadelphia. But the cold meat freezers aggravated his arthritis
and drink weakened his resolve, and by October he was in Manhattan, sleeping on
a mattress on a loading dock underneath the Brooklyn Bridge under the gaze of
two small religious statues tucked by the wall.

"We don't count for society," he said before lifting a large bottle of beer
wrapped in a crinkly brown bag and gulping hard. "It's like we're just like a
flea on a dog."

His friend Angel Cintron sat shoeless and cross-legged nearby, slowly blinking.
He could not cut through his clouded memory to recall whether he was counted
last year.

"Some people came by from Brooklyn but I don't know if they were from the
Census," he said woozily. "They took my name and everything but I never saw them
again."

Others had more vivid memories of the night, as brief as it was. Donald Vinson
was living in a small encampment by the rotunda at the 79th Street Boat Basin
when the enumerators came calling.

"They didn't really look, all they did was ask if you were homeless and left,"
he said, clutching a plastic bag with a sandwich and fruit he got from the
nightly food line in City Hall Park. "They came in a group and left like that.
They didn't make an effort."

James Gibb, a 40-year-old Vietnam veteran who has been homeless for four years,
said he was not counted. It would have been difficult, since he was a moving
target, spending his nights riding the subways. He feels slighted that the
Government did not see fit to seek him out.

"I'm not counted, so I guess I don't exist," he said, adding that he doubted the
Government really was interested in an accurate portrait of the homeless. "If
they were, they would know how many people out here need help."

Shanty Town Near Chinatown

"That's right," nodded Constance Jackson McKain, a petite woman whose jangling
earrings underscored her assent. "President Bush ain't truly interested in the
people of America today, he's interested in himself."

"We don't exist," repeated Mr. Gibb. "But if this country goes to a state of
war, that's when they count."

Some 80 people live in a congested Hoovervile of shacks and improvised houses in
a broad dirt-covered plaza by the Canal Street exit of the Manhattan Bridge. But
several residents said the census-takers never entered their urban village,
which these days even features a teepee.

"I saw the Census people walk by and there were 15 guys on the corner hustling
cars," said a 50-year-old homeless man who identified himself only as Pike. "All
they did was smoke their cigarettes and keep on walking."

A younger man who called himself Love ridiculed the Census Bureau's announcement
that its tally turned up fewer people than expected. "What kind of drugs are
they using?" he asked. "If they paid me a decent wage, I'll go out there and
show them where the homeless are. They hired people who were afraid to go into
these sections."

'Why Can't They Find Them?'

Lights glowed inside the other shacks, their exteriors briefly illuminated by
the headlights of cars rolling off the bridge. Ivan Martinez said city social
wokers were the closest thing to government that he has seen in the little more
than a year he has shared a shack with a roomate named "Red." If the Census --
and government in general -- really was concerned, he said as he fixed a floor
lamp outside his shack, they would have given the people around him better
housing.

"Why can't they find them?" he asked. "Or is it they don't want to find them?"

Red was preoccupied with his own search -- one for a vein to jab with the
slender heroin-filled syringe that hovered above his left forearm.

He insisted that Census enumerators did come by the shacks last year, and
remembered that they were rousing people from their sleep at 5:30 on a Sunday
morning. However, March 20 was a Tuesday night.

And he could not recall what month the census was done. "I don't even know what
month this is," he said. He found a vein, slid in the needle and pushed the
plunger. "Numbers don't matter to them."


LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: When Census workers canvassed New York State, they found 32,472
people in shelters and 10,732 on the street. People like Jesus Ramos, who lives
in a shack on the Brooklyn waterfront, were not counted. (Nancy Siesel for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Law Learns From the Kurds

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 497 words


President Bush was so determined to avoid plunging into a quagmire like Vietnam
that he initially plunged instead into what looked like a glacier of icy
indifference to the fate of Iraqi Kurds and Shiites. Now, after an uproar of
shock, he has warmed to his humane duty. He has moved to reinforce international
rescue operations by ordering the American military to feed and provide
sanctuary for the refugees. By doing so at last, he advances his, and the
world's, understanding of international law.

From Iraq's August invasion of Kuwait until the shooting war ended, Mr. Bush
repeatedly and justly branded Saddam Hussein a global outlaw and his aggression
a flagrant violation of international law. When the shooting stopped, so did
those charges, no matter that the Iraqi dictator then rained misery on his own
people.

Viewing the Kurdish revolution and its consequences as Iraq's internal affair
suited Mr. Bush's determination to avoid the quagmire, but it betrayed an
obsolescent view of international law.


Whatever the scope of international law may be, Iraq's aggression was a gross
violation. To invade a neighboring state is to shatter longstanding global
norms. But what of Saddam Hussein's subsequent domestic oppression of fellow
Iraqis, bordering on genocide: does that not likewise offend international
rights?

No, not even that, according to notions of international law honored until
recently. These fixed international legal rights as those of states, not of
people. Although the United Nations has proclaimed its concern for human as well
as national rights, the scholarly American Law Institute as late as 1965 was
defining international law as "rules and principles of general application
dealing with the conduct of states and international organizations." Not until
1987 did the institute's lawyers add, "as well as some of their relations with
persons." [Italics supplied.]

And now, the stark images of Kurdish refugees have forced yet more humanity on
theory. Even as the United Nations declares the shooting over, it expresses
institutional concern for starving civilians and its determination to provide
some sort of safe haven and relief. In only a handful of cases in U.N. history
has the Security Council declared, as it did on April 5, that an ostensibly
internal matter posed a threat to international peace.

The Kurds may lack military support abroad but they now have the law on their
side, international authority for humanitarian assistance independent of the
police action over Kuwait's sovereignty. With all the suffering that is now
evident on the world's television screens -- indeed because of the suffering --
concern for human rights now transcends borders and political interests, and may
be taking hold.

That concern could stand even more leadership of the sort President Bush so ably
gave to the coalition against aggression. Such new world law comes as a warmly
welcome aspect of the new world order.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

The World;
When Empires Fall, Not Everyone Emerges With a State of His Own

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1244 words

DATELINE: LONDON


VICTORY in the war against Iraq did not produce the allies' finest hour.  The
tragic spectacle of over a million Kurdish refugees fleeing cruel retribution
from Saddam Hussein underlined not only the fundamental ambivalence of allied
war aims, but also the widespread indifference the world has long shown to the
principle of self-determination.

The Kurds made the mistake of taking President Bush at his word and rising up
against the Iraqi regime, only to find that Kurdish independence apparently
wasn't what he had in mind when he encouraged the overthrow of President
Hussein.

The Kurds -- perhaps 20 million of them, scattered over Iraq, Syria, Turkey,
Iran and the Soviet Union -- are only one of many distinct peoples who have been
unable to create a national state of their own out of the ruins of the many
empires that have crumbled during the 20th century.

The world is still trembling from the aftermath of the collapse of the Ottoman
Empire, which effectively suppressed the ethnic and religious conflicts of the
Middle East until early this century. Cataclysms also followed the collapse of
the British Empire in India, Pakistan, Kenya, Zimbabwe and Burma, and the French
in Vietnam, Algeria and Morocco.  The dominant ethnic groups in the former
colonies, by and large, established nation-states that suppressed or ignored
minorities.

The pattern is an ancient one, as the history of the British Isles proves, but
it is almost worldwide. Basques in France and Spain, Eritreans in Africa and
native Americans in North America were unable to establish independent national
states, as were Armenians, Georgians, Latvians, Lithuanians, Estonians and many
others in the Soviet Union.

Jews succeeded in establishing their own state in Palestine after World War II,
because of their own determination and the support of colonial powers after the
Holocaust in Europe, but Arabs there are still disputing their claim.

The kings of Europe had claimed divine right to create their kingdoms.
Nationalists who succeeded them later in most countries were equally dismissive
of the rights of ethnic minorities. Small wonder, then, that hypocrisy over
self-determination is codified in the United Nations Charter. That document
pledges "respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of
peoples," but it also enjoins states from interfering in each other's internal
affairs.

So the agony of the Kurds has created anguish in Western Europe, with much of
the outrage directed at President Bush -- the "joggin', fishin', and golfin'
President," as the English newspaper columnist Peter Jenkins described him last
week. Only a few weeks ago, Mr. Bush was being accused with equal outrage of
secretly scheming to overthrow Saddam Hussein. Now he is being criticized for
not helping the Kurds to do it.

But how much does the world really want to do for the Kurds? Prime Minister John
Major of Britain got his European Community colleagues last week to propose
security zones for the Kurds and Shiites in Iraq, and President Bush later said
the United States would provide air cover for the Kurds north of the 36th
parallel and run the aid program.

But there is a big difference between protecting minorities from attack and
enforcing a right of self-determination or secession. Mr. Major, confronted with
a much smaller but similar dilemma of his own in Northern Ireland, would be the
first to recognize this.

Turgut Ozal, the President of Turkey, would probably be the second. His country
is as anxious as Iraq is to squelch any notion of an autonomous Kurdish
homeland, because it has millions of Kurds inside its own borders and treats
them nearly as ruthlessly. Mr. Ozal, in fact, was the first leader to plead for
the establishment of security zones for the refugees, perhaps because he was
desperate to keep more of them from pouring in and seeking food and shelter that
Turkey is ill-equipped to provide.

The rise of nationalism, in Turkey and many other places around the world, was
one consequence of the collapse of earlier empires. But in areas where ethnic
and tribal loyalties do not coincide exactly with political lines on a map,
nationalism can also spell trouble.

When Saddam Hussein grabbed Kuwait last August he claimed that the British who
took responsibility for the area after the defeat of the Ottoman Empire had
arbitrarily dismissed Iraq's historical right to rule it. Was self-determination
for the Kuwaitis the first thing on the minds of the British imperialists who
redrew the maps in the early 1920's? Hardly likely. Keeping Iraq cut to size was
more likely, but if so it didn't work very well.

The other great Middle East problem not solved while the British held League of
Nations mandates in the area, of course, was Palestine. Zionist resettlement in
the first half of the century established a claim to Jewish statehood that was
finally legitimized by the United Nations after World War II. But it also set up
a conflict with the Arab world that led to three wars and turned Arab
Palestinians toward terrorism to advance their own claims to self-determination.

Now another empire, the Soviet Union, is in a tumult that is unleashing
conflicting claims to independence and self-determination by its myriad ethnic
components. Only Mikhail S. Gorbachev and some ethnic Russian minorities in
Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia may seem to disagree that independence for the
Baltic republics would be a good thing, but what would the West offer if a
full-scale war for self-determination broke out there and Moscow sent the Red
Army in? Probably not much more than moral support, which hasn't helped the
Kurds.

Realpolitik, not idealism about self-determination for small peoples who happen
to be outnumbered and overwhelmed, apparently governs Mr. Bush's new world
order, just as much as it usually ran the old world orders. Ask the Armenians,
for instance, or the Georgians -- who, like the Baltic nations, briefly achieved
independence from Russia after World War I only to lose it again to the Soviet
Union soon after.

But Armenians and Georgians can be just as fierce in defending their own
territory from rival ethnic claims. Fighting between Armenians and Azerbaijanis
still rages in the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh. And Georgians, who
proclaimed nominal independence from Moscow last week, want self-determination
for themselves, but not for the Ossetians in their midst; the result is civil
war within civil war in that republic.

Hard-liners in Moscow, and Mr. Gorbachev, warn that this sort of strife could
spread throughout the Soviet Union unless it is suppressed. What could happen
can be seen emerging, they might argue, in the near-disintegration of
Yugoslavia, where Serbs and Croats are again at each other's throats 77 years
after Sarajevo.

Things have a way of getting dangerously out of hand when empires fall apart,
the voice of Realpolitik argues. Its first counsel to outsiders is usually to
stick with non-interference, but it is not always the voice of wisdom.

THE ROOTS
The birds which are killed in the sky
Though the stars, the clouds, the wind
And the sun do not see them
The Horizon plays deaf,
The mountains and waters forget them:

Yet some tree
Must witness the criminals
And write their names
In its roots

-- Written by Sherko Bekas, a Kurdish poet, about the Iraqi destruction of
villages in the 1970's and 80's

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 21, 1991, Sunday

CORRECTION:

A picture caption last Sunday about Armenians waiting to receive food rations in
Turkey misstated the date. The picture was made in 1920, not 1929.


GRAPHIC: Photo: In 1929, Armenians who had fled massacres waited to receive
their daily ration of food near Maras, Turkey. (International)

Map: "Upheaval and exodus" shows locations of refugees fleeing Iraq.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Unfinished Politician

BYLINE: By Robin Toner  Robin Toner, national political correspondent of The New
York Times, profiled Dianne Feinstein for this magazine last fall.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 43; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5019 words


SENATOR BOB KERREY WAS DRIVING THROUGH THE flat fields of northern Nebraska, a
somber landscape in midwinter: white sky, white fields, a few brown stands of
trees. The land was quiet, frozen, and farmers had time for a town meeting with
their Senator, time to gripe about the price of soybeans and the inequities of
the new Federal farm program.

But it was the trouble in the Persian Gulf that was uppermost on their minds. It
was a few days before Congress was to vote on the resolution authorizing
President Bush to go to war with Iraq, and many Nebraskans were inclined to
support him. But Senator Kerrey did not.

Everywhere he went, the 47-year-old Democrat talked about the cost of war.
Everywhere he went, he talked about the reality of war, a very simple reality,
he said, for all the wizardry of high technology. "In the end, you've got to
take ground, and you've got to hold ground, and you've got to kill," he said.
Saddam Hussein could be contained with something short of a full-scale
offensive, Kerrey argued. The price of such an offensive, he said, was simply
too high.

Kerrey's audiences listened respectfully, although many in this conservative
state clearly disagreed. Still, this was not just another liberal Democrat
cautioning against the use of force; this was one of their own, a Lincoln boy
who went off to Vietnam 22 years ago and came home with a Medal of Honor and an
artificial leg. In these meetings, Kerrey did not talk much about his own
experiences. He did not have to. The memory of Vietnam was everywhere, an old
ache aroused by the prospect of a new war.

Two months later, Bob Kerrey struggled with that memory once again -- this time
pondering how it might have led him astray. The war in the Persian Gulf was
over, a popular success, and Congressional Democrats, most of whom voted against
the war authorization, were grimly hunkered down. But Kerrey was wrestling,
aloud, on the Senate floor and in political speeches around the country, with
what had happened: where he had gone wrong and where he had not. He continued to
stand behind his vote against the war, but he talked about his "voyage" of
recent months, about what he had learned of "the fallibility of my own nature."

"My own war experiences affected me throughout, and I say, as I have said to
Nebraskans, not always in a constructive fashion," he said last month in a
speech in Oklahoma City. "The political lies of Vietnam, and their tragic
impact, have put me on constant alert for a battle cry that is tainted with
insincerity or evasiveness."

It was a characteristic speech -- emotional, introspective, at times maddeningly
inexact and naive, willing to concede error and far removed from the cool policy
debate that is the norm in Washington. It was the speech of an unfinished
politician, still in the middle of a personal odyssey that began in Vietnam, an
odyssey of significance to a party and a generation.

Shaped by a devastating wound and a failed war, Bob Kerrey is a complicated,
intense, often troubled politician who has become one of the most distinctive
voices in the Democratic Party. He stands at the fault line of the 1960's: a
decorated Vietnam veteran who later opposed the war but was wary of the antiwar
movement because "it felt anti-veteran to me."

Emblematic of the conflicted political attitudes of the baby boomers, Kerrey was
suspicious and sometimes contemptuous of politics for much of his life, then
jumped in at the age of 39 to run for office for the first time. The job was
governor and he won it. He still cultivates an outsider's air; some Democrats
think of him as the "un-politician."

He lapses from time to time into moments of "cosmic Bob," putting aside the
details of health care, education and foreign policy to talk of God, altruism
and the need for spirituality in American politics. Some Democrats worry that
they have produced another Jerry Brown, another mystic, when what they need are
street-smart pols. The flattering way to describe him is inner-directed. But
between the lines, one can almost hear the plaintive question from the political
veterans, bred on straight-ahead, eyes-on-the-prize Humphreys and Mondales:
What's wrong with this generation, anyhow?

Kerrey bears many telltale signs of a man with Presidential ambitions -- a
national speaking schedule, a top aide out of the Gary Hart campaigns (Bill
Shore) and a practiced line that disavows current interest in the White House
while refusing to rule anything out. But when a reporter suggests he is playing
out the string on this game and enjoying it, he turns petulant. "You're looking
cynically at me," he snaps. "I'm not asking you to put me on any bloody short
list, and it doesn't bother me if you take me off it."

Friends worry that he is being pushed too fast. Critics portray him as a
lightweight with gushy press notices, a compelling life story and few real
political accomplishments. Republicans dismiss him as the latest incarnation of
the Democratic Party's ultraliberal, pacifist wing.

Clayton K. Yeutter, the new Republican Party chairman, scoffs at Kerrey's
"negative and depressed viewpoints," while Roger Stone, a Republican strategist,
says, "His war record provides some immunity, but he still fits into the
Mondale/McGovern wing of the party when it comes to foreign policy."

As the spotlight settles on him, Kerrey whipsaws between angst and attitude.
Geoffrey Garin, a Democratic poll taker, sums up the tension this way: "The
question on Kerrey is, there's a fine line between being unconventional and
being unpresidential."


THE GENERATION that fought in World War II came home to a foreign policy
consensus -- the virtues of containment, a muscular United States presence
around the world to stem the onslaught of communism and prevent another world
war. But those who fought in Vietnam, and those who fought against the war in
Vietnam, and those in between never resolved what it meant for American foreign
policy.

"The Vietnam War never ended," says Todd Gitlin, a sociologist at the University
of California at Berkeley and former president of Students for a Democratic
Society. "It simply stopped. And the country was left to thrash around without
ever coming to a consensus on why we got involved in the war in the first place,
and why we lost it, and with what consequences."

This unfinished business hung heavily over the gulf debates. A few days before
the vote, Kerrey reflected, "I think it's going to be very difficult over the
next 20 years or so to come to that conclusion: the conclusion of when do you
die? When do you put it on the line? When do you use force?"

Many Democrats faulted George Bush for viewing the Persian Gulf crisis through
the prism of World War II, the war of his youth, for drawing easy analogies to
Hitler and Chamberlain in a kind of geopolitical transference. Kerrey, however,
all but acknowledges that he is sometimes a prisoner of his own war.

"I believe that if we launch a military offensive, we will sustain thousands of
casualties without military necessity, moral justification or public
endorsement," he said in written testimony submitted to the Senate Armed
Services Committee last November. He worried that the war would "reopen social
divisions we have only recently healed."

Throughout the late summer and fall, he attacked the Administration for not
outlining a worthy rationale for the war and not confessing the policy errors
that led to it. In January, he joined 44 other Senate Democrats in voting
against the war resolution, urging that sanctions be given more time to work.
The resolution passed by a vote of 52 to 47.

After the war, Kerrey took to the floor of the Senate for a characteristically
candid post-mortem. "I have had the experience of having Government mislead me,
of not leveling entirely," he said. "I have had the experience of just being in
a war and then discovering you get halfway into it and Americans stop supporting
it. It influenced my judgment on what we should do, perhaps too much."

Even before the war in the gulf, Kerrey admitted that his thinking on America's
role in the world had begun to change. As a result of Vietnam, he said, he'd
been skeptical about the doctrine of containment, until the emergence of Eastern
Europe and the testimony of such dissidents as Vaclav Havel and Lech Walesa
about the importance of America's cold war stance. "My own experience had caused
me to skeptically conclude something that was wrong," he said. "It was worth
doing, and perhaps it was worth pressing it even further than we did."

In an interview after the cease-fire in the gulf, Kerrey said he would continue
to stand behind what he called, with a slight smile, "the mother of all votes."
He said he still believed that sanctions would have worked, but noted that, like
other Democrats after the vote, he immediately rallied round the President and
his policy. In a series of speeches after the war, he hailed the efforts of the
troops and of General H. Norman Schwarzkopf and praised President Bush for
articulating a moral crusade that roused the American people.

It is critical, Kerrey said, that this moral framework not be overlooked and
that America keep pushing for the cause of individual freedom in Iraq and
Kuwait. "If all we do after this war is over is take advantage of construction
contracts, cheap oil and new buyers of military hardware," he said in a recent
speech, "the sweet taste of victory could become as bitter as the defeat in
Vietnam."

The suspicion of the Vietnam vet remains, along with an unflinching sense of the
reality of war. "I remember sitting in that Philadelphia Naval Hospital," he
says, "listening to the politicians saying, 'We know what war is all about,' and
thinking, 'You bastards haven't got any idea.' "

KERREY ENLISTED IN October 1966. He was 23 years old, one of seven children of a
building contractor and a teacher (both now deceased), and a recent graduate of
the University of Nebraska at Lincoln, with a degree in pharmacy. He was about
to be drafted into the Army; instead, he joined the Navy and entered officer
candidate school. When he earned his commission a year later, he volunteered for
the Seals (the acronym stands for sea, air and land, meaning its members operate
in all three) -- the Navy's commando team. "Mostly it was just duty," Kerrey
says with a shrug. "I was an American. We had a war."

An old friend from the Seals, Gary Parrott, recalls: "We didn't go out there
just to fight the enemy. We went out to capture important people and damage
their war-making capability."

Lieutenant (j.g.) Kerrey was a Seal team leader. In January 1969 his seven-man
team was sent to Vietnam. On the moonless night of March 14, Kerrey's unit set
out to capture a group of Vietcong intelligence officers operating on a small
island off the coast of Nha Trang. A defector had informed the Americans of the
Vietcong's location, on a ledge beneath a 350-foot cliff. Kerrey and his team,
intending to surprise them from above, had designed an operation to scale the
cliff.

The Americans split into two teams, one to engage the Vietcong from the front
while Kerrey and the other group came down from the top. They were near the end
of their descent when the Vietcong began firing. A grenade exploded at Kerrey's
feet. "All I knew was it was loud and it hurt like hell," he says.

His citation for the Congressional Medal of Honor declares: "Although bleeding
profusely and suffering great pain, he displayed outstanding courage and
presence of mind in immediately directing his element's fire into the heart of
the enemy camp. Utilizing his radioman, Lieutenant Kerrey called in the second
element's fire support, which caught the confused Vietcong in a devastating
crossfire.

"After successfully suppressing the enemy's fire, and although immobilized by
his multiple wounds, he continued to maintain calm, superlative control as he
ordered his team to secure and defend an extraction site. Lieutenant Kerrey
resolutely directed his men, despite his near-unconscious state, until he was
eventually evacuated by helicopter. The havoc brought to the enemy by this very
successful mission cannot be overestimated."

Kerrey had been in Vietnam for three months. He would spend the next nine months
in a hospital, along with a lot of other young men trying to cope with lost
limbs, burned bodies and pain. As Kerrey's roommate at the Philadelphia Naval
Hospital, Jim Crotty, says, "It was, very simply, another war."

KERREY ARRIVED IN Philadelphia shortly after his injury, and the doctors
immediately scheduled surgery. When he woke up, he asked his mother how much of
his leg was left. They had managed to save the knee.

The hospital specialized in amputees, and each morning, Crotty recalls, the
orthopedic surgeons conducted "stump rounds," examining wounds and changing
dressings. "You could tell how close they were to your room by the screams you
heard," says Crotty. "And one thing I remember about Bob is, I never heard him
utter a sound. He just had a real good capacity for pain."

Kerrey describes the hospital as a defining experience. "It's awfully difficult
to be arrogant when they're sticking a bedpan under your butt. I learned what
it's like to be dependent. Learned what it's like to suffer. Learned what it's
like to feel compassion for someone who's suffering even more. Learned what it's
like to feel alone and different."

In the hospital, he says, his doubts and anger about the war began to grow. "I
was strongly of the opinion that Vietnamization would not work, that all we were
doing was stalling for time and that we were going to negotiate away every damn
thing we said we wouldn't negotiate away, that all we were trying to do was
protect the politicians for a little while until they could get re-elected.

"And that's exactly what we did. And another 20,000 guys died."

He went home to Nebraska in December 1969 -- angry, bitter and still in a lot of
physical pain. He worked with the liberal activist Allard Lowenstein in a voter
registration drive and spoke out against the war, "but I didn't feel any strong
kinship with the antiwar movement." Years later, he saw a taped interview he had
done in 1973 with Jim Lehrer. "They asked me, are you bitter? And I said, 'NO!'
And Jesus, you see the thing and you'd say, 'Here's a guy who's the definition
of bitterness.' "

He went back to school, then into business with his brother-in-law, eventually
building chains of restaurants and health clubs in Nebraska. He had several
operations on his leg during the 1970's that enabled him to walk with only a
slight limp and eventually even to run five miles a day. He married a woman from
Nebraska, Beverly Defnall, and had a son and a daughter (Benjamin, now 16, and
Lindsey, 14), but the marriage ended after four years. Kerrey had been only
minimally involved in politics and had never run for office when he decided to
seek the governorship in 1982. A combination of the ailing farm economy and his
own fresh appeal helped him oust Republican Charles Thone.

"I believed I would be good at it and I would enjoy it, and finally I just said,
'I'm going to try,' " Kerrey says. "I'd had a lot of involvement with
government, and I'd seen it do stupid things."

IT WAS LATE, AND OMAHA was a good 40 miles away. Bob Kerrey had already done a
half-dozen events that January day, the last being a long meeting in the small
town of Tekamah, where he'd responded to anxious questions about the Persian
Gulf. The small traveling party of aides and reporters was ready for Omaha and
bed. Kerrey, however, had other ideas: Everybody was going to Ronnie's, a
Tekamah bar. The patrons looked up approvingly as their Senator walked in at
9:30 on a Tuesday night and ordered a beer. It is the kind of surprise
Nebraskans have come to expect. It is part of the mystique.

Kerrey appears ideally suited for an era of personality politics. There is, of
course, Bob Kerrey, war hero. There is also Bob Kerrey, regular guy, whooping it
up with a couple of beefy ranchers about a mutual acquaintance, a trapper
renowned for his drinking ability and earthy habits. There is Bob Kerrey,
celebrity bachelor, who has an off-again, on-again relationship with the actress
Debra Winger; they met in 1983 in Lincoln, where she was filming "Terms of
Endearment" and he was in the Governor's mansion. Even Bob Dole, the
unimpressable Senate minority leader, looked slightly dazzled when Kerrey showed
up at the Capitol one weekend during the budget crisis with Winger in tow.
People magazine could not have done a better job inventing Bob Kerrey.

David K. Karnes, the former Senator who was defeated by Kerrey in 1988, contends
that all the glitter has an impact. "I was never able to transcend the charisma
and get to the issues," he says. Karnes remembers one campaign event when
"somebody came up and asked me about soybean marketing loans; then they turned
to Bob and asked about Willie Nelson and Debra Winger."

Kent Grisham, the former communciations director of the Nebraska Republican
Party, adds: "He has star quality. I don't think he has leadership qualities. I
don't think he has statesmanlike qualities, but unfortunately star quality can
get you elected."

"Charisma" is a word devalued by overuse, endlessly invoked by a generation of
journalists and consultants seeking the Kennedy myth of their youth. But Kerrey
does have the ability, in person and on screen, to connect.

The looks help. Kerrey has a boyish face saved from weatherman prettiness by his
eyes, which are the eyes of a man who spent nine months in a hospital. He is
much hotter emotionally than most of his fellow politicians, who have been
taught to downsize their gestures and cool their tones for the television era,
only to find a generation of voters turned off by standardized, sound-alike
pols.

"I remember seeing the first cuts of the TV ads in his first campaign, and they
leapt off the screen," says John J. Cavanaugh, a former Democratic
Representative from Omaha. "I said, geez, can we tone this guy down?"

Kerrey always has an edge -- sometimes ironic detachment, sometimes a barely
cloaked streak of up-yours:

Reporter: "You've been the subject of a lot of speculation about running for the
Presidency. Do you want it and do you think you're ready for it?"

Kerrey: "I don't want it and I don't know if I'm ready for it. If I wanted it,
I'd worry about being ready."

Reporter: "So you'd rule out a run in '92?"

Kerrey: "I don't absolutely rule out a run in '92, but something's going to have
to happen to make me want to be President. And it hasn't happened yet."

Reporter: "Why wouldn't you want to be President?"

Kerrey: "Gee, I don't know. Let somebody else figure that out. That's what you
guys do for a living. Analyze."

Reporter: "No, that's what therapists do for a living."

Kerrey: "That's right. [Laughing, lowering his voice] 'Maybe it's because he
gets too angry.' "

Kerrey and his handlers have a sure sense of how to package his persona. His
1988 campaign commercials had the aura of Midwestern myth: Kerrey in fields,
Kerrey on a farm with a huge extended family, Kerrey talking dead into the
camera about losing his leg and witnessing the birth of his children -- all
under the tag line, "Nebraska at Its Best."

The Republican Party's Grisham argues, with considerable frustration, that
Kerrey "represents a much more liberal, left-of-center group of people than
Nebraskans tend to be." But according to an Omaha World-Herald poll, Kerrey's
approval rating in the state has generally stayed above 70 percent and
Nebraskans dote on his national image. Almost everywhere he goes in the state,
people ask if he will run for President.

Kerrey's detractors say his personal magnetism has masked an unimpressive record
in both offices he's held. He was Governor during the height of the farm crisis,
but a Governor can usually do little more on farm issues than rail at Federal
policies. Kerrey takes credit for balancing a strained budget without a
permanent tax increase. But even he acknowledges that he "made a lot of
mistakes" in his handling of the state's banking crisis in the mid-80's.

Those mistakes came under renewed scrutiny last year when Kerrey launched an
attack on the Bush Administration's own handling of the national
savings-and-loan collapse. Republicans noted that Kerrey had kept close ties,
including a business partnership, with one of the owners of a Nebraska bank that
eventually folded while he was Governor. The Omaha World-Herald reported last
year that investigations had found no evidence of wrongdoing by Kerrey, but the
issue lingers.

His critics point to something else about Kerrey: an impatience, a restlessness.
In 1985, just three years after becoming Governor, he announced that he would
not run again, explaining he needed a break from politics, saying it was time to
move on. He taught for a while and tended his restaurant business; then in 1988,
after the death of incumbent Democratic Senator Edward Zorinsky and the
short-term appointment of Karnes, he returned to run for the Senate. "He ran for
Governor and inspired the troops to beat an incumbent," says Karnes. "Then
three-quarters of the way through, he decided it wasn't what he really wanted to
do. I guess the question comes down to, what is his motivation? What drives this
guy?"

KERREY ARRIVED IN Washington in 1989 amid great expectations; right from the
start, the Democratic networks were humming about the talented newcomer who
might be able to help juice the party, a party shut out of the White House for a
decade, a party constantly searching for the angle, the philosophy, the
personalities to bring it back. The Democratic Party makes its stars with
dizzying speed, and often breaks them just as quickly.

Kerrey sought and won appointments to the Appropriations and Agriculture
committees -- good assignments for a Midwestern freshman, though not the kind
that win a Senator national visibility. Last year, Kerrey built a fairly liberal
voting record, according to the annual ranking by the National Journal: more
liberal than 66 percent of his colleagues on economic issues, than 74 percent on
social issues and than 75 percent on foreign issues.

He made his mark during one of the most emotional debates of the 101st Congress,
over a proposed Constitutional amendment to outlaw flag burning. Eventually,
most Senate Democrats voted against that amendment, but Kerrey opposed it at a
time when few Democrats were willing to get out front and polls showed
overwhelming support for the measure. The Democratic leadership was delighted to
see the charge led by a winner of the Medal of Honor.

Kerrey was also a vocal critic of the Administration's Southeast Asia policy. He
has argued that the United States should explore the possibility of improving
relations with Vietnam and the Vietnamese-backed government of Cambodia.

Kerrey has tried to tackle health care as well, holding numerous informal
hearings on the issue in his home state and producing a draft plan this winter
intended to provide universal health care. But as some of the keepers of
conventional wisdom in Washington have noticed, he often gives the impression of
being in the middle of a vast tutorial on national policy.

"My sense of Kerrey is of a guy who hit .385 in triple-A ball, is proclaimed by
all the scouts as the next phenom, comes up to the Major Leagues and so far
hasn't really shown that he'll be a star in the World Series," says Norman
Ornstein, an analyst at the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative
Washington think tank.

Yet Kerrey, by virtue of his raw political talent and the wide-open Democratic
field, regularly makes the short list of potential Presidential candidates kept
by the press and the political professionals. This has caused some jitters among
his friends. "I have told him, be careful," says J. James Exon, Nebraska's
senior Democratic Senator and something of a mentor to Kerrey. "The press loves
to build people up for these offices, and then once they build them up to a
pinnacle, they love to tear them down."

Another senior Democrat, a declared fan of Kerrey's who insisted on not being
identified, adds: "I'm sure he's getting a lot of pressure to do it, but I don't
think he's getting that much pressure from his real friends. What little
opportunity he's had to prepare to run for the Presidency would make him fall,
and if you fall hard, it's hard to come back."

Already there are hints of downward reappraisal. "I'm a little worried that he
could turn out to be a kind of recycled Jerry Brown," says one Democratic
consultant who also spoke on condition of anonymity. Other Democrats privately
worry about a gravitas problem. To which a somewhat exasperated Kerrey replies,
"I'm not going to sit here and list the things that cause me to believe I've got
gravitas."

Kerrey's strong position against the gulf war would almost certainly be used
against him in any Presidential campaign. But only to a point, his allies
suggest; his war record provides a certain protective cover.

Those close to Kerrey take him at his word on 1992: that he has no plans or even
desire to seek the Presidency but reserves the right to change his mind. Yet
there is something about Kerrey that seems incompatible with modern Presidential
campaigning -- sitting in the front of an airplane day after day, watched by 50
reporters waiting for a gaffe; serving up a message of the day with relentless
discipline. No more impromptu stops at Tekamah bars. No freedom to change his
mind on major policy questions -- or think aloud, as Kerrey is wont to do --
without provoking a furor. Opening your personal life to unending scrutiny.

He is plainly uncomfortable with questions about Winger, whom he began seeing
again last year after a long hiatus, during which she married the actor Timothy
Hutton, had a son and was divorced. One day several months ago, Kerrey winced at
the sight of a gossip item about his Paris rendezvous with the actress for the
opening of her film "The Sheltering Sky."

"The generalization is that your personal life and your political life are
always mixed up together," he said later. "And the danger is that you begin to
act on the personal side as if you're still a politician. It's hard to shut it
off. So you begin to think about your children and loved ones in political ways.
I think that's a genuine danger."

At this point, the most intense Democratic fantasy about Kerrey probably
revolves around the No. 2 slot. Party officials practically salivate at the idea
of watching their Medal of Honor winner in a Vice Presidential debate against
Dan Quayle, whose service in the National Guard during the Vietnam War proved so
controversial in the 1988 campaign. It is an understandable fantasy for a party
that has absorbed such a hammering on the issue of patriotism, that has
repeatedly seen its candidates attacked as something less than red-blooded
heroes.

"I think you could fund the Democratic National Committee for four years just by
selling tickets to Democrats to see Kerrey on a stage with Quayle," says
Harrison Hickman, a Democratic poll taker and longtime adviser to the Senator.

Kerrey, while claiming no interest in the Vice Presidency, still shows a keen
sense of how to use his combat record against the Quayles of the world. When the
Vice President was traveling the country pledging, "This will not be another
Vietnam," Kerrey asked, "How does he know?" When Representative Newt Gingrich,
the Republican whip, drew a scathing contrast between Operation Desert Storm and
Operation Desert One, Jimmy Carter's failed attempt in 1980 to rescue the
hostages in Iran, Kerrey fired back, taking note of the fact that Gingrich had
the benefit of student and family deferments during Vietnam.

"This avoider of miltiary service gained my permanent enmity," Kerrey said,
"debasing the memory of those men who died in that noble, dangerous, heroic and
-- yes, in the end -- unsuccessful try to liberate their fellow Americans."

EACH TIME BOB KERREY runs for office, his old Seal buddies show up; they help
him campaign and they help him celebrate. The night Kerrey was sworn in as
Governor, Gary Parrott remembers, "he just opened the door to the mansion, let
us in and locked it." The night he claimed victory in the Senate race, five of
his fellow Seals, who had campaigned across the state for him, were there. On
live television, at the end of his victory speech, Kerrey sang a song that he
dedicated to them. It was the Australian lament from World War I, "And the Band
Played Waltzing Matilda," about a young man who goes to war and comes home
without his legs.

For Kerrey, the political pilgrim, the journey begins in Vietnam and always
leads back there. It gives his politics an emotional charge, a passion rare in
public life. But Kerrey is still learning how to use it, how to harness the
energies and ideas that come from his own experiences into a vision of public
policy.

Like any good pilgrim, he acknowledges doubts, wrong turns, missteps. It is a
refreshing trait in the Senate. In a Presidential campaign, it would not be
easily forgiven.

In the days after the cease-fire in the gulf, exuberant pundits all over the
country pronounced the Vietnam syndrome dead. Bob Kerrey was reaching for some
closure, too. In an interview, he talked about the astonishing effectiveness of
the allied military campaign, of the nation's justifiable pride in its troops.

"We started this thing and we finished it," Kerrey said. "We have a powerful
military leader in Schwarzkopf, who did exactly what he said he was going to do.
We drove them out of Kuwait. We accomplished our objectives, and there's
tremendous pride in that."

But Kerrey was raising questions, too. "The larger issue for me is, how are we
going to use this power? Are we going to use it for good?"

He rambled on, thoughts and theories spinning round and round, searching,
apparently, for his own "new world order."

NAME: Bob Kerrey

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Bob Kerrey at home in Omaha. His Vietnam War experience
gives his politics a passion rare in public life. (Rick Olivier for The New York
Times)(pg. 42)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 932 words


MAASAI DAYS, by Cheryl Bentsen. (Anchor/Doubleday, $11.) To go beyond the
noble-savage myths that so many Westerners attach to the East African Masai, a
journalist in Kenya befriended members of the endangered tribe. In 1989 our
reviewer, Louisa Dawkins, called the result "one of the most successful attempts
by a Westerner to present a contemporary African world view that I have come
across." THE THINGS THEY CARRIED, by Tim O'Brien. (Penguin, $8.95.) In a series
of intertwined stories about Vietnam, a semifictional character named Tim
O'Brien reflects on how memory and imagination magnify and distort the stories
we tell ourselves about war. The author, whose 1978 novel "Going After Cacciato"
won a National Book Award, "adds his second title to the short list of essential
fiction about Vietnam," Robert R. Harris said here last year. "By moving beyond
the horror of the fighting to examine with sensitivity and insight the nature of
courage and fear, by questioning the role that imagination plays in helping to
form our memories and our own versions of truth, he places 'The Things They
Carried' high up on the list of best fiction about any war."

AGAINST JOIE DE VIVRE: Personal Essays, by Phillip Lopate. (Poseidon, $9.95.) In
the title piece of this collection, the author takes on those obsessively happy
people who, as they insist on living for the moment, deny themselves the
pleasures of savoring disappointment. In 1989 our reviewer, Herbert Gold, said,
"Mr. Lopate's eloquence and wit are instructive about the glamorous foreign
lands of chagrin."

RESTORATION: A Novel of Seventeenth-Century England, by Rose Tremain. (Penguin,
$8.95.) A greedy medical student abandons his studies for a life of debauchery
in the court of Charles II. Rose Tremain "has restored the historical novel to
its rightful place of honor after nearly two decades of degeneration into the
sweet-savage imbecility of so-called historical romance," Florence King said
here last year. The result is "nothing less than superb."

SWORD OVER RICHMOND: An Eyewitness History of McClellan's Peninsula Campaign, by
Richard Wheeler. (Harper Perennial, $10.95.) By all rights Gen. George B.
McClellan's campaign to take the Confederate capital of Richmond should have
succeeded. Using diaries, letters and other documents to tell what went wrong,
Richard Wheeler has produced "a lively and often moving account," Hal Goodman
said here in 1986. "As a day-to-day journal of war, 'Sword Over Richmond'
succeeds brilliantly." Harper Perennial has also reissued Mr. Wheeler's 1989
WITNESS TO APPOMATTOX ($10.95), compiled from eyewitness accounts.

PORT TROPIQUE, by Barry Gifford. (Vintage Contemporaries, $9.) As revolution
grips a Central American country, a smuggler addicted more to risk than money
gets involved in the ivory trade. In 1981 our reviewer, Jonathan Baumbach, said,
"The clean prose is one of this novel's pleasures; the dreamlike narrative, for
all its effacement, another. . . . Mr. Gifford uses the charged story of Franz
as an apprentice smuggler as an occasion for his own literary and cinematic
smuggling -- from Conrad, Hemingway, Camus, John Hawkes, Howard Hawks, Orson
Welles and Ozu among others -- and to discover new literary form." THE VOYAGE OF
THE SANDERLING, by Roger D. Stone. (Vintage, $12.) Sailing from Maine to Rio de
Janeiro on a 38-foot cutter, an environmentalist tells how the pressures of
human population are destroying the Atlantic coast. "Much of what he discovered
has been documented elsewhere, but his accounts of the decline, and of the
heroic commitment of many of the environmentalists who are trying to stop it,
are impressive," Robert Finch said here last year.

BREAKING GENTLE, by Beverly Lowry. (Penguin, $8.95.) A Virginia Woolf scholar
moves with her husband and children to the hill country of Texas where they
raise quarter horses. In exploring the strains that lead to the family's
disintegration, Beverly Lowry has produced "a strong and graceful performance, a
book to reread," William Pritchard said here in 1988.

THE SEARCH FOR EVE, by Michael H. Brown. (Harper Perennial, $10.95.) By
analyzing DNA, a group of molecular biologists in California claim to have
traced human ancestry back to an African Garden of Eden where Eve, the mother of
us all, once lived. Last year our reviewer, Natalie Angier, said the author
tried to fit too much information into his narrative but "the breadth of his
research is impressive." HIS LITTLE WOMEN, by Judith Rossner. (Pocket Books,
$5.95.) The daughter of a Hollywood producer writes a novel based on the racy
lives of her three sisters.  "Imagine Thackeray, clear-eyed as ever but hipper,
taking on Hollywood, multiple marriages, the effect of divorce on children, the
women's movement, cosmetic surgery, Playboy and Ms. magazines," Cyra McFadden
said here last year. " 'His Little Women' is as crowded and wide-ranging as
'Vanity Fair.' "

DROWNED HOPES, by Donald E. Westlake. (Mysterious Press, $4.95.) An old cellmate
enlists burglar extraordinaire John Dortmunder to help recover $700,000 in
stolen money buried under what is now a 50-foot-deep reservoir. "Donald
Westlake's lean prose and deadpan delivery are engaging, as always," Katherine
Dunn said here last year. "His psychology is sharp and his characters colorful,
as usual. The stylish dialogue plays with Harold Pinter-meets-Abbot & Costello
fireworks -- and the kinked plot is worthy of the doughty Dortmunder himself."
Carroll & Graf has republished Mr. Westlake's 1960 novel THE MERCENARIES
($3.95).

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: /* //* //* //* //* //* //*
Photo: Tim O'Brien. (Steve Wolf for The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Man Who Detested the Sea

BYLINE: By Joyce Carol Oates;  Joyce Carol Oates, the Roger S. Berlind
Distinguished Professor in the Humanities at Princeton University, is the author
of the forthcoming novel "The Rise of Life on Earth."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2457 words



JOSEPH CONRAD
A Biography.
By Jeffrey Meyers.
Illustrated. 428 pp. New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons. $27.50.

"The necessity which impelled me [to go to sea and to become a writer] was a
hidden, obscure necessity, a completely masked and unaccountable phenomenon,"
Joseph Conrad wrote in "A Personal Record."

Born in 1857 in the Polish Ukraine, to impoverished landed gentry with a family
history of courageous, if reckless, patriotism, Joseph Conrad (ne Jozef Teodor
Konrad Nalecz Korzeniowski) became in the course of his difficult lifetime a
paragon of the post-Flaubertian literary artist: the writer of idiosyncratic and
obsessive genius who is neglected for most of his career by the general reading
public, but celebrated by his fellow writers; the virtual martyr to his art who
exhausts himself in its service, as in the worship of an inscrutable god. By the
time of Conrad's death in 1924, at the age of 66, he was considered one of the
greatest writers in contemporary English, though his spoken English was still so
bad that even acquaintances had trouble understanding him. His stature has
strengthened posthumously, partly as a result of the text-conscious New
Criticism of the 50's (for which Conrad's elegantly fashioned, ironic prose is
ideally suited) and partly as a result of our general skepticism concerning the
morality of imperial politics and "progress" -- the bringing of the light into
"the dark places of the earth" by European Christianity.

Though he was born Roman Catholic, Conrad acknowledged no religion and wrote of
the supernatural only as superstition. He knew nature firsthand, having been a
merchant seaman for 20 years -- thus he was no nature mystic, and detested what
he perceived to be sentimentalism in Herman Melville (with whom, to his disgust,
he was repeatedly compared). His masters were Flaubert, Turgenev and Henry
James; his intention as an artist was, as he states in the celebrated preface to
"The Nigger of the 'Narcissus,' " to appeal to the reader's temperament -- "to
make you hear, to make you feel . . . to make you see." Yet he was a passionate
moralist, a philosophical writer whose primary subject is the individual and his
relationship to the human community.

Though Conrad's vision is tragic (he might have said realistic), his tone is
often comic. His dense, convoluted prose, English uneasily qualified by
undercurrents of the Polish and French that were the author's earlier languages,
is sometimes obscure. (An early reviewer, even as he acknowledged Conrad's
greatness, complained that "his story is not so much told as seen intermittently
through a haze of sentences . . . like a river-mist.") Yet, at times, his prose
is swift, sensuous and cinematic in a manner that, as Jeffrey Meyers shrewdly
notes in "Joseph Conrad: A Biography," seems to have directly inspired Ernest
Hemingway. Among Conrad's most compelling works of fiction are "The Nigger of
the 'Narcissus,' " "Lord Jim," "The Secret Agent" and "The Secret Sharer"; his
extraordinary long novel "Nostromo," a prophetic tragedy of "material interests"
set in an invented but vividly rendered Central American republic, is one of the
underrated masterpieces of 20th-century English literature. Conrad's most famous
work, based upon his traumatic experience in the Belgian Congo in 1890, is the
novella "Heart of Darkness," a Symbolist masterpiece narrated by the eloquent,
brooding Marlow, to whom, as to his creator, "the meaning of an episode was not
inside like a kernel but outside, enveloping the tale which brought it out only
as a glow brings out a haze, in the likeness of one of these misty halos that
sometimes are made visible by the spectral illumination of moonshine." "Heart of
Darkness" was the source of Francis Ford Coppola's Vietnam film "Apocalypse
Now," and it is surely one of the perennial best sellers in English literature
-- in both its original text and in its handy Cliffs Notes gloss for students.

"The great irony of Conrad's artistic career," Jeffrey Meyers says, "was that he
had poor sales for his greatest books and popular acclaim for his late, inferior
work, which he himself called 'secondhand Conrad ese.' " Mr. Meyers might have
added that Conrad's posthumous popularity -- including the success of
"Apocalypse Now" -- deepens the irony and would certainly have astonished
Conrad, so desperate for money through most of his life, and so demeaned by the
effort to get it. (As a young man, in 1878, after having lost 800 francs in a
Monte Carlo gaming room, Conrad tried to commit suicide. As late as 1911, while
working on "Under Western Eyes," and approaching a nervous breakdown, Conrad was
complaining bitterly of receiving only £300 for the serial rights to that novel:
"Think of those awful creatures who get thousands. . . . Mais, I am always under
the water.")

Conrad's life abounded in ironies and contradictions. While believing himself a
pragmatic person, one committed to facts and "sound method," he was often
obsessed with unrealistic plans and projects: during his youthful seagoing years
he hoped to earn money outside the merchant service (which paid little) by way
of whaling ventures, Australian pearl fisheries, the Japanese Navy, even work of
some sort for an American politician. Though, by the age of 30, Conrad was the
sole Polish-born captain in the British merchant marine, an achievement in
itself, he experienced continual difficulty getting work, and, after 1894, never
succeeded in getting another berth, realizing bitterly that he had spent 20
years mastering an art that was no longer needed. Moreover, however he was to
romanticize the sea in his fiction, Conrad seems to have hated it in reality:
"He detested the sea as a man detests a cast-off mistress . . .; his passion
became to live out of sight of the sea and all its memories," as his friend Ford
Madox Ford said. Another irony lay in the fact that while Conrad wrote so
powerfully of the physical life, the manly life removed from female
companionship and society, he was very often near-crippled with gout and
numerous ailments, some of which appear to have been neurasthenic. He was, as
Mr. Meyers states, "often maniacally depressed"; susceptible to violent mood
swings, absent-minded and impractical, he was utterly dependent upon his wife,
his servants and his friends.

Like many another writer who feels himself accursed by his very vocation, if not
his very genius, Conrad took zestful pleasure in detailing his disasters in
letters to his friends. (A typical passage, from a letter to Edward Garnett, in
1896, while Conrad was writing "The Rescue": "I have long fits of depression,
that in a lunatic asylum would be called madness. I do not know what it is. It
springs from nothing. It is ghastly. It lasts an hour or a day; and when it
departs it leaves a fear. . . . I suspect I am getting through a severe mental
illness.") When Conrad became hysterical, chattering and screaming like a
monkey, he could calm himself by compulsively brushing his hair.

Perhaps the greatest irony of Conrad's personal life was his marriage, about
which everyone who knew him seems to have had sardonic, if not cruelly comic,
opinions. His wife, Jessie George, was 16 years his junior; an English typist,
plain, uneducated, unemotional, whose "unassailable placidity" was, in the eyes
of her son Borys, "almost frightening at times." Like James Joyce's wife, Nora,
Jessie had no interest in literary and intellectual subjects, but provided
maternal solicitude for the temperamental writer; unlike Joyce's Nora, Jessie
soon rivaled her husband in invalidism and, moreover, became grotesquely obese,
a glutton for food and drink. H. G. Wells called her "a Flemish thing from the
mud flats," Virginia Woolf spoke of her as Conrad's "lump of a wife," Conrad
despaired of her as "enormous" and seems to have used her as the model for
Winnie's mother in "The Secret Agent": "a stout, wheezy woman, with a large
brown face" whose "swollen legs rendered her inactive. . . . [There was] a
venerable placidity conferred upon her outward person by her triple chin, the
floating ampleness of her ancient form, and the impotent condition of her legs."
Mrs. Conrad may not have known of her husband's use of her in this instance, as
in others, but she seems to have taken revenge upon him by publishing, after his
death, her own memoirs, "Joseph Conrad as I Knew Him" and "Joseph Conrad and His
Circle," the latter of which inspired Edward Garnett to say that it was "the
most detestable book ever written by a wife about her husband." Yet, as Violet
Hunt ironically observed, Jessie was, in her very lumpishness, "the perfect wife
for an author."

Conrad's genius was for friendship. Jeffrey Meyers notes the 14 works dedicated
to Conrad, tracing the history of some of his literary friendships, which were
quite devoted, including those with John Galsworthy, Constance Garnett, Robert
Cunninghame Graham, Ford Madox Ford (with whom he collaborated), Violet Hunt,
Edward Thomas, Arthur Symons and Richard Curle. He was warmly acquainted too
with the "Old Man" (as Conrad admiringly called him), Henry James; and with the
young Stephen Crane, Andre Gide, Norman Douglas and the ill-fated Sir Roger
Casement. He seems even to have had a romantic friendship with a beautiful
orange-haired young American journalist named Jane Anderson, whose adventurous
life and career Mr. Meyers has investigated with considerable zeal, suspecting
that earlier biographers deliberately omitted Anderson from their books:
"[Conrad] fell in love with her, met her secretly and -- seizing the last chance
for sexual romance -- wrote her passionate love letters. She became his mistress
in the summer of 1916 and was the only woman, apart from Jessie, whom we know he
slept with." The imperial "we" here is somewhat startling, for how, in fact,
does one "know" such a thing? Isn't the love affair fundamentally conjecture,
however attractive? For a man of Conrad's temperament, romance, unconsummated,
would have had a strong appeal.

Just as Conrad's life at sea provided rich, endlessly stimulating material for
the author to draw upon through his landlocked years as a writer, so too his
life in general, augmented by highly quotable letters to and from literary
friends, has proved irresistible to biographers. Two works by G. Jean Aubry,
"Joseph Conrad: Life and Letters" and "The Sea Dreamer: A Definitive Biography
of Joseph Conrad," are fundamental to an understanding of Conrad's work in
relationship to his personal life. The indefatigable Norman Sherry, who followed
the routes of Conrad's distant travels in order to write "Conrad's Eastern
World" and "Conrad's Western World," set a biographical standard that is
virtually impossible to match. (Mr. Sherry's short study, "Conrad," with its
numerous photographs, is also an excellent guide.) Frederick Karl's fact-filled
"Joseph Conrad: The Three Lives" is a valuable, encyclopedic work. Jocelyn
Baines and Richard Tennant have written sympathetic, intelligent studies of
Conrad. The problem for new biographers of Conrad is one of inescapable
belatedness, for discovering something fresh and valuable about the writer is
surely difficult at this date. And even assuming that one has discovered
something, how does one present the new discoveries except by way of
interlarding them, chronologically, with the old and familiar?

As if anticipating this objection, Mr. Meyers prefaces his biography by listing
his use of unpublished material, which gave him access to new information about,
among other subjects, Conrad's Polish background; Conrad's positive attitude
toward Jews, and America; Conrad's relations with Perceval Gibbon, Sir Robert
Jones and T. E. Lawrence; most of all, his relations with the "vivacious and
reckless" Jane Anderson. The chapters devoted to Anderson, including even a
bibliography of her journalistic work, might seem excessive to some skeptics:
one wonders if Joseph Conrad had read her pieces in The New York Tribune and The
Catholic Digest, and whether they were the basis of his attraction to her. The
fact that, decades later, Anderson was arrested for treason, as a Nazi
sympathizer, is particularly irrelevant to her friendship with Conrad.

Jeffrey Meyers has written biographies of Wyndham Lewis, D. H. Lawrence,
Katherine Mansfield and Ernest Hemingway, as well as a number of critical
studies; his "Manic Power: Robert Lowell and His Circle" is a gossipy account of
wounded poets, with but marginal literary significance. "Joseph Conrad" is never
less than a workmanlike amalgam of known and new material; at its best, it is
sensitively written, and clearly inspired by a great admiration for its subject.
If, like this reviewer, you share Mr. Meyers's enthusiasm for Conrad, you will
not much mind, and may in fact enjoy, the many instances of deja vu this book
provides -- like hearing, another time, an old and cherished family anecdote.




'I WOULDN'T HAVE WRITTEN A LINE'

In the summer of 1889 Conrad began the crucial transition from sailor to writer
by starting his first novel, Almayer's Folly, based on his brief acquaintance
with the seedy Eurasian trader in Borneo. . . .

Conrad had been thinking in English for eleven years, had lived his Eastern
experience in English and did not hesitate about which language to use in his
nautical novels. As Thomas Mann noted, English is "the classical tongue of the
sea-faring man." More unusual than his choice of language was the fact that
Conrad, as an adult, had learned literary English from reading Shakespeare and
Byron at the same time that he had learned colloquial English from the fishermen
and sailors of Lowestoft. He later said that when he "came to England, he did
not know anything of the language, and it was in a little inn at Lowestoft,
frequented by sailors, at which he stayed between his voyages, that he puzzled
out in the articles of the Standard -- the only English literature to be found
there -- his first lessons in English."

At that time, his choice of an alien language was unique. Later, Vladimir
Nabokov, Arthur Koestler, Isak Dinesen as well as Samuel Beckett and Eugene
Ionesco also achieved distinction while writing in a foreign tongue. Conrad
clarified this issue in 1918 by telling Hugh Walpole: "When I wrote the first
words of Almayer's Folly, I had been already for years and years thinking in
English. I began to think in English long before I mastered, I won't say the
style (I haven't done that yet), but the mere uttered speech. . . . If I had not
known English I wouldn't have written a line for print, in my life." -- From
"Joseph Conrad."

NAME: Joseph Conrad

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing: Joseph Conrad

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 15, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BOXING;
Frazier and Ali, Together Again (Minus Gloves)

BYLINE: By PHIL BERGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 4; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 347 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, April 14


Twenty years after Muhammad Ali lost the first of a three-fight series with Joe
Frazier, the man called the Greatest has conceded defeat.

"My jaw told me he won," Ali said tonight at a news conference preceding a
black-tie dinner commemorating the 15-round heavyweight championship fight, held
March 8, 1971, at Madison Square Garden and won on a unanimous decision by
Frazier.

Ali, who was knocked down by Frazier in the 15th round that night, suffered a
badly swollen jaw from the pounding Frazier gave him over the 15 rounds.

"He hit me so hard it shook up my kinfolks in Africa," Ali told amused
reporters, repeating a line he used 20 years ago.

Both fighters received $2.5 million purses for the match, a record at that time
but a modest sum in today's marketplace. For his title defense Friday, Evander
Holyfield, the present heavyweight champion, is guaranteed $20 million for
fighting George Foreman, who is guaranteed $12.5 million.

When Frazier was asked what he thought a Frazier-Ali bout would be worth today,
he paused a moment to think, then as his expression brightened said, "I have to
talk to the lawyer tomorrow." Ali won the final two fights between them, a
non-title bout at the Garden and the Thrilla in Manila, in which he retained the
title he won from Foreman.

Both fighters sat in a room that had on the wall blow-ups of a March 5, 1971,
Life magazine cover showing them in the kind of formal attire they wore tonight.


Cosell Has His Say

The dinner was organized by Frazier's daughter Jacquelyne Frazier-Lyde, who is
an attorney, and his son Marvis, who, like his father, was a heavyweight
fighter.

At the news conference, Howard Cosell praised Frazier, 47 years old now, as "one
of the most honest, dedicated and exceptional gladiators." He called Ali, 49, "a
figure of significant constitutional law."

Cosell's reference to Ali was an allusion to the fighter's refusal on religious
grounds to be drafted for the Vietnam War, a stand that led to his being
stripped of his title but that was ultimately upheld by the Supreme Court.

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 16, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. to Review Dioxin Risk Given New Studies

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 5; Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 365 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 15



The Government is reviewing the risks of dioxin, spurred partly by studies that
suggest small amounts of the chemical may not be as dangerous to humans as was
believed.

William K. Reilly, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency,
said last week that it was important not to prejudge the results of the
reassessment of dioxin, long considered one of the most toxic substances in the
world.

"There has been much speculation about the effect of these new developments on
our revised dioxin risk assessment," Mr. Reilly said in a letter initiating the
review. "Some factors may decrease the level of concern. Others may result in
estimates of increased risk."

Dioxin is an unwanted byproduct of certain chemical reactions. It has
contaminated some weed and insect killers, including the herbicide Agent Orange
used extensively in Vietnam, and is produced in tiny amounts by paper mills that
use chlorine bleaches.

The substance appears to be the most powerful cancer-causing agent ever tested
in laboratory rodents. Recent studies have suggested that exposure to small
amounts of dioxin may not be associated with a substantial cancer risk in
humans, but large amounts might be.

Red Cavaney, president of the American Paper Institute, the principal trade
association of the paper industry, said pulp and paper producers believe current
dioxin standards are "too stringent, in light of all the evolving science that
has come out."

But Robert Adler, a senior staff attorney for the Natural Resources Defense
Council, said the environmental group believes the E.P.A. has disregarded
dioxin's toll on ecosystems and has underestimated human dioxin exposure.

He said the agency, for example, is relying on outdated statistics for how much
fish the average American consumes. Dioxin accumulates in the bodies of fish
living in rivers and lakes that may have extremely small concentrations of the
chemical.

Mr. Reilly also asked a group of senior E.P.A. managers to consider what the
reassessment might mean for current regulations involving dioxin, such as
cleanups of hazardous waste sites, discharge permits under the Clean Water Act
and enforcement cases.


LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 16, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

OBSERVER;
So Happy Down South

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 726 words


For days I have been struggling not to become sanctimonious about the Kurds
freezing and starving and burying the dead on that faraway mountainside. See
there? I am losing the battle again. That bit about "burying the dead" should
have been omitted.

"Burying the dead" is sentimentality, the feverish sign of an emotional view of
things, and being emotional is so, so, so out of place when one deals with hard
realities. One hates being emotional when hard realities are present. To
overcome the temptation to do so, I went to Washington the other day, hoping
that inhalations of that stern official air might put steel into my spirit,
Washington being the home office of hard realities.


"Why are the realities always hard?" I asked a vital Washingtonian. "Isn't there
room somewhere in the world for a few soft realities?"

"Ah," said she, speaking with sorrow, "you are emotional about the Kurds."

It reminded me of a terrible dinner party during the terrible Vietnam years when
a State Department man humiliated me with that terrible word. I had been
objecting to the Vietnam War on ground that its logic might require the death of
my children for the curiously abstruse purpose of demonstrating American
willingness to wage war.

"Ah, you are emotional," he said, turning away, ending the discussion to the
complete satisfaction of the State Department, having made it clear that anyone
who let concern for a few deaths in the family affect his opinion of public
policy was not worth listening to.

I never again want to be exposed as such a milksop, so am determined to forgo
pious abuse of George Bush for going fishing when the Kurds needed comfort from
a noble people capable of wielding great power with a humane spirit instead of
an eight-minute photo-opportunity visit from a Secretary of State.

So down to Washington I went, there to toughen my emotions by rubbing against
those famously hard realities. What a foolish city Washington can be despite the
hardness of its realities.

When I arrived the place was agog. What had it agog was a large load of dirt
dished on Nancy Reagan a day or two earlier from a just-published one-volume
well-poisoner. This rich load had followed fast on the news of the latest
Kennedy mess, something about the Senator taking his son and nephew for a night
on the town in delightfully rich, deliciously decadent Palm Beach, where 3:30
A.M. apparently is just the shank of the evening.

How desperately Washington seemed to need such entertainment. The Kurds had
probably been weighing on consciences all over the great capital, since, after
all, what could lesser Americans do for them if the President himself, that
awesome center of power, now doubly awesome because of his fantastic popularity
polls, couldn't think of much?

Relief supplies were finally being dropped from planes, of course, which was
better than the nothing we sent two weeks ago. Still it seemed feeble compared
with the heroic display of muscular Christianity we had mustered for war.

Here was a depressing reminder that Washington's ability to do things on the
heroic scale nowadays seems confined to warfare. It can't even help American
cities get their homeless off the streets; how could it possibly be expected to
cope with the desperation of an alien people on a faraway mountain?

Thank Heaven for Kennedys and Reagans. They had arrived in the nick of time with
a marvelous change of subject. Even the media sorcerers went at them with gusto.
The public philosophers apparently were as irritable as President Bush about the
depressing Kurds.

Washington speculated happily about what kind of trousers, if any, Senator
Kennedy wore with his T-shirt and why Mrs. Reagan lunched with Frank Sinatra.
Much delightful was written about what it all revealed about the national
condition, the state of the soul and other nonsensically gravid matters.

This seems to bear out Neil Postman's thesis that America is entertaining itself
to death, but the zeal with which ostensibly serious people went at such trivia
suggested a desperate need in Washington for a new subject -- any subject that
can divert the sad suspicion that the victory at war in Iraq has not produced a
new world order, but just the same old moral squalor.

No! Scratch that. It's emotional sanctimony again. Shameful, shameful.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 16, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

'Miss Saigon' Proposal

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 94 words


To the Editor:

I have seen the much acclaimed and discussed, overpriced and overbudgeted "Miss
Saigon" in a preview. It brings to our attention the problem of children
fathered by Americans in Vietnam, the hopelessness, the abandonment and the
prejudice they face. These children were left fatherless and penniless.

Couldn't the producers of "Miss Saigon" take one or two dollars from the top
ticket price of $100 a seat and contribute to them something other than song and
dance about their plight?

LAURA SUDARSKY
New City, N.Y., April 4, 1991

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 16, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Gen. Powell Returns to the Bronx, and Remembers

BYLINE: By CRAIG WOLFF

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 984 words


Gen. Colin L. Powell came home to the Bronx yesterday, seeking to connect with
the neighborhood of his past as he traveled its streets in search of familiar
sights and sounds.

The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff rode along Prospect Avenue,
Westchester Avenue and Intervale Avenue, up 166th Street. He paused along the
sweeping curve of Kelly Street, his old block, where he used to race bicycles
with his best friend, Gene. And he recalled many sights and smells -- a
hamburger place that is still standing, a family home that is not.

"I remember, I remember," he said as he surveyed his old neighborhood through a
steady rain.

He remembered many things, he told the students at Morris High School, where he
had not been since Graduation Day in 1954. Running through Van Cortlandt Park
with the track team. The corner at the end of Kelly Street, where even back
then, he said, the local drug dealers worked.

"I remember the front door," he said. "I remember the auditorium. I remember the
feeling that you can't make it. But you can."

"Things have changed, but you didn't discover everything," he said, as he
encouraged the students to avoid drugs and get their diplomas. "Stick with it.
I'm giving you an order. Stick with it."

Renewing Ties

Moving from one ceremony to the next, at the Loral Corporation plant where radar
equipment is produced for military aircraft, at his alma mater, at the county
courthouse and finally at Yankee Stadium where he threw out the first ball to
the Yankees' catcher, Bob Geren, his objective seemed clear -- to let people
know he had not lost the connection.

Outside the Loral plant, he grabbed for people. "Hey, John," he exclaimed,
clasping hands with a man who said that General Powell had been his company
commander in the Pershing Rifles, a precision drill team, when both were in the
Reserve Officers Training Corps at City College of New York. When someone
questioned him, the man, John Marchisotto, said sharply, "Yes, he recognized
me."

Inside the plant, scores of workers stopped in front of their computers and
machine stations to applaud. And to be sure, General Powell, accompanied by his
wife, Alma, moved like a politician, shaking hands and occasionally giving out
autographs as he led a procession of politicians, including Representative Jose
E. Serrano.

He told a worker, Shirley Tong, "It's good to be back near the White Castle."

Walter Schwartz, a chief scientist at the plant, who had gone to Public School
52 with General Powell, then to Morris High School and finally to City College,
said, "He was very intense, even then."

Only once did General Powell himself make a reference to politics, a subject
that has followed him since the Persian Gulf war. There has been speculation
that he might replace Vice President Dan Quayle as President Bush's running mate
in 1992. As photographers clicked away, he said to Mr. Serrano, "You guys
running for anything?"

"Right now, no one could beat you," Mr. Serrano fired back.

General Powell, seemingly aware that many young people are not accustomed to the
sight of a general in full uniform, said to the 300 students who greeted him in
the gymnasium at the high school: "Forget everything else. Let's just talk."

As he talked, a couple of radio microphones on the podium in front of him
crashed to the floor. It hardly made him pause.

He told the students he understood their struggles and those of their families.
He was born in Harlem in 1937 to parents who had come from Jamaica more than 20
years before. His parents worked in the garment district in Manhattan; his
father, Luther, as a shipping clerk, and his mother, Maud Ariel, as a
seamstress.

When he was 3, his family moved to the Hunts Point section of the Bronx, into a
community that was predominantly Jewish. His best friend then and still a good
friend, Gene A. Norman, the president of the Harlem International Trade Center
Corporation, said he and General Powell used to play stickball and have dinner
at each other's homes, apartments in walk-up buildings.

General Powell majored in geology at City College and graduated at the top of
the college R.O.T.C. class with the rank of cadet colonel. In 1962, he was one
of several thousand military advisers sent to South Vietnam, and mostly missed
the changes that transformed his old neighborhood from a solid, working-class
area to a place decimated and at one point almost completely abandoned.

But in the last decade, through the Banana Kelly Community Improvement
Association -- named for the banana-like curve in Kelly Street -- many blocks,
including Kelly Street, were revived with new two-family homes and apartment
houses.

Wendy Gabriel, an 18-year-old senior at Morris, said that his parents,
immigrants from the Virgin Islands, were particularly excited by the general's
visit.

"No kidding about this man," said Mr. Gabriel, who sounded like someone who had
heard too many dignitaries give the standard school speech. "He's the real
thing."

Throughout the day, General Powell seemed taken by the display of affection. At
Yankee Stadium, he stopped in the clubhouse, where players asked him for an
autograph.

Advice From a Fan

Between ceremonies, he unexpectedly stopped at the apartment of his aunt, Beryl
Deleon, at 1150 Union Avenue. Outside, Specialist Kevin Tann, who served in the
Persian Gulf, waited in desert fatigues. Specialist Tann said he lived a few
blocks away.

"How did you know I'd be here?" the general asked him.

"New Yorkers know everything," said Mr. Tann as he remained in a rigid salute.

The general even received some advice. At the county courthouse, a young man, in
front of hundreds of veterans and municipal workers, presented him with a
collection of Desert Storm trading cards, the latest rage, and told him: "You've
worked hard. Take my advice. Relax and chill out."

NAME: Colin L. Powell

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
greeting well-wishers as he left Borough Hall in the Bronx yesterday before
going to Yankee Stadium for the Yankees' home opener. (Chester Higgins Jr./The
New York Times) (pg. B4)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR;
2 Missing Journalists Are Released by Iraq

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 200 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, April 16


An American journalist and a French photographer who entered Iraq with Kurdish
rebels have been released from a Baghdad prison after 18 days in detention.

They were captured by Iraqi troops who mounted a counteroffensive to crush the
Kurdish revolt in March.

Alain Buu, 30 years old, a Vietnamese-born photographer with the French agency
Gamma-Liaison and Frank Smyth of New Jersey, who works for The Village Voice and
CBS Radio, said they were released late Monday. The two planned to leave for
Jordan.

A third journalist has also been reported missing in northern Iraq. He is Gad
Schuster Gross, who works for J. B. Pictures and was on assignment for Newsweek
magazine.

Mr. Buu, who fled Vietnam in 1975 in the wave of boat people, said the speed of
the Iraqi counteroffensive had taken the rebels by surprise.

"Most of the Kurds were leaving in total panic," he said.

He said he and Mr. Smyth had spent the night of March 28 hiding in a ditch
before giving themselves up to soldiers on the road from Kirkuk to Erbil, in
Kurdistan. They were blindfolded and interrogated, he said, and held in
different places in Kirkuk and later, Baghdad.

"We have been well-treated," he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR;
Excerpts From Bush's News Conference: Relief Camps for Kurds in Iraq

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2713 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 16


Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference today at the White
House:

OPENING STATEMENT

I have a brief statement here and then I'll be glad to take a few questions.

Eleven days ago, on April 5, I announced that the United States would initiate
what soon became the largest U.S. relief effort mounted in modern military
history. Such an undertaking was made necessary by the terrible human tragedy
unfolding in and around Iraq as a result of Saddam Hussein's brutal treatment of
Iraqi citizens. Within 48 hours our operation was providing scores of, tons of
food, water, coats, tents, blankets, and medicines to the Iraqi Kurds in
northern Iraq and southern Turkey.

The scale of this effort is truly unprecedented yet the fact remains that the
scale of the problem is even greater. Hundreds of thousands of Iraqi Kurds are
in difficult-to-reach mountain areas in southern Turkey, and along the
Turkish-Iraq border. The Government of Turkey along with U.S., British, and
French military units, and numerous international organizations have launched a
massive relief operation.

But despite these efforts hunger, malnutrition, disease and exposure are taking
their grim toll. No one can see the pictures or hear the accounts of this human
suffering, men, women, and most painfully of all, innocent children, and not be
deeply moved.

It is for this reason that this afternoon, following consultations with Prime
Minister Major, President Mitterrand, President Ozal of Turkey, Chancellor Kohl
this morning, U.N. Secretary General Perez de Cuellar, I am announcing an
expanded, a greatly expanded and more ambitious relief effort. The approach is
quite simple.

If we cannot get adequate food, medicine, clothing and shelter to the Kurds
living in the mountains along the Turkish-Iraq border, we must encourage the
Kurds to move to areas in northern Iraq where the geography facilitates rather
than frustrates such a large-scale relief effort.

Consistent with United Nations Security Council Resolution 688, and working
closely with the United Nations and other international relief organizations and
our European partners, I have directed the U.S. military to begin immediately to
establish several encampments in northern Iraq, where relief supplies for these
refugees will be made available in large quantities and distributed in an
orderly way.

Humanitarian Concerns

I can well appreciate that many Kurds have good reason to fear for their safety
if they return to Iraq, and let me reassure them that adequate security will be
provided at these temporary sites by U.S., British and French and ground forces,
again consistent with United Nations Security Council Resolution 688. We are
hopeful that others in the coalition will join this effort.

I want to underscore that all that we are doing is motivated by humanitarian
concerns. We continue to expect the Government of Iraq not to interfere in any
way with this latest relief effort. The prohibition against Iraqi fixed- or
rotary-wing aircraft flying north of the 36th parallel thus remains in effect.

And I want to stress that this new effort, despite its scale and scope, is not
intended as a permanent solution to the plight of the Iraqi Kurds. To the
contrary, it is an interim measure designed to meet an immediate penetrating
humanitarian need. Our long-term objective remains the same: for Iraqi Kurds and
indeed, for all Iraqi refugees, wherever they are, to return home and to live in
peace, free from repression, free to live their lives.

I also want to point out that we're acutely concerned about the problem of the
Iraqi refugees now along the Iran-Iraq border and in Iran. I commend the members
of the European Community for their efforts to alleviate hardship in this area.
We ourselves have offered to contribute to international efforts designed to
meet this humanitarian challenge.

As I stated earlier, the relief effort being announced here today constitutes an
undertaking different in scale and approach. What is not different is basic
policy. All along I have said that the United States is not going to intervene
militarily in Iraq's internal affairs and risk being drawn into a Vietnam- style
quagmire. This remains the case. Nor will we become an occupying power with U.S.
troops patrolling the streets of Baghdad. We intend to turn over the
administration of and security for these sites as soon as possible to the United
Nations, just as we are fulfilling our commitment to withdraw our troops and
hand over responsibility to U.N. forces along Iraq's southern border, the border
with Kuwait. But we must do everything in our power to save innocent life, and
this is the American tradition and we will continue to live up to that
tradition.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Timing of Action

Q. Mr. President, your Administration estimates that up to a thousand Kurds are
dying each day. How do you respond to critics who say that you've acted too
little too late and that you've turned your back on the very people that you
inspired to rise up against Saddam Hussein?

A. I don't think we've responded too little too late. It is an extraordinarily
difficult logistical problem, and we have been, as I said in my statement,
sending lots of humanitarian relief in there -- not just the United States,
incidentally; other countries as well, a lot of private relief organizations
helping out. So this has been our policy. But it now -- I think we have a better
chance to facilitate the relief and to get the Kurds in more sanitary conditions
by this new program I've announced here today. There's been an awful lot of
consultation with the Turks and others going into this. And in terms of the
other I simply don't accept that.

Role of the U.N.

Q. How long do you think it will be before you -- the United Nations forces can
take over from the U.S. and other allies?

A. You mean in this new operation? We don't know that, we don't know that. But,
clearly, the sooner the better. The United Nations forces will be coming down
into the south, the blue helmets, and we hope and expect that to be accomplished
in a very few days. But this one we're just starting. But we'll have to see what
we do, and it may require, for a U.N. peacekeeping force in there, or U.N. blue
helmets, a new resolution from the Security Council. And that's a complicated
problem, given the fact that some of the members who were steadfastly with us in
the coalition might have problems with something of this nature.

Opinion of World

Q. Mr. President, you keep absolving yourself of any responsibility and yet time
after time you are on the record of calling on the Iraqis to take the matter in
their own hands, and you never said, "Not you, Kurds, not you, the Shiites." So
how can you really continue to justify that in your own mind when the world's
conscience and [inaudible] ----

A. Go ahead and finish your question.

Q. Well, the world's conscience has been aroused by this and we are seeing
pictures of this terrible suffering. . . . Obviously you were taken by surprise
and you have no long-term policy for what is going to happen eventually. Will
they be refugees for the rest of their lives?

A. I hope not. We've got enough, what looks like permanent refugees, and we're
trying to do something about that in various areas. The objectives were set out
very early on and the objectives never included going into Baghdad, never
included the demise and destruction of Saddam personally.

You had many people that were telling me early on let sanctions work, let
sanctions work; don't do anything about the aggression at all.

We led a national, an international coalition of unprecedented historic
proportions and achieved objectives, and are you asking me if I foresaw the size
of the Kurdish refugee problem? The answer is no, I did not. But do I think that
the United States should bear guilt because of suggesting that the Iraqi people
take matters into their own hands with the implication being given by some that
the United States would be there to support them militarily? That was not true.
We never implied that.

Do I think the answer is now for Saddam Hussein to be kicked out? Absolutely.
Because there will not be -- may I finish, please -- there will not be
normalized relations with the United States and I think this is true for most
coalition partners, until Saddam Hussein is out of there, and we will continue
the economic sanction.

. . . I don't, I don't concede encouraging an exodus. I do -- I did suggest, and
it's well documented, what I thought would be good, is if the Iraqi people would
take matters into their own hands and kick Saddam Hussein out. I still feel that
way and I still hope they do.

Number of Troops

Q. You have hundreds of thousands of refugees. It will require a large number of
forces. How many allied and U.S. forces will be involved inside northern Iraq?

A. I think rather small numbers because I don't think Saddam Hussein, given the
assurances he made today to the United Nations in Iraq -- they had some
representatives there -- would venture to use force. But the problem isn't what
we think about it. The problem is what do these Kurdish refugees who have been
brutalized by this man think? And what they think is look, we don't want to take
his word, we need some security.

Q. Mr. President, have you actually formally notified Iraq that this is what
you're going to do, set out encampments?

A. No.

                                    .  .  .


Response of Iraq

Q. Are you sure that they're not going to respond militarily?

A. They should not respond militarily. They've underestimated the United States
once before on that, and they shouldn't do it again, and I don't think they
will. And the United Nations people who've been talking to them in Baghdad don't
think that there will be a military response. And since we said no action north
of the 36th parallel, in fairness, there hasn't been any military action north
of the 36th parallel.

Length of Mission

Q. You said before that you didn't like the idea of a protected enclave within
Iraq itself, but doesn't this, in effect, establish for months in the
foreseeable future, the United States military protecting Kurdish refugees in
that area? And do you want to continue to leave it ambiguous what the U.S. would
do in case there is any effort by the Iraqis against the Kurdish refugees?

A. I hope we're not talking about a long-term effort. We're working with the
French, who've taken a leadership role in a policy to encourage the Kurds to
return to the cities. There's some talk about trying to get a U.N. presence
along these various waystations as they go back, and that would be a very useful
idea, and I told Mr. Mitterrand I supported him strongly on that. But in this
one, I don't think it has to be long-term.

                                    .  .  .

Q. Will the American military be militarily protecting these areas, and what
will they do if there is any attack on ----

A. Well, that was the question I used to get before the war started against --
what are you going to do, how are you going to respond to this. And I won't give
you any details, but I will simply suggest that these people will be protected.
We are not going to say to them come down from the mountains, you will be
protected, and then not protect them.

Role of the Allies

Q. Mr. President, how are -- given the condition of many of these refugees, how
are you going to get them to these new camps? How far away or how far a distance
are we talking about moving them, and what role might the U.S. and the allies
play in getting them there?

A. We're going to have what you call a supply train, there will be strong -- I
mean not train in the sense of railroad train, but a supply train, and there
will be a lot of international support for that. The Turks will facilitate this.
I can't give you the -- there will be maybe five or six camps in these
so-called, what Ozal calls flat areas, but I can't give you an exact estimate on
the mileage. It's not too far in terms of long distances. But what we've got to
do now is get in there, build these camps, and keep our, keep our commitment to
be sure that they are safe, and I think they will be, and then you ask a very
good question because how you talk these scared people into coming down, that's
another question, but we will be doing our level best and we have very good
people on the ground there now.

                                     ..  .


Safety of Troops

Q. Do you feel certain enough of their safety that you feel this is not
inconsistent with your earlier statements about not putting one U.S. soldier's
life on the line?

A. Yes, I do. I think this is entirely different, and I think it's a -- I just
feel it's what's needed in terms of helping these people. And so some may
interpret it that way; I don't. I think it's purely humanitarian, and I think
representations have been made as recently as today that they'd be -- you know,
that these people would be safe. So I hope it proves that way.

Shiites in the South

Q. Mr. President, you haven't mentioned anything about the situation in the
south, where there are thousands of Shiites who are equally concerned about what
will happen when Americans withdraw. Could you offer the same kind of assurances
that they won't be attacked?

A. Well, the United Nations will be in there soon, and we think that will be
very good assurance that they will not be attacked. And people forget that the
United States has been doing a wonderful job for those refugees for a long time.
I've seen no credit given to our troops that are handling that with great
concern and compassion. They have done a superb job. So what we want to see --
in that neutral zone see the blue helmets come in there, and I will then
continue to keep moving our people out as rapidly as possible. I want to bring
them home.

                                    .  .  .


Fate of Hussein

Q. Mr. President, your wife suggested yesterday -- Mrs. Bush suggested -- that
Saddam Hussein be tried for war crimes and hanged. Do you agree?

A. I seldom differ with my wife, and I don't know that I would differ with her
here. I'll tell you what's the most important thing, however, and that is to get
Saddam Hussein out of there. So if you came to me as a broker and you said I can
get him out of there, but he'd have to be able to live a happy life forevermore
in some third country, with all kinds of conditions never to go back and
brutalize his people again, I might be -- I'd have to think about it, but I
might be willing to say, well, as far as our pressing charges, we'd be willing
to get him out; we want him out of there so badly, and I think it's so important
to the tranquillity of Iran -- of Iraq -- that under that condition we might.
But his crimes -- do I think he's guilty of war crimes, the environmental
terror, the rape and pillage of Kuwait, what he's done to his own people? I
would think there'd be plenty of grounds under which he would be prosecuted for
war crimes.

                                    .  .  .


Situation in Iran

Q. Mr. President, you made mention of the situation in Iran as being equally
difficult, but your plan seems to only deal with the situation in Iraq and
perhaps to help your friend, President Ozal. Why is there no component here for
the refugees in Iran, which are even greater in number?

A. Well, we've offered to help in Iran, and, as you know, we have different --
difficult -- relations with the state of Iran. The Germans have stepped up to
the tune of several hundred million . . . 250 million Deutschmarks to help
there; the E.C. has taken on that in a coalition way. We've had individual
charitable organizations -- AmeriCare has been in there with medicine already.
So we want to help there. But you got to be a realist; I mean, the Iranians
still have strained relations with the United States of America, and they make
that clear to various visitors that go there. But others are stepping into that
breach and helping, just as we're helping with the Shiites in the south and have
been to the tune of 30,000 refugees through American compassion and American
largesse. Others are pitching in on the Iranian side.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush at a news conference yesterday announcing that
expanded relief efforts would be made to ease the suffering of Kurdish refugees.
(Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

In Edison, a Crossroads of Diversity

BYLINE: By ROBERT HANLEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 744 words

DATELINE: EDISON, N.J.


The racial and ethnic mix achieved here and in the surrounding towns of
Middlesex County in the 1980's suggests to many experts the direction in which
the counties around New York City are heading.

In a swath of suburbia where Indian immigrants sell not only saris and jewelry
but also videos and baseball cards, Middlesex is aggressively addressing issues
like racial harmony, school curriculums for immigrants and new voting blocs.

At the crossroads of the Garden State Parkway, the New Jersey Turnpike,
Interstate 287 and Route 1, the county underwent a boom in new offices, housing
and jobs in the 1980's and grew by about 76,000 people to nearly 596,000, one of
the largest increases for any county in the region.

But Middlesex's population also stood at a crossroads. Counties closer to New
York lost population or did not grow, as a decline in the number of whites of
European or Middle Eastern background outweighed an increase in black, Hispanic
and Asian residents. The counties farther out had large population increases,
fueled mainly by an increase in whites. Middlesex, in between, grew by
attracting people of every race.

Half of Newcomers Are Asian

Of its total increase of 76,000 people, 72,000 were Asian, Hispanic or black,
the 1990 census found. The county's population is 8.9 percent Hispanic, 7.4
percent black, 6.5 percent Asian and 76.9 percent white.

Edison, a centerless community laced with highways, grew in the last decade by
18,000 people to nearly 89,000. Half the newcomers were Asian.

Ripples of change are everywhere. Young Indian and Chinese mothers struggling
with English now flock with their preschool children to reading programs in the
library in the north end of town, the area of greatest growth. The library has
done such brisk business that it plans to double its size.

In the schools, 22 extra classrooms were built in mid-decade and 26 more are to
be finished by fall, partly to provide more space for bilingual and English
remedial classes for newly arriving Indians, Chinese, Koreans, Filipinos and
Nicaraguans, as well as Hungarians and Poles.

Sari Shops and Card Store

"We have 70 different languages in our schools," said Charles A. Boyle, the
Superintendent.

On Oak Tree Road in Edison, Indian businessmen now own gas stations, jewelry and
sari shops, electronics stores, groceries and restaurants. There is even a
baseball card store, Nicky's Sports Collectibles, owned by Naresh Kapadia, who
says he never touched a baseball until he came to the United States seven years
ago.

Indian residents in Edison are raising money to convert an old warehouse into a
temple. And they have formed a business association to press their political
agenda and a cultural group to celebrate traditional Indian holidays as well as
Christmas, Thanksgiving and the Fourth of July.

"Our kids are brought up here and we want to mix in all the cultures and know
more about them," said Pradip Kothari, a travel agent on Oak Tree Road and a
leader of the Indian community. "We want to be identified as a mainstream
group."

The growth of the Indian business community has heartened Bharti Patel, who
opened a grocery store 13 years ago. "Before, I was alone here and I was a
little bit scared," she said. "Now I can leave the door open."

Perfecting New Language

In the 80's, Middlesex County College in Edison increased its English classes
for newcomers to 75 from 10. Students perfecting their new language in the
English labs one recent day were a snapshot of the new diversity. There were
Allies Yeh and Kuei-Mei Yang, young mothers from Taiwan; Gloria Zuluaga, a
Nicaraguan studying business; Nalini Patel, an Indian whose family moved here
from Jersey City after thugs beat her brother; Yun Sook, wife of a Korean
clothier, and Tung Trang, who fled Vietnam on a boat with 75 people four years
ago and now drives a forklift at a chewing-gum factory.

"Everybody here feels like family, even if we're not from the same country or
the same continent," said Hector Rodriguez, a 21-year-old who came from the
Dominican Republic a year ago. "We're all together, trying to help each other."

Martin Spritzer, a lawyer in Edison, has created a countywide human relations
commission, with Indian, black, Chinese, Hispanic and Jewish members. He plans
to add Hungarian and Polish members soon and to urge all municipalities in the
county to create similar commissions at the local level.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Middlesex County, N.J., has grown, according to the 1990 census,
by attracting people of every race. Students studying English at Middlesex
County College worked to perfect skills in their new language. (John
Sotomayor/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR;
U.S. TROOPS TO BUILD CAMPS IN NORTH IRAQ TO AID KURDS; BUSH SEES 'TEMPORARY'
ROLE

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1268 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 16


President Bush said today that American, French and British troops would set up
secure camps in northern Iraq that could care for more than half a million
Kurdish refugees until they could be coaxed back to their homes.

Outlining what he described as "a greatly expanded and more ambitious relief
effort," Mr. Bush said five or six encampments would be built as "temporary"
relief stations to encourage Iraqi Kurds to move to areas where they could be
provided with food, clothing and medicine.

Last week, the United States announced that American troops would go back and
forth into northern Iraq by helicopter in small numbers to try to feed the
refugees congregating near the Iraqi-Turkish border. Today's announcement goes
beyond that and seems to envisage building camps able to handle tens of
thousands of people each.

'Purely Humanitarian' Effort

At a hastily called news conference after a day of consultations with his main
allies and top advisers, Mr. Bush called the effort a "purely humanitarian"
operation by a relatively small number of American troops. He insisted that his
decision was not the first step toward a large-scale occupation of Iraqi
territory. [Excerpts from the news conference, page A12.]

But the President's action will expand American military involvement in Iraq
when Mr. Bush has been eager to fulfill his declaration to the American people
that American troops would come home quickly. Today's decision also opens up the
possibility of military clashes between Iraqi military forces and American units
operating the camps inside northern Iraq.

'Adequate Security' Seen

Mr. Bush said he did not think Iraq would attack the camps or the Western troops
deployed around them. He said the troops would provide "adequate security" for
the Kurds, and he warned Iraq that his ban on all air activity in northern Iraq
was still in effect.

"They should not respond militarily," Mr. Bush said. "They've underestimated the
United States once before on that, and they shouldn't do it again, and I don't
think they will."

Although Mr. Bush repeatedly denied having any desire to become involved in
Iraq's internal affairs, his decision to send troops, however few, into Iraq
risks doing just that.

Administration officials said the shift had been prompted by three
considerations: the intense pressure on the President to aid the Kurds after
urging the Iraqi people to rise up against President Saddam Hussein, the
difficulty of getting relief to Kurds in remote mountains where they have fled
to escape reprisals by Iraqi troops, and concern that the United Nations was
slow to respond to the refugee problem.

But Mr. Bush said in a statement that he was not changing "basic policy." He
said: "All along I have said that the United States is not going to intervene
militarily in Iraq's internal affairs and risk being drawn into a Vietnam-style
quagmire. This remains the case."

Mr. Bush offered no details on how the camps would be set up, how many troops
would be involved, how the troops would guarantee security in the camps or how
long the troops would stay. But he said it might be difficult to turn the camps
over to United Nations administration and protection, because such a move might
require a new vote by the Security Council that might draw opposition from
United States allies.

"I have directed the U.S. military to begin immediately to establish several
encampments in northern Iraq, where relief supplies for these refugees will be
made available in large quantities and distributed in an orderly way,"Mr. Bush
said.

A French Foreign Ministry official said each camp would care for up to 100,000
refugees.

For the first time, Mr. Bush said that he was so eager to see Mr. Hussein out of
power that he might consider allowing him to seek political asylum in a third
country. As he has in the past, Mr. Bush accused the Iraqi President of war
crimes and did not rule out the possibility of trying him in an international
court.

Consultations With Allies

But, Mr. Bush said, "if you came to me as a broker and you said, 'I can get him
out of there, but he'd have to be able to live a happy life forevermore in a
third country with all kinds of conditions never to go back and brutalize his
people again,' I might be -- I'd have to think about it -- but I might be
willing to say: 'Well, as far as our pressing charges, we'd be willing to get
him out. We want him out of there so badly.' "

The plan was evolved hastily by Mr. Bush, largely in telephone consultations in
the last few days with President Francois Mitterrand of France, Prime Minister
John Major of Britain, President Turgut Ozal of Turkey, Chancellor Helmut Kohl
of Germany and Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations,
said the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater. Mr. Bush said he had spoken to
all of those leaders today.

Mr. Bush said this evening that all had assured him that they believed that an
Iraqi military attack on the proposed camps was unlikely.

But the plan immediately alarmed American military commanders, who have been
eager to hold on to their victory and pull American troops away from a military
confrontation with Iraq or direct involvement in its internal turmoil.

"We were pulling out of Iraq; now we're coming back in," said one Pentagon
official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. "There is a discomfort that the
military mission is being extended. It's playing with fire."

Expressing a clear awareness of the political and military risks he is taking,
Mr. Bush said the United States would not "become an occupying power, with U.S.
troops patrolling the streets of Baghdad. We intend to turn over the
administration of and security for these sites as soon as possible to the United
Nations, just as we are fulfilling our commitment to withdraw our troops and
hand over responsibility to U.N. forces along Iraq's southern border."

Pentagon officials have criticized the United Nations for moving in much too
slowly to replace American troops in the south of Iraq. And relief agency
officials have complained that the United Nations, burdened by a cumbersome
bureaucracy, had not responded quickly enough to the plight of the Kurds and
might find it difficult to play the ambitious role that Mr. Bush envisions for
it.

Mr. Bush said he hoped that the deployment of United Nations forces in the south
could be "accomplished in a very few days." Asked when the Untied States might
turn over the proposed camps in the north to the United Nations, he said,
"Clearly, the sooner the better." But he said, "This one we're just starting,"
and added that he might have to seek a new Security Council vote.

Mr. Bush's plan is modeled after a French proposal to set up humanitarian "rest
stops" at points along the border and inside Iraq where refugees could receive
help before they returned home. Initially, the United States was cool to an idea
of creating a safe "enclave" in northern Iraq, as proposed by Mr. Major, but
felt compelled to back the French idea in the face of so much suffering and the
weight of public pressure to do something for the Kurds.

Mr. Bush said his announcement in the White House was the first authoritative
notice to Iraq of the allied decision. Sadruddin Aga Khan, the special
representative of the United Nations on the refugee crisis, met today in Baghdad
with Iraq's new Foreign Minister, Ahmed Hussein Khudayer, to activate and
coordinate a relief effort for the Kurds, the Iraqi News Agency said.

It is not clear whether they discussed the allied plan.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
A New Iran Hostage Scandal?

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 692 words


Hardball politics is one thing. But Presidential candidates or their aides
interfering in life-and-death, war-and-peace decisions of sitting Presidents is
quite another. It is treachery.

There is now strong circumstantial evidence that the Reagan campaign team in
1980 undercut President Carter's efforts to gain the release of Americans held
hostage by Iran.

Such an act would be so subversive of the democratic process and Presidential
authority that it must not be swept aside as "an old story" or "just a bunch of
rumors." If it happened, those responsible must be exposed.

President Bush won't do anything.  But Congressional leaders, if they have guts,
should appoint a nonpartisan commission of private citizens to investigate the
charges. Congressional committees with Democrats and Republicans playing their
usual games cannot be expected to manage this task with the necessary dispatch
and credibility.

The commission could include scholars with no party affiliation such as Graham
Allison and Ernest May of Harvard, Nelson Polsby of Berkeley and John Gaddis of
Ohio University. Two former Senators, the Democrat Abraham Ribicoff and the
Republican Charles Mathias, also would bring stature and judiciousness to the
investigation. Former diplomats like Samuel Lewis and Philip Habib would add
experience. Throw in trusted Washington lawyers like Steven Umin and Sol
Linowitz.

Based on reporting by the "Frontline" documentary team from PBS and independent
research by Gary Sick, a highly respected former U.S. official, here are the
allegations for the commission to chew on:

President Carter pressed hard in the summer of 1980 to obtain release of the
Americans taken hostage at the U.S. Embassy in Teheran. He hoped to gain their
freedom before Election Day.

Mr. Carter toyed with offering Teheran arms to help fight off the Iraqi invasion
in September. He surely had politics on his mind, but his actions were well
within legitimate Presidential authority -- and they made sense on national
security grounds.

The worst fear in the Reagan camp was that Mr. Carter would use the advantages
of incumbency to conjure up an "October surprise." And the worst surprise for
Reaganites would be to see Mr. Carter greeting the hostages on the White House
lawn a few days before the election.

Enter William Casey, Mr. Reagan's campaign chairman and future C.I.A. boss. This
wily street fighter reportedly held two meetings in Madrid in July with an
Iranian cleric representing Iran's leader, the Ayatollah Khomeini. Mr. Casey
supposedly offered to provide arms to Iran if the Ayatollah delayed the hostage
release until after Election Day.

Further meetings purportedly occurred in Paris in October at which both sides
agreed to the Madrid formula. Several sources put Mr. Bush into this Paris
picture. At the same time the Israelis, who were also a party to the Paris
talks, secretly airlifted arms to Iran.

The lawlessness and recklessness of these alleged transactions seem now to
foreshadow the Iran-contra affair, the trading of arms for hostages and money
and then using the money illegally to buy arms for the anti-Sandinista rebels.

The smell also recalls similar shenanigans carried out by Richard Nixon's
campaign team against Hubert Humphrey in 1968.  At that time, President Johnson
was nearing agreement to de-escalate the war in Vietnam, a move that would have
boosted Mr. Humphrey at the polls. Forewarned, the Nixon camp contacted
President Thieu of South Vietnam. Block the negotiations, the Nixon friends and
aides told him, and a Nixon Administration will do far more to protect your
interests than a Humphrey Administration.

Mr. Thieu took the bait, the peace talks stalled and Mr. Nixon won a close
victory. Mr. Nixon ended up forcing an unpalatable treaty down Saigon's throat
anyway.

No one will go to jail, the law notwithstanding, for such seedy and corrosive
maneuvers. But the evidence about the 1980 campaign is serious enough and the
implications for our democracy alarming enough to pursue the matter. Let's show
that political values are not dead and find out what really happened.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Homer Bigart, Acclaimed Reporter, Dies

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2375 words


Homer Bigart, one of the most accomplished reporters in American journalism,
died yesterday at the Edgewood Center in Portsmouth, N.H., where he had been
hospitalized for two months. Mr. Bigart, who wrote for both The New York Herald
Tribune and The New York Times, was 83 years old and lived in West Nottingham,
N.H.

He died of cancer, his wife, Else, said.

In a calling whose end product tends to be ephemeral and forgettable, in which
writers nervously jest that they are only as good as their last story, Mr.
Bigart stood as an enduring role model.

During a prize-collecting career of nearly four decades, he always seemed to be
at the top of his game, much to the dismay of his competitors.

His articles remained taut, witty and astringently understated, even when
created under deadline pressure and the appalling working conditions imposed by
war and famine; even when they concerned mundane events that lesser reporters
regarded as routine. Mr. Bigart knew that what counted was not the place but the
poetry and that a reporter could create memorable prose from even the most
unremarkable happening.

Such pieces became models of grace by which young reporters measured their own
talent, and they were the reality from which a legend was born. In journalism
schools and in the drafty city rooms of a town that always prided itself on
being the ultimate stop for the nation's most gifted newspaper reporters, Mr.
Bigart was regarded with awe.

He won most of the major national and local prizes in journalism. There was a
Pulitzer Prize, and there was an uncommon second Pulitzer. There were an
Overseas Press Club award and the George Polk Memorial Award and the Meyer
Berger Award and a Page One Award, and many others.

All were given for the resourcefulness and courage that Mr. Bigart repeatedly
showed in World War II, the Greek civil war, the Korean War and the turbulent
years that followed, when he wrote about the civil-rights struggle and hunger
and the extraordinary changes that were taking place in urban and rural America.

All of his articles were written either for The Herald Tribune, where he worked
from 1929 to 1955, or The Times, where he worked from 1955 until his retirement
in 1972.

If his reporter friends told him that the encomiums in his stocking approached
an indecent level, they were proud that he had won such praise, because they
felt he was the best of them. Wherever he went and whatever he did, his copy
rose above the moment; no awards judge could resist Mr. Bigart at his best.

Describing History In the Making

For example, there was the opening of the article he wrote from the battleship
Missouri on Sept. 2, 1945, telling readers of The Herald Tribune that one of the
greatest military struggles in world history was finally over:

"Japan, paying for her desperate throw of the dice at Pearl Harbor, passed from
the ranks of the major powers at 9:05 A.M. today when Foreign Minister Mamoru
Shigemitsu signed the document of unconditional surrender.

"If the memories of the bestialities of the Japanese prison camps were not so
fresh in mind, one might have felt sorry for Shigemitsu as he hobbled on his
wooden leg toward the green baize covered table where the papers lay waiting.

"He leaned heavily on his cane and had difficulty seating himself. The cane,
which he rested against the table, dropped to the deck of this battleship as he
signed."

And there was the time in 1943 that he took a troopship to London and was
surprised that it had not been torpedoed, reports of scores of U-boats to the
contrary. Three paragraphs from the end of his dispatch he wrote:

"Then you woke up one morning and the ship was very steady, and you knew she had
entered the harbor. You had arrived. You had crossed the submarine-infested
Atlantic without sighting even a porpoise. A hell of a thing to have to confess
to your grandchildren."

War is damaging to the sense of humor of those who are caught up in it, but Mr.
Bigart, describing the American Army's pursuit of the Germans in Sicily and
noting that civilian conduct had been "exemplary," wrote this on July 25, 1943,
as a last paragraph:

"In fact, the Sicilians are too friendly. Their attitude strengthens the
impression that this island is a forgotten portion of Southern California,
instead of a segment of enemy Italy."<nm But there were times when he had to
describe death, as he did on Dec. 18, 1943, from San Pietro, Italy:

"Generally, there is no mistaking the dead -- their strange contorted posture
leaves no room for doubt. But this soldier, his steel helmet tilted over his
face, seemed merely resting in the field. We did not know until we came within a
few steps and saw a gray hand hanging limply from a sleeve."

After he joined The Times, Mr. Bigart covered such important assignments as the
trial of Adolf Eichmann, the Nazi war criminal, in Israel in 1961. The following
year Mr. Bigart surveyed the war in Vietnam. He was already in his middle 50's,
but he had lost none of his ability to understand a situation and report it
quickly.

Shy, Private Man, Insouciant Wit

David Halberstam, who succeeded Mr. Bigart for The Times, recalled that Mr.
Bigart was one of the first reporters to conclude that contrary to the
Pentagon's representations, America was not about to win an easy war, and that
the war was in fact a tragedy and a mistake. He advised younger reporters to
write that the American effort "just doesn't work."

Mr. Halberstam said Mr. Bigart's irreverence, his "unerring instincts," his
willingness to challenge "the official version" and his leadership were the
sustenance that younger reporters needed to chronicle an unprecedented American
military tragedy.

In 1963, when The Times asked him to cover the grim winter confronting
unemployed coal miners in Kentucky, it was clear that Mr. Bigart had lost none
of his reportorial eye:

"Creeks are littered with garbage, choked with boulders and silt dislodged by
strip-mine operations. Hillsides that should be a solid blaze of autumn color
are slashed with ugly terraces, where bulldozers and steam shovels have stripped
away the forest to get at the coal beneath."

The legend was not built simply on his articles. It rested as much on the man
himself.

Mr. Bigart, a shy and private man with a pronounced stammer, was at once
retiring and combative, devoted equally, it seemed, to minding his own business
and to hoisting a few with friends. It was on these occasions that he told the
stories the journalists of his era loved to tell and hear. And he did it as well
in bars as in print. His insouciant one-liners about people, places and things
were not soon forgotten by colleagues.

At The Herald Tribune, for example, one colleague (and rival) was Marguerite
Higgins, a determined World War II and Korean War correspondent who won much
fame because of the aggressive way she pursued reporting. Miss Higgins was a
pioneer working in what men liked to think of as their province, and she often
outmaneuvered most male rivals, who, in those prefeminist days, would have
preferred her to be shy and confined to the society page, or, as they might have
put it, barefoot and pregnant.

On one occasion, she did become pregnant. When Mr. Bigart learned of it, he
snapped: "Oh, g-good. And wh-wh- who is the mother?" Later, when the baby was
born, Mr. Bigart cheerily inquired if the mother had devoured it.

Another competitor in the old days was Clifton Daniel, a correspondent for The
Times in Jerusalem in the late 1940's when Mr. Bigart covered Israel for The
Herald Tribune. Years later Mr. Daniel, who eventually became managing editor of
The Times, recalled how hard he had to work to avoid being scooped by Mr.
Bigart.

"I worked out a system for keeping an eye on him," Mr. Daniel said. "I persuaded
him to move into the Eden Hotel, where I lived after the King David was bombed
by the Zionist underground. Moreover I had a car, and Homer didn't; I offered to
give him a lift whenever there was a big story to be covered out of town, so I
always knew where he was."

But the ploy didn't work. Britain then ran Palestine under a United Nations
mandate, and Mr. Daniel said that Mr. Bigart "sneaked out of the press room of
the British Office of Information and held a clandestine interview one night
with one of the biggest underground leaders."

"I didn't know anything about it until the next day," Mr. Daniel said.

Later, after Mr. Bigart returned to New York, he would occasionally drink
martinis at a grungy newspaper bar in the Times Square area where the customers
could always see what they were breathing. Taking stock of the environment one
night, Mr. Bigart politely inquired of the bartender what day of the week they
changed the air.

One evening, late in life, he decided to tell Murray Illson, a reporter friend
at The Times, that he was marrying again. "I showed her mine, and she showed me
hers," Mr. Bigart said. Before Mr. Illson could say anything, Mr. Bigart added,
"Our bankbooks."

Like other great reporters of his generation, Mr. Bigart never hesitated to show
disdain for his editors and independence from them. One evening late in his
career, he was assigned to write about a riot, drawing on information from
reporters on the street.

As one reporter, John Kifner, called in from a phone booth, rioters began
shaking it and Mr. Kifner conveyed his fright to Mr. Bigart. But Mr. Bigart,
busy fending off editors he regarded as hysterical, comforted Mr. Kifner by
noting, "At least you're dealing with sane people."

From Architecture To Journalism

Homer William Bigart was born Oct. 25, 1907, in Hawley, Pa., in the Pocono
region, the son of Homer S. Bigart, a woolens manufacturer, and Anna Schardt
Bigart. He attended public schools there, then ventured to Pittsburgh to enroll
in the Carnegie Institute of Technology. He thought he wanted to be an
architect. The institute felt otherwise.

"They found I couldn't draw," Mr. Bigart later recalled, "and invited me to find
another school."

In 1929, Mr. Bigart complied. He enrolled in the New York University School of
Journalism and got a job as a night copy boy on The Herald Tribune. N.Y.U. liked
him well enough, but Mr. Bigart remained unconvinced that his journalism
professors knew much about journalism. He dropped out, and in 1929, as the Great
Depression was starting, joined The Trib full time.

Since he was neither a college graduate nor adept at office politics, he
remained a copy boy for four years. But then The Trib decided to give him a
chance and made him a general-assignment reporter at $25 a week.

At first, it seemed he would not make it. He was a painfully slow writer.
Editors were amazed at his bizarre typing style, in which he double-spaced
between words. He made the errors that young reporters are prone to make. Once,
assigned to cover the start of coach railroad service between New York and
Florida, he went to the wrong track and wrote about the wrong railroad.

It was in this period that Mr. Bigart found he could use his halting speech to
become a more effective reporter. The stammer made it easier for him to pose as
a bumbler who was not very smart. He would often say to those he interviewed
something like, "G-g-gee, I d-d-didn't really understand that. C-c-could you
repeat it?"

Most of those he interviewed went to extra lengths to make sure he got the story
straight, and the result was that Mr. Bigart's articles seemed to be clearer
than anyone else's; the quotations were invariably rich.

During the 1930's the paper found ample reason to have more and more confidence
in Mr. Bigart's skills, and in 1942 he was asked if he would become a war
correspondent. He agreed and went on to cover the London blitz, the bombing of
Nazi Germany, the battles of North Africa, Italy and southern France.

When the war was over in Europe, he moved to the Pacific and covered the final
months of the war against Japan. He always seemed determined to cover war at the
cannon's mouth and was one of the first reporters to enter Hiroshima after the
Americans dropped the atomic bomb.

Newsweek called him "the hardest kind of worker and the fairest kind of
competitor." Philip Potter of The Baltimore Sun said Mr. Bigart "worked over his
copy more than any of the rest of us correspondents, who were anxious after a
hard day in the field to get our copy written and filed so we could get a
drink."

"Homer would still be at his portable, crossing off one word because he had
thought of a better one," Mr. Potter said. "He observed things that we had
missed."

The plaudits kept coming when he covered the war in Korea. In that war, Newsweek
called him "the best war correspondent of an embattled generation."

The people who ran some of the countries Mr. Bigart visited as a reporter did
not entirely agree with that appraisal. Because of the independence of his
reporting, he was ordered out of Hungary, Egypt, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Saudi
Arabia, Oman and Vietnam.

The Vietnamese order was rescinded; the censor admitted he had made a
translation error that led him to believe that Mr. Bigart had written something
obscene.

When Mr. Bigart left The Trib to join The Times, there was no particular joy in
it for him. The Trib was a decade away from its demise, and its economic
problems were not lost on Mr. Bigart. But it was a paper with a proud tradition
of giving writers their head, and Mr. Bigart loved it.

"It seemed to me that he always looked down on The Times, even when he worked
there," Mr. Daniel said. "Its main fault, in his eyes, was that it wasn't The
Trib. It was too proud and stiff-necked for his taste. But he knew that if he
couldn't work for The Trib, the next best thing was The Times. He was not
disloyal to it; he just wasn't in love with it."

Mr. Bigart's first two wives were Alice Veit, who died in 1959 after they were
divorced, and Alice Weel, who died in 1969. The next year he married Else
Holmelund Minarik, the author of children's books, who survives him. He is also
survived by a sister, Margaret Crowe of Lancaster, Pa., and a stepdaughter,
Brooke Minarik of Dover, N.H.

No funeral is planned, the family said.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 18, 1991, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A picture caption yesterday with an obituary of Homer Bigart misstated the year
the picture was taken. It was 1972.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Homer Bigart (The New York Times, 1973); Homer Bigart, right,
preparing to accompany a bombing raid to Germany from a base in England in 1943.
Other correspondents were, from the left, Gladwin Hill, William Wade, Robert
Post and Walter Cronkite (Associated Press)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Homer Bigart, Acclaimed Reporter, Dies

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2376 words


Homer Bigart, one of the most accomplished reporters in American journalism,
died yesterday at the Edgewood Center in Portsmouth, N.H., where he had been
hospitalized for two months. Mr. Bigart, who wrote for both The New York Herald
Tribune and The New York Times, was 83 years old and lived in West Nottingham,
N.H.

He died of cancer, his wife, Else, said.

In a calling whose end product tends to be ephemeral and forgettable, in which
writers nervously jest that they are only as good as their last story, Mr.
Bigart stood as an enduring role model.

During a prize-collecting career of nearly four decades, he always seemed to be
at the top of his game, much to the dismay of his competitors.

His articles remained taut, witty and astringently understated, even when
created under deadline pressure and the appalling working conditions imposed by
war and famine; even when they concerned mundane events that lesser reporters
regarded as routine. Mr. Bigart knew that what counted was not the place but the
poetry and that a reporter could create memorable prose from even the most
unremarkable happening.

Such pieces became models of grace by which young reporters measured their own
talent, and they were the reality from which a legend was born. In journalism
schools and in the drafty city rooms of a town that always prided itself on
being the ultimate stop for the nation's most gifted newspaper reporters, Mr.
Bigart was regarded with awe.

He won most of the major national and local prizes in journalism. There was a
Pulitzer Prize, and there was an uncommon second Pulitzer. There were an
Overseas Press Club award and the George Polk Memorial Award and the Meyer
Berger Award and a Page One Award, and many others.

All were given for the resourcefulness and courage that Mr. Bigart repeatedly
showed in World War II, the Greek civil war, the Korean War and the turbulent
years that followed, when he wrote about the civil-rights struggle and hunger
and the extraordinary changes that were taking place in urban and rural America.

All of his articles were written either for The Herald Tribune, where he worked
from 1929 to 1955, or The Times, where he worked from 1955 until his retirement
in 1972.

If his reporter friends told him that the encomiums in his stocking approached
an indecent level, they were proud that he had won such praise, because they
felt he was the best of them. Wherever he went and whatever he did, his copy
rose above the moment; no awards judge could resist Mr. Bigart at his best.

Describing History In the Making

For example, there was the opening of the article he wrote from the battleship
Missouri on Sept. 2, 1945, telling readers of The Herald Tribune that one of the
greatest military struggles in world history was finally over:

"Japan, paying for her desperate throw of the dice at Pearl Harbor, passed from
the ranks of the major powers at 9:05 A.M. today when Foreign Minister Mamoru
Shigemitsu signed the document of unconditional surrender.

"If the memories of the bestialities of the Japanese prison camps were not so
fresh in mind, one might have felt sorry for Shigemitsu as he hobbled on his
wooden leg toward the green baize covered table where the papers lay waiting.

"He leaned heavily on his cane and had difficulty seating himself. The cane,
which he rested against the table, dropped to the deck of this battleship as he
signed."

And there was the time in 1943 that he took a troopship to London and was
surprised that it had not been torpedoed, reports of scores of U-boats to the
contrary. Three paragraphs from the end of his dispatch he wrote:

"Then you woke up one morning and the ship was very steady, and you knew she had
entered the harbor. You had arrived. You had crossed the submarine-infested
Atlantic without sighting even a porpoise. A hell of a thing to have to confess
to your grandchildren."

War is damaging to the sense of humor of those who are caught up in it, but Mr.
Bigart, describing the American Army's pursuit of the Germans in Sicily and
noting that civilian conduct had been "exemplary," wrote this on July 25, 1943,
as a last paragraph:

"In fact, the Sicilians are too friendly. Their attitude strengthens the
impression that this island is a forgotten portion of Southern California,
instead of a segment of enemy Italy."<nm But there were times when he had to
describe death, as he did on Dec. 18, 1943, from San Pietro, Italy:

"Generally, there is no mistaking the dead -- their strange contorted posture
leaves no room for doubt. But this soldier, his steel helmet tilted over his
face, seemed merely resting in the field. We did not know until we came within a
few steps and saw a gray hand hanging limply from a sleeve."

After he joined The Times, Mr. Bigart covered such important assignments as the
trial of Adolf Eichmann, the Nazi war criminal, in Israel in 1961. The following
year Mr. Bigart surveyed the war in Vietnam. He was already in his middle 50's,
but he had lost none of his ability to understand a situation and report it
quickly.

Shy, Private Man, Insouciant Wit

David Halberstam, who succeeded Mr. Bigart for The Times, recalled that Mr.
Bigart was one of the first reporters to conclude that contrary to the
Pentagon's representations, America was not about to win an easy war, and that
the war was in fact a tragedy and a mistake. He advised younger reporters to
write that the American effort "just doesn't work."

Mr. Halberstam said Mr. Bigart's irreverence, his "unerring instincts," his
willingness to challenge "the official version" and his leadership were the
sustenance that younger reporters needed to chronicle an unprecedented American
military tragedy.

In 1963, when The Times asked him to cover the grim winter confronting
unemployed coal miners in Kentucky, it was clear that Mr. Bigart had lost none
of his reportorial eye:

"Creeks are littered with garbage, choked with boulders and silt dislodged by
strip-mine operations. Hillsides that should be a solid blaze of autumn color
are slashed with ugly terraces, where bulldozers and steam shovels have stripped
away the forest to get at the coal beneath."

The legend was not built simply on his articles. It rested as much on the man
himself.

Mr. Bigart, a shy and private man with a pronounced stammer, was at once
retiring and combative, devoted equally, it seemed, to minding his own business
and to hoisting a few with friends. It was on these occasions that he told the
stories the journalists of his era loved to tell and hear. And he did it as well
in bars as in print. His insouciant one-liners about people, places and things
were not soon forgotten by colleagues.

At The Herald Tribune, for example, one colleague (and rival) was Marguerite
Higgins, a determined World War II and Korean War correspondent who won much
fame because of the aggressive way she pursued reporting. Miss Higgins was a
pioneer working in what men liked to think of as their province, and she often
outmaneuvered most male rivals, who, in those prefeminist days, would have
preferred her to be shy and confined to the society page, or, as they might have
put it, barefoot and pregnant.

On one occasion, she did become pregnant. When Mr. Bigart learned of it, he
snapped: "Oh, g-good. And wh-wh- who is the mother?" Later, when the baby was
born, Mr. Bigart cheerily inquired if the mother had devoured it.

Another competitor in the old days was Clifton Daniel, a correspondent for The
Times in Jerusalem in the late 1940's when Mr. Bigart covered Israel for The
Herald Tribune. Years later Mr. Daniel, who eventually became managing editor of
The Times, recalled how hard he had to work to avoid being scooped by Mr.
Bigart.

"I worked out a system for keeping an eye on him," Mr. Daniel said. "I persuaded
him to move into the Eden Hotel, where I lived after the King David was bombed
by the Zionist underground. Moreover I had a car, and Homer didn't; I offered to
give him a lift whenever there was a big story to be covered out of town, so I
always knew where he was."

But the ploy didn't work. Britain then ran Palestine under a United Nations
mandate, and Mr. Daniel said that Mr. Bigart "sneaked out of the press room of
the British Office of Information and held a clandestine interview one night
with one of the biggest underground leaders."

"I didn't know anything about it until the next day," Mr. Daniel said.

Later, after Mr. Bigart returned to New York, he would occasionally drink
martinis at a grungy newspaper bar in the Times Square area where the customers
could always see what they were breathing. Taking stock of the environment one
night, Mr. Bigart politely inquired of the bartender what day of the week they
changed the air.

One evening, late in life, he decided to tell Murray Illson, a reporter friend
at The Times, that he was marrying again. "I showed her mine, and she showed me
hers," Mr. Bigart said. Before Mr. Illson could say anything, Mr. Bigart added,
"Our bankbooks."

Like other great reporters of his generation, Mr. Bigart never hesitated to show
disdain for his editors and independence from them. One evening late in his
career, he was assigned to write about a riot, drawing on information from
reporters on the street.

As one reporter, John Kifner, called in from a phone booth, rioters began
shaking it and Mr. Kifner conveyed his fright to Mr. Bigart. But Mr. Bigart,
busy fending off editors he regarded as hysterical, comforted Mr. Kifner by
noting, "At least you're dealing with sane people."

From Architecture To Journalism

Homer William Bigart was born Oct. 25, 1907, in Hawley, Pa., in the Pocono
region, the son of Homer S. Bigart, a woolens manufacturer, and Anna Schardt
Bigart. He attended public schools there, then ventured to Pittsburgh to enroll
in the Carnegie Institute of Technology. He thought he wanted to be an
architect. The institute felt otherwise.

"They found I couldn't draw," Mr. Bigart later recalled, "and invited me to find
another school."

In 1929, Mr. Bigart complied. He enrolled in the New York University School of
Journalism and got a job as a night copy boy on The Herald Tribune. N.Y.U. liked
him well enough, but Mr. Bigart remained unconvinced that his journalism
professors knew much about journalism. He dropped out, and in 1929, as the Great
Depression was starting, joined The Trib full time.

Since he was neither a college graduate nor adept at office politics, he
remained a copy boy for four years. But then The Trib decided to give him a
chance and made him a general-assignment reporter at $25 a week.

At first, it seemed he would not make it. He was a painfully slow writer.
Editors were amazed at his bizarre typing style, in which he double-spaced
between words. He made the errors that young reporters are prone to make. Once,
assigned to cover the start of coach railroad service between New York and
Florida, he went to the wrong track and wrote about the wrong railroad.

It was in this period that Mr. Bigart found he could use his halting speech to
become a more effective reporter. The stammer made it easier for him to pose as
a bumbler who was not very smart. He would often say to those he interviewed
something like, "G-g-gee, I d-d-didn't really understand that. C-c-could you
repeat it?"

Most of those he interviewed went to extra lengths to make sure he got the story
straight, and the result was that Mr. Bigart's articles seemed to be clearer
than anyone else's; the quotations were invariably rich.

During the 1930's the paper found ample reason to have more and more confidence
in Mr. Bigart's skills, and in 1942 he was asked if he would become a war
correspondent. He agreed and went on to cover the London blitz, the bombing of
Nazi Germany, the battles of North Africa, Italy and southern France.

When the war was over in Europe, he moved to the Pacific and covered the final
months of the war against Japan. He always seemed determined to cover war at the
cannon's mouth and was one of the first reporters to enter Hiroshima after the
Americans dropped the atomic bomb.

Newsweek called him "the hardest kind of worker and the fairest kind of
competitor." Philip Potter of The Baltimore Sun said Mr. Bigart "worked over his
copy more than any of the rest of us correspondents, who were anxious after a
hard day in the field to get our copy written and filed so we could get a
drink."

"Homer would still be at his portable, crossing off one word because he had
thought of a better one," Mr. Potter said. "He observed things that we had
missed."

The plaudits kept coming when he covered the war in Korea. In that war, Newsweek
called him "the best war correspondent of an embattled generation."

The people who ran some of the countries Mr. Bigart visited as a reporter did
not entirely agree with that appraisal. Because of the independence of his
reporting, he was ordered out of Hungary, Egypt, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Saudi
Arabia, Oman and Vietnam.

The Vietnamese order was rescinded; the censor admitted he had made a
translation error that led him to believe that Mr. Bigart had written something
obscene.

When Mr. Bigart left The Trib to join The Times, there was no particular joy in
it for him. The Trib was a decade away from its demise, and its economic
problems were not lost on Mr. Bigart. But it was a paper with a proud tradition
of giving writers their head, and Mr. Bigart loved it.

"It seemed to me that he always looked down on The Times, even when he worked
there," Mr. Daniel said. "Its main fault, in his eyes, was that it wasn't The
Trib. It was too proud and stiff-necked for his taste. But he knew that if he
couldn't work for The Trib, the next best thing was The Times. He was not
disloyal to it; he just wasn't in love with it."

Mr. Bigart's first two wives were Alice Veit, who died in 1959 after they were
divorced, and Alice Weel, who died in 1969. The next year he married Else
Holmelund Minarik, the author of children's books, who survives him. He is also
survived by a sister, Margaret Crowe of Lancaster, Pa., and a stepdaughter,
Brooke Minarik of Dover, N.H.

No funeral is planned, the family said.

NAME: Homer Bigart

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Homer Bigart (The New York Times, 1973); Homer Bigart, right,
preparing to accompany a bombing raid to Germany from a base in England in 1943.
Other correspondents were, from the left, Gladwin Hill, William Wade, Robert
Post and Walter Cronkite (Associated Press)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 18, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR: A RISKY UNDERTAKING;
Kurd Relief Plan Takes Bush to the Edge Of the Tangle He Has Tried Hard to Avoid

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1165 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 17


President Bush presented his plan to aid the Kurdish refugees as a
straightforward and limited humanitarian operation, but it has raised the
possibility of snaring Mr. Bush in just the kind of political and military
tangle that he has been trying to avoid.

Less than a day after the President said he would set up refugee camps in
northern Iraq, the United Nations was questioning the legal basis for the
effort, which seemed to be predicated on little more than the rights of a
conqueror.

The White House found itself sidestepping questions about the political future
of Iraqi Kurdistan to avoid conflicts with its allies in Turkey, which contains
the largest population of Kurds and which has long feared and opposed steps that
could encourage any Kurdish separatism.

But, signaling its own awareness that the refugee problem could become political
and military dynamite if not properly handled, the White House warned Kurdish
opposition groups not to use the proposed refugee camps as a staging area and
safe haven for guerrilla bands.

The Bush Administration took pains to reassure the American people that the
refugee project was a short-term commitment and that the United States would not
be drawn ever deeper into Iraq's tortuous politics.

An Unresolved Question

"We hope and intend to turn them over to the U.N. to administer as soon as
possible," Marlin Fitzwater, Mr. Bush's spokesman, said of the camps. "This
effort in no way is expected to delay the withdrawal of U.S. forces from the
region."

But Administration officials acknowledged that they would have difficulty
getting the United Nations Security Council to approve an allied plan for
coaxing the refugees to return home and that they had not resolved the far more
difficult question of how to protect them from reprisals by President Saddam
Hussein if they do go back.

Indeed, there was confusion today about the procedural aspects of Mr. Bush's
relief plan. The United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar,
asserted that Iraq must agree to the plan before it could proceed and that it
would require a new Security Council vote as well. The White House disputed both
points and suggested that it would press Mr. Perez de Cuellar to change his
position.

In addition to feeding and clothing Kurdish refugees, the United States and its
partners in the operation are likely to find themselves caring for their sick
and perhaps even arbitrating their political disputes.

Prominent foreign policy analysts suggested that the President could be moving
toward an indefinite commitment to protect the Kurds and direct involvement in
determining the shape of Iraq's future political structure.

"We should not delude ourselves that this is something we can do for a month and
then walk away," said Henry A. Kissinger, the former Secretary of State.

The Role of Hussein

In outlining its plans for the refugees, the White House has stressed the
humanitarian aspects of providing food and clothing and Mr. Bush said he was
reasonably confident that Iraq would not attack the planned refugee camps.

But Mr. Bush and his aides acknowledge that the United States, Britain, France
and Turkey will have to protect the Kurds from Mr. Hussein's harsh repression as
well, and that poses the most risks and long-term problems.

"We can protect these people for a while," said Mr. Kissinger, "but the basic
problem will be either to get a government into Baghdad that one can trust
enough to treat these Kurds differently than they've been treated for decades or
get some kind of international regimen that limits the capacity of the Iraqi
Government for repression in the Kurdish area. Either would be a major
intervention in what has heretofore been considered the domestic affairs of
another country."

Mr. Kissinger said the trouble with trying to provide an international security
apparatus for the Kurds in northern Iraq was that such an effort would presume
some sort of autonomy for the region. That could put Washington in conflict not
only with Turkey, whose Kurdish citizens are already agitating for autonomy, but
also with Syria and Iran, which also have Kurdish populations.

Cyrus R. Vance, the former Secretary of State, said he did not think Mr. Bush
had any alternative to aiding the refugees.

But he said: "It looks like you're going to end up with a lot of big camps, such
as we've seen on the West Bank. Where are you going to have these people go so
they don't sit in camps indefinitely? They should go back to their hometowns and
cities. But unless you have some kind of assurance that they are going to be
protected, it's going to be hard to ask them to go back. And that gets us
involved in politics."

An Administration official said Mr. Bush hoped to safeguard the Kurds from Mr.
Hussein's forces by continuing his efforts to dismantle Iraq's poison gases and
biological weapons and by keeping economic sanctions in place as long as Mr.
Hussein is in power.

But there are already signs that the pressure to do more will continue to mount
on Mr. Bush, who has already been criticized for urging the Iraqis to overthrow
Mr. Hussein and then remaining on the sidelines of the ensuing civil war.

"Once you commit yourself to protecting those people, you are committed until
you are sure they are 100 percent safe, and they won't be as long as Saddam
Hussein and his regime are in power," said Najmaldin O. Karim, a spokesman for
the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, one of the two largest Iraqi Kurdish groups.

He added, "We hope that this commitment to protect these people is serious and
is open-ended."

A Plea by Bush

For the Administration, the simplest solution continues to be the removal of Mr.
Hussein. But American officials are no closer now to finding a way to achieve
that objective than they were when Mr. Bush halted the fighting on Feb. 27.

Mr. Bush seemed acutely aware of this problem on Tuesday, when he said at a news
conference that he might be open to Mr. Hussein taking refuge in another country
with guarantees that he never return to Iraq.

"That was a plea: 'Take this problem away,' " one official said.

For weeks, the President has been proclaiming that the successful end to the war
to drive Iraq from Kuwait signaled an end to the "Vietnam syndrome."

But it is clear now that he has been defining that generational problem in
relatively narrow terms of America's ability to express its national will and is
suddenly confronting the broader aspects of the Vietnam legacy: the risks of
being drawn into a political quagmire.

"When I first became Secretary of State, I asked the policy planning staff to
give me a memorandum on how a great power avoids becoming a satellite of a small
country that is completely dependent on you," said Dean Rusk, who was Secretary
under John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson. "They didn't come up with a very
good answer for a problem that we had in our time and which I'm afraid Bush has
now."

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 18, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1179 words



INTERNATIONAL A3-18

U.S. troops went into northern Iraq to begin securing one or two large zones
where they will build refugee camps near Kurdish cities as deep as 60 miles
inside Iraq.  Page A1

Iraq denounced the effort to send troops inside the northern part of the nation,
and said it had reached its own agreement with the United Nations to establish
"humanitarian centers" to care for refugees. A16

Baker defends refugee plan at European meeting A18

U.S. aid effort is a relief to British Prime Minister A17

Confusion delays aid for Kurds fleeing to Iran A17

Kurds at a refugee camp in Turkey said they feared returning to an Iraq still
controlled by Saddam Hussein, even with the American promise of protection. A1

News analysis: The refugee plan raises the possibility of snarling President
Bush in just the kind of political and military tangle that he has been trying
to avoid.  A1

How Bush overcame reluctance and embraced Kurdish relief A16

Prince appeals for U.S. troops to stay in Kuwait A18

Schwarzkopf plans return to U.S. and fall retirement A18

Photographer is reported killed by Iraqi troopsA17

Syria's Foreign Minister sees real hope for Mideast peace A18

Four Israeli farmers were shot by Jordanians, who killed one and wounded the
three others at a Kibbutz near the Jordan border. A3

President Gorbachev asked for aid and investment from Japanese lawmakers and
industrial giants to help the Soviet Union avoid what he said was a
"disintegration" of its economy. A1

President Bush will help Nicaragua by spearheading an international effort to
clear more than $360 million of its crushing debt, he promised President
Chamorro. A3

Black Americans and Africans, including political and business leaders, have
gathered for a conference on promoting support for African economic development
and interest in African heritage. A8

Mandela group moving to arm black townships A9

Port Elizabeth Journal: dispossessed tribe wants its land A4

India's soon-to-be-ex-Premier likes it that way A11

NATIONAL A20-23, B8-12

The Dow Jones industrial average closed above the 3,000 level for the first
time, another milestone in a bull market that has seen stocks around the world
rise sharply since last fall. D1

A bill to end the railroad strike was approved by the Congress and sent to
President Bush less than 24 hours after the strike began. B8

A House plan for Federal spending for the next fiscal year was approved by its
members after they rejected President Bush's budget request.  B12

Democrats send education bill to Senate B12

$10 billion in new taxes was raised to meet state woes B10

Caps suggested for U.S. health spending B10

G.O.P. chairman offers preview of 1992 campaign A21

Senate forms group to offer ethics guidelines B9

Companies fleeing pollution controls in the United States will encounter
standards just as tough in Mexico, Mexican officials said. A20

The case of the alleged rape at the Kennedy estate in Palm Beach has been
hampered by the initial move of the police to hold back any news of the
allegation for 48 hours after the alleged victim first reported it. A22

Debate is intense over use of accuser's name in news media A22

Orthodontist with AIDS closes Florida practice A23

Study links a kidney hormone to heart attacks B10

Court limits liability on international flights B12

Yale gets big gift for Western studies A20

Yale Journal: Women in the crypt? Old bonesmen say no B3

Guggenheim grants averaging $26,500 are awarded to 143 A23

"Right out of left field" arises a new Leonardo A20

REGIONAL B1-7

News analysis: The fiscal strategy of Mayor Dinkins in the past, to inflict the
least pain possible, seems to have all but assured a price of great pain in the
present crisis.  A1

Correction officers settle pregnancy bias suit B1

A bill outlawing discrimination against homosexuals was passed by the
Connecticut Senate. The measure would make Connecticut the fourth state in the
nation to formally protect gay rights. B1

Connecticut averted the layoffs of 2,600 state employees with an agreement with
labor unions on a $327.7 million package of concessions to help ease the state's
budget crisis, Governor Weicker announced. B5

A 68-year-old Brooklyn man was run over and killed by a van, the police said.
His family and neighbors said the killing was in retaliation for his persistence
in ordering drug dealers, addicts and prostitutes off their block. A1 Two slain
and pregnant woman shot in Bronx drug dispute B2

A defense lawyer has been indicted for refusing to disclose the source and
amount of fees she received from a major drug dealer she defended.  B1

The casino industry is plagued with enormous debt, declining revenues and a
static or shrinking market. Regulators have been debating whether casinos that
are bankrupt can also be considered "financially stable." B2

Subway panhandlers and peddlers are being ejected from trains and stations under
a police crackdown. Advocates for the homeless oppose the plan, while many
subways riders applaud it.  B1

Transit agency is retreating on service cuts B4

Axelrod quits health post; search begins for successor B3

Amid debate, two hospitals get new chiefs B3

Gifts keep Hale House nursery open B3

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

The Home Section

Reality hits Milan like a falshback C1

Loam in the gloaming C1

Sheltering children of the Vietnam War C1

Parent & Child C2

Not all that's gilt is gold C5

Products for recycling in the home C12

Arts/Entertainment

Guggenheim going to SoHo C15

Criticism about auctioning Mahler symphonyC20

A family takes on a dictatorship C15

Theater: Mamet's "Three Sisters" C14

Film: "Spartacus" is restored C15

Music: Pavarotti's Otello C15

Pop in Review C16

Word and Image: "Object Lessons" by Anna Quindlen C19

On boycotting network news C20

Home Video C20

Health Page B13

Implant maker asks doctors not to use device linked to cancer

Obituaries B14

James F. Garrett, executive of Fund for Rehabilitation

Sports

Baseball: Yanks beat unbeaten White Sox B15

Smiley blanks Mets on one hit B15

Witness says Spira threats went unreportedB16

Basketball: Knicks remain inconsistent B22

Boxing: How Holyfield and Foreman can win B19

Column: Vecsey on Torborg B15

Football: Questions and answers with Paul Tagliabue B15

Draft uncertain for underclassmen B18

Giants' quarterback situation scrambled B18

Hockey: Capitals and Bruins triumph B21

Gretzky closing in on Howe B21

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A24

At last, the Kurds find friends

Numbers game at Georgetown

Budget worth noticing, barely

Robert B. Semple Jr.: Yale

Letters A24

Anna Quindlen: Skullduggery A25

William Safire: Tall in the straddle A25

Susan Estrich: The real Palm Beach story A25

Eric T. Dean Jr.: The unforgotten Vietnam vet A25

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 18, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Bush Asks the Army's No. 2 To Take Over the Top Spot

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 142 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 17


President Bush has chosen Gen. Gordon Sullivan, the Army's No. 2 officer, to be
the Army's chief of staff for the next four years, the White House announced
today.

Pentagon sources have said that the post would have gone to Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf if he had expressed an interest in it. But the commander of the
allied forces in the Perisan Gulf told Pentagon officials that he preferred to
retire on schedule.

The nomination of General Sullivan is subject to Senate confirmation.

The 53-year-old general is regarded as the service's chief architect of its
plans for the post-cold war era. He will replace Gen. Carl Vuono, who is
scheduled to retire at the end of June.

In his 31 years in the service General Sullivan has held commands from the level
of platoon to division. He specialized as an armor officer and saw duty in
Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 18, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Sheltering Children Of the Vietnam War

BYLINE: By CAROL LAWSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 5; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1298 words


CHILDHOOD was mostly a matter of survival. Many children grew up in the streets,
begging for food.  Those who were lucky enough to go to school usually dropped
out after a couple of years, succumbing to the beatings of other students who
taunted them with the charge, "You look American."

That is what life was like in Vietnam for Amerasian children, the offspring of
Vietnamese mothers and American soldiers. Most share a heritage of poverty,
illiteracy and racial prejudice.

But now, 16 years after American troops withdrew from Vietnam, many of the
children they left behind are pulling out, too. Because of American legislation
passed in 1988, a new wave of immigration is bringing the Amerasian children to
the United States in record numbers. Last year 5,134 arrived in this country and
even more are expected this year.

For some of these children, whose sad existence is dramatically brought to
public attention in the new Broadway musical "Miss Saigon," life begins anew in
a small red brick building in the Fordham section of the Bronx. This is St.
Rita's Asian Center on Andrews Avenue. A group of Amerasian children, many of
them now young adults, spend their days here in second-floor classrooms where
they are learning to read and write and function in the land of fathers most of
them have never known.

"In Vietnam they called us hybrids, and people threw stones at us," said Linh
Phan, a 25-year-old Amerasian who arrived in New York with his mother five years
ago and now works at St. Rita's as a translator and caseworker. "Some Amerasians
had no place to live. They sold peanuts in the street. They had no life."

Mr. Phan grew up with his mother in Ho Chi Minh City, in a house "that leaked
every time it rained." He got off the plane here, he said, like most Amerasians,
with few belongings: the clothes on his back, a pair of thongs on his feet and
an old photograph of his American father.

Meeting his father is something that Mr. Phan dreams of, but he is not ready to
look for him yet. "I know his name, and my mother knows where he lives now," Mr.
Phan said, "but I want to wait until I am married and have my own car and have
finished my schooling and am settled. I don't want him to feel any obligation."

He sighed deeply. "My father can love me or not," he said quietly. "I just want
to see him."

Sister Jean Marshall, director of St. Rita's, said Mr. Phan was "one of the
lucky ones," for he had had several years of schooling in Vietnam and was later
able to learn English and earn a degree from Bronx Community College.

"Most of the Amerasians come here uneducated and unskilled," Sister Jean said.
"Being illiterate in their own language makes it even harder for them to learn
English.  Many are young adults and should be working, but their lack of
education holds them back. When they find jobs, they are often laid off after a
couple of weeks. They come here feeling this is their fatherland, but it is very
difficult for them."

Many Amerasians have an additional difficulty: their fathers were black. When
they left Vietnam, Sister Jean said, they thought they were escaping racial
prejudice, but in the United States they are perceived as black Americans
because of their dark skin.

Some Amerasians also arrive with severe family problems. Most come to the United
States with their mothers, even those whose mothers treated them as outcasts
because of their mixed race. "In many cases they don't know their mothers very
well," Sister Jean said. But family ties are nonetheless too strong for the
children to leave their mothers behind, and the mothers themselves are often
eager to leave Vietnam.

St. Rita's Asian Center, which provides a wide range of social and educational
services, opened eight years ago to help Cambodian refugees. In the summer of
1989, it began assisting Amerasians and Vietnamese family members who arrive
with them. Sister Jean said that, compared to Cambodians, the Amerasians have
been "much more difficult" to work with.  "The Cambodians were also unskilled,
but they were younger and adapted more easily," she said.

Another problem is the vulnerability of some Amerasians to recruitment by Asian
gangs in this country.  "We try to do all we can to keep them on the right
road," Sister Jean said.

St. Rita's, supported by a patchwork of city, state and Federal grants, is "home
base," Sister Jean said, for 150 Amerasian children, plus nearly 1,000 of their
family members.  The center, part of the Tolentine Zeiser Life Center, gives
refugees clothing when they arrive. "In the middle of winter, a family of eight
arrives in thongs," Sister Jean said.

The center also provides job counseling and placement, English classes for
adults, an after-school program for children 7 to 12 years old, psychotherapy
and translators to help refugees work with public agencies.

There is also an alternative high school for teen-agers who speak little
English. Classes are taught by two New York City school teachers who speak
Vietnamese. "The Amerasian students get sick a lot and don't do much homework,"
said one of the teachers, Nancy Chung, who is a Vietnamese refugee.

Sister Jean said she hoped to add a child-care center. "Many Amerasians are
pregnant or are arriving with babies," she said. "This is a real problem. We are
seeing second-generation Amerasians. I want to open a child-care center so the
mothers can find jobs."

Looking for American fathers is on the minds of most Amerasian children, but it
is not a high priority when they arrive in this country. "Very few are finding
their fathers," said Marta Brenden, a program consultant to the InterAction
Amerasian Resettlement Program. "Initially, they are so preoccupied with the
strangeness of life here that they don't try to search for them. But I suspect
that might become more important later."

Sister Jean said that only two Amerasians at St. Rita's have tried to find their
fathers. "They have a picture or an old address of 20 years ago," she said.
"That is all the information they come with." One Amerasian who did find her
American father is Anh Huynh, who is 19 years old. She located him in St.
Thomas, in the Virgin Islands. "He has a new family," she said, "but he sends
money to my family once a month. I feel very happy that I know who he is."

The current wave of immigration began with the Amerasian Homecoming Act of 1988.
The legislation marked the end of the tight controls the Vietnamese Government
had imposed on Amerasian emigration. The 5,134 Amerasians who emigrated to the
United States last year were accompanied by 12,928 Vietnamese family members.
The emigration is expected to end next year.

"We anticipate we will have processed all Amerasians who want to leave by
mid-1992," said Pam Lewis, public affairs officer for the State Department's
Bureau for Refugee Programs. Ms. Lewis said that since 1980, 14,253 Amerasians
and 32,196 accompanying family members have been admitted to the United States.

Sister Jean said she hopes that "Miss Saigon" will remind Americans that
Amerasians are alive and struggling. "We don't have to feel guilty about it,"
she said. "But we should understand what life has been like for them. If someone
fathered an Amerasian and doesn't want to acknowledge it, I can understand that.
But we should think about what we can do for their plight."

In a classroom at St. Rita's, the Amerasians sat in a circle of desks and
talked, in a mixture of Vietnamese and English, about their new lives. All
agreed that while life here has been much more difficult than they expected,
they do not have second thoughts.

"I left school in Vietnam when I was 6 years old because people beat me and my
face swelled up," said 18-year-old Phong Tran. "I am so happy to be free of
that."

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "In Vietnam they called us hybrids, and people threw stones at
us," said Linh Phan, standing second from right, with other students in the
kitchen of St. Rita's Asian Center. (Suzanne DeChillo for The New York Times)
(pg. C8)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 20, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

In the Nation;
End of A Great Era

BYLINE: By TOM WICKER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 738 words


Homer Bigart, one of the best newspaper reporters ever to pound a typewriter,
died in New Hampshire this week, at age 83. On the same day, in an irony he
might have appreciated, a Federal judge pronounced what may well have been the
end of the great tradition of combat correspondence in American journalism.

Mr. Bigart sent back to the late, lamented New York Herald Tribune, and later to
The New York Times, brilliant and illuminating dispatches from both the European
and Pacific theaters of World War II, the Korean War, the Vietnam War, the
Israeli struggle for independence and others of the many conflicts that marked
his time.

Other professionals respected him, above most reporters, for his powers of
observation, his accuracy, his wit and the clarity and grace of his writing.
When his obituary was published in The Times, he was pictured preparing to cover
a bombing raid over Germany in 1943 with Walter Cronkite and Gladwin Hill -- two
other correspondents whose skill and bravery kept homebound Americans informed
in those grim years.  Thirty-six of them died in World War II, eight in Korea,
sixteen in Vietnam.

In some wars, these correspondents' reports were subject to censorship; but in
none of them were they as restricted as were their professional descendants in
the Persian Gulf war. Rarely, if ever, were military officers assigned to
monitor their interviews; usually they could go to any military outpost or
battle scene they had the courage and ingenuity to reach -- often via military
transportation, many times under fire.

During the gulf war, in contrast, American reporters were confined to "pools,"
sharply restricted in their movements, often supervised by official monitors,
subjected to military review of their reports and sometimes required to hold up
even inoffensive stories until they could be officially disclosed by Government
briefers at the Pentagon or in the Middle East.

For those reasons, the United States Government was able to control, to its
liking, the tone and content of most newspaper, radio and television reports
coming back to Americans -- whose sons and daughters were fighting in the Middle
East, and whose tax dollars were paying for the American effort. The resulting
coverage was highly congenial to the Pentagon; for only one well-known example,
no pictures of dead or mangled Americans -- there were some -- reached front
pages or the home screen to disturb the general euphoria.

Controlled coverage did not badly distort, this time, news of what proved to be
a quick and relatively easy victory; but it might have, had the war been more
difficult. Nor can anyone know how, or to what purpose, future officials in
future wars -- there will be some -- may exercise such controls.

As Federal Judge Leonard B. Sand put it this week, in dismissing a court
challenge to the constitutionality of gulf war news restrictions: "This court
cannot now determine that some limitation on the number of journalists granted
access to a battlefield in the next overseas military operation may not be a
reasonable time, place and manner restriction, valid under the First and Fifth
Amendments." (Emphasis added.)

That's the green light the Government needed to impose the same, or greater,
restraints on correspondents in "the next overseas military operation," and the
next, and the next. Having done it with such success and so little protest
during the desert war, even well-meaning officials no doubt will control, next
time, with a heavier and more restrictive hand -- especially if the next time
produces less success and more casualties.

Americans will be no more likely to rise up against such limitations on their
constitutional right to know than they were last winter. In wartime, at least,
they seem now to prefer information doled out by the Government to the
traditional work of a free press they misunderstand and mistrust. This may be a
setback for journalism; but it's the public's loss.

As Eric Sevareid, himself a distinguished war reporter, wrote last month in a
letter to The Times:

"Our modern military leadership has put an end to the time-honored role of
combat correspondent in American journalism. We are not likely to see, hear or
read the work of any future Ed Murrows, Ernie Pyles, Homer Bigarts, or Bob
Capas. I would settle for that only if future American wars were equally
unlikely, which is doubtful."

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 21, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On Language;
Izationization

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1233 words


An ugly but necessary new noun is being floated out today: izationization, "the
creation of lengthy nouns out of shorter words by adding -ization."

Events in the Persian Gulf (CBS has stopped calling it "the Arabian Gulf,"
reflecting loss of prestige by Saddam Hussein or second thoughts by Dan Rather)
have churned up a couple of -ization formations that need work.

One is Lebanonization. This tongue twister was coined in June 1983 by Shimon
Peres, Israel's Labor Party leader, on the analogy of Vietnamization as Israel
removed its troops from Lebanon: "Our policy should be maximum Lebanonization of
the territory and minimum permanent Israeli army presence." In that sense,
Lebanonization was a good thing -- returning Lebanon to the Lebanese, much as
Americans wanted to turn the fighting of our 1960's war over to our South
Vietnamese allies.

However, the Israeli withdrawal was followed by what seems to be a permanent
state of civil war among the religious, ethnic and political factions within
that unhappy country; as a result, the word gained a pejorative sense of
"unending internal strife, fueled by arms sales from abroad." Speaking in San
Salvador in 1985, Archbishop Arturo Rivera y Damas sadly said of his country:
"Here is where we reach the theme of Lebanonization."

By 1989, Mary Curtius of The Boston Globe was using the changed sense in
reporting from the West Bank of the Jordan River: "Israeli analysts now
frequently refer to what they call the Lebanon ization of the territories, a
label that means that all semblance of restraint, of playing by rules, is
breaking down." Mikhail S. Gorbachev joined in: "Let's be frank," he told a 1990
party plenum of his worry about Boris N. Yeltsin's calls for decentralization.
"The country could really be threatened by Lebanon ization with all the
wellknown consequences."

The postwar struggle within Iraq put the word in its negative sense over the
top. In Washington last month, Laurie Mylroie (pronounced mill-roy) of the
Harvard Center for Middle Eastern Studies urged President Bush to establish
contacts with dissidents in Iraq quickly: "The United States can constructively
influence the situation in Iraq without settling for its Saddamization or
Lebanon ization." Otherwise, she warned, "Either Saddam will re-establish
control, or you'll have a Lebanonization."

Bush Administration spokesmen used the word to justify a sudden hands-off
policy, leaving vulnerable to Saddam Hussein the Kurdish and Shiite opponents
that Mr. Bush had urged to revolt. (In a stunning double redundancy, President
Bush said, "I do not want to see us get sucked into the internal civil war
inside of Iraq." Internal made civil redundant, with inside doubling the
redundancy; the Squad Squad is beside itself.)

"The new threat-word is Lebanonization," A. M. Rosenthal wrote in The New York
Times. This term was not the same as Balkanization, a much older word. I asked
my colleague for his differentiation.

"Lebanonization refers to the activity within a single country," he replied, "so
riven with religious and other disputes that the country becomes impossible to
govern. Lebanon was divided that way and became subject to foreign invasion by
the Palestinians and then the Syrians.

"Balkanization means taking a country and splitting it into parts," Mr.
Rosenthal continued, "into separate countries. In relation to Iraq, it means
taking away areas to form Kurdistan and perhaps another country in the south.
That would turn Iraq into three countries -- they could make seven out of it,
for all I care -- but such Balkanization is not the same process as the internal
struggle that causes Lebanonization."

(The historian Arnold J. Toynbee used the British spelling when he explained in
1922 that "The word Balkan isation . . . was coined by German socialists to
describe what was done to the western fringe of the Russian Empire by the Peace
of BrestLitovsk.")

You may think this clearly pins down the meaning of Lebanonization, but a
complication arises: Because the word is such a mouthful, posing a constant
danger to broadcasters, a conspiracy is afoot to compress it. Bashir Gemayal,
the President-elect of Lebanon who was assassinated before he could take office,
spoke in 1982 of what was transcribed as "the re-Lebanization" of the
mountainous area occupied by the Druse. Perhaps this was an error in
transcription, but Zbigniew Brzezinski wrote in 1989 of "Iran even facing the
danger of internal 'Lebanization.' " After Saddam Hussein's military defeat, The
Associated Press reported that Yemen's United Nations Ambassador, Abdalla
al-Ashtal, complained that everybody said "they don't want Leban ization of
Iraq," but actions were encouraging it.

Look, Excellency and Zbig, we're not talking about a country called "Leban"; if
you are going to use the overused verb, it requires the full Lebanonization.

Now we take our leave of Beirut-causes and turn to the second example of
izationization: What do we call the process of taking the salt out of water? The
plants to do that were in the news when they were endangered during the recent
hostilities.

"Desalination or desalinization?" writes Ben Bradlee, executive editor of The
Washington Post. "Bush uses the former, Baker the latter. Lead us out of this
minefield!"

We start with our gal sal, Latin for our noun "salt," and the adjective saline,
the pronunciation of its first syllable switching to SAY; a saline solution is
frequently a fancy way of saying "salt water." In 1904, when the notion of
taking the salt out of sea water was first seriously bruited about, the verb was
the simple desalt. In 1949, desalinate appeared, the function of a device called
a desalinator; the author Arthur Koestler picked up the term and applied it to
the purposely bland: "The blond, good-looking young man with his neutral,
'de-salinated' features."

People in the desalting dodge have named their trade group the International
Desalination Association, and its director, Patricia A. Burke, says that when
faced with the Bradlee question, "we prefer the shorter term desalination."

I prefer the even shorter verb desalt, and would use the gerund desalting for
the process, with the noun desalter to describe the machine or the person who
operates it. We have no good reason to keep lengthening the terms from
desalination to desalinization and ultimately to desodiumchloridization.

Must the -ize always have it? No; the -ization suffix, so readily used for
turning a noun into the action, condition or result of making, should be
resisted when a shorter route is at hand. Izationization is a bad habit; you can
even forget the word.

Nervous broadcasters will have to negotiate the shoals of Lebanonization in all
its stutter-inducing syllabification until a nation or region with a shorter
name becomes the example of ceaseless hostility. And I suppose we'll have to
prefer the familiar decentralization that Mr. Yeltsin seeks to an unfamiliar
decentraling.

But if you don't like the colorization of old movies, complain instead about
coloring; if you can't get your mouth fixed for needless extensions of
brackishness, say desalting. (Become desalinizationfree!)

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 21, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SUNDAY VIEW;
The 'Saigon' Picture Is Worth 1,000 Words

BYLINE: By David Richards

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1544 words


Put aside for a minute the considerable talent of the British actor Jonathan
Pryce and the galvanizing mixture of ferocity and subservience that he brings to
"Miss Saigon." Disregard the loud sport shirts and slinky bell-bottom trousers
that he wears. Forget, if you can, his bony fingers, always on the move, like
those of a cheap magician about to produce a bouquet of paper flowers from an
unsuspecting lady's decolletage.

There is another reason he stands out these nights on the stage of the Broadway
Theater like a snarl of India ink on a piece of parchment: in a musical without
dialogue, he gets the best lyrics.

To the other performers in Alain Boublil and Claude-Michel Schonberg's
tumultuous saga about a G.I. in Vietnam and the bar girl he leaves behind, fall
the soaring melodies, the breast-rending passions and the noble sentiments. Mr.
Pryce's character -- a two-bit hustler called the Engineer, trafficking in phony
Rolex watches and soiled virgins, just before the fall of Saigon -- represents
the low end of humanity.

No conflict troubles his dingy soul. Like the cockroach, he operates purely out
of an instinct for self-preservation. His single ambition is to make his way to
America, and then only because he thinks he can practice his hustles on a larger
scale there. He is without ambiguity and, theoretically, at least, unambiguous
characters tend to use up their welcome rapidly. Mr. Pryce has a significant
trump card, however. The words that have been put in his mouth by Mr. Boublil
and Richard Maltby Jr., the show's lyricists, are the rare words that do not
seem to have come from a faltering greeting-card factory.

In a dazzlingly sardonic second-act production number, staged by Bob Avian, Mr.
Pryce articulates "The American Dream" that has helped his character not only
survive one of Ho Chi Minh's re-education camps, but endure the even greater
humiliation of having to rope customers into a Bangkok fleshpot for 10 cents an
hour. Although softer here than in the original London production, the number
remains triumphantly sleazy -- a worm's-eye view of a land where "bald people
think they'll grow hair," "call girls are lining Times Square," and life is "as
sweet as a suite in Bel Air."

Mr. Pryce is soon joined by a line of chorus girls emitting waves of peroxide,
and grinning chorus boys in the sort of powder-blue tuxedos once favored by
Wayne Newton. Then, out of the billowing clouds emerges the vision: a pristine
Cadillac convertible, carrying a piece of cheesecake pretending to be the Statue
of Liberty. Eyes gleaming like silver dollars, tongue flickering lasciviously,
Mr. Pryce throws himself on the hood as if it were a voluptuous hooker.

All the stops are clearly being let out. But the real electricity in the air
isn't generated by the perverse spectacle. It comes from Mr. Pryce, an anorexic
Al Jolson, biting into lyrics that can actually lay claim to some bite of their
own. The word has briefly emerged from the background and is being allowed to
paint images as vivid as those that the director Nicholas Hytner and the
designer John Napier have been putting on the stage all evening long.

Most of the time in "Miss Saigon," it's the other way around. The story is
abundantly illustrated for us, but the lyrics function as little more than
captions or subtitles. While "Guys and Dolls" in German, say, would probably
prove a fairly baffling experience for anyone not conversant in that language, I
suspect that "Miss Saigon" in French or Finish would still yield up most of its
secrets to us.

What Mr. Boublil and Mr. Schonberg are striving to reproduce, as they did in
"Les Miserables," is the grandeur of opera in popular garb. Puccini's "Madama
Butterfly" has been widely cited as the show's precursor, but don't let that
intimidate you. The doomed love between Kim (Lea Salonga), the innocent
Vietnamese bar girl, and Chris (Willy Falk), the burned-out G.I. who finds
regeneration in her arms before losing her in the chaos of the American
withdrawal, is played out on an epic scale. "Miss Saigon" puts the lovers into
Cinemascope decors, wraps them in Mr. Schonberg's lush music, and then, when
their passion is white hot, throws a chain-link fence between them and exiles
them to opposite ends of the globe.

As big as the emotions want to be, however, they are constantly whittled down to
size by lyrics that border on the simple-minded. "I feel walls in my heart/
Closing in/ I can't breath/ I can't win" hardly takes full measure of the agony
in Kim's soul when she learns, three hard years after their liaison, that Chris
has married an American. The reaction of the American wife (Liz Callaway) to her
Vietnamese counterpart is even feebler. "There are days/ There are days when
your life clouds over," kvetches Miss Callaway, with the sour demeanor of one
who has got up on the wrong side of the bed.

This great divide between words and feelings runs the entire length of the show.
While "Miss Saigon" is surely going to amaze a lot of people for years to come,
the greatest of its amazements, to my mind, are the ways Mr. Hytner and company
have managed to bridge the gap.

Sometimes it is the passionate commitment of the performers that creates the
impression of wholeness and keeps ludicrousness at bay. The purity of Miss
Salonga's features and the tenacity of the devotion she lavishes first on her
lover, then on the child who is born after his departure, contribute
significantly to her character's stature. She is touching at first sight -- a
shy, shrinking peasant girl amid the carnivores in a raucous Saigon dive. Even
though her perilous destiny at times rivals that of Mother Courage, she never
entirely loses her dewy freshness.

We certainly take as many cues from Mr. Falk's earnestly American, nice-guy
aura, and the vigor of his voice, as we do from what he is singing. When he and
Miss Salonga come together, the basic laws of biology supplant those of the
drama. They look good in each other's arms, the way movie stars looked good when
the studios were masterminding their careers.

For all its rumored anti-Americanism, the show's politics seem rooted primarily
in esthetics. The war was bad because it was untidy. ("All I made was a mess,"
laments Chris, "just like everyone else.") It despoiled a misty landscape and
upset pretty customs. But its most reprehensible sin seems to be that it split
up a handsome couple, leaving an adorable poster child fatherless.

In that respect, it was surely inspired casting to put Hinton Battle in the role
of John, Chris's Vietnam buddy, who, years later, heads a campaign to rescue the
bui-doi, those hapless "half-breeds" sired by American servicemen and abandoned
to a society that treats them as "the dust of life." In the guise of a lecture,
Mr. Battle sings about their plight before a large screen on which film clips of
their woebegone faces are projected. The number is so flagrantly moralistic as
to recall "You've Got to Be Carefully Taught," that Sunday school lesson from
"South Pacific." Mr. Battle's soulful voice, however, curls itself around the
preachy lyrics, lifts them up and infuses them with a dignity they do not
possess on their own.

Sometimes, it is the romantic excess of Mr. Hytner's staging that fills in the
blanks in the libretto. At the end of "The Last Night of the World" -- the
ecstatic duet between Kim and Chris that occurs early in the show -- the two
lovers embrace fervently. While a saxophone wails and the sky turns red, the
balcony on which they are standing slowly carries them off into the night. For
one rapturous moment they are detached from the squalor, the war, the world.

Among the astounding stage effects of the late-20th-century musical
(Grizabella's ascent to heaven in "Cats" or Inspector Javert's suicidal plunge
into the waters of the Seine in "Les Miserables"), we now must count the
evacuation of the American Embassy in "Miss Saigon." Preceded by the roar of
whirling blades, a helicopter lowers itself onto the embassy roof while
searchlights sweep the auditorium. Meanwhile, crowds of frenzied Vietnamese,
clutching their worthless papers, hurl themselves against the embassy's gates.
The scene is nightmarish in its desperation.

Then, as the helicopter takes off without them, the crowds slowly turn to follow
its flight, until they are facing us -- dejected and hopeless in the falling
light. Nightmare has been suddenly bled of its fury. What's left is still and
sour and scary. This is potent imagery, especially when it is underscored by an
orchestra operating at full tilt.

Mr. Hytner knows the intrinsic power of the material he is dealing with. But
more significantly, given the lyric shortfall, he knows its iconography. A
mother leading a tiny child by the hand or a file of weary refugees plodding
toward the unknown can't help unleashing in us an instinctive emotional
response. I think that may be why "Miss Saigon," which can often seem
overwhelming in performance, fades so quickly afterward. It takes canny
advantage of all the theater's resources, except the most basic -- the word,
which would give the multimillion-dollar swirl some of poetry's sticking power.
The eye is surfeited. The mind's eye starves.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Willy Falk and Lea Salonga in "Miss Saigon"--They look good in
each other's arms the way movie stars looked good. (Joan Marcus/"Miss Saigon")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 21, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. to Open an M.I.A. Office in Hanoi

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 534 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, April 20


The United States has agreed to establish its first official presence in
Vietnam, President Bush's special envoy for humanitarian affairs said here
today.

The official, Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., in a statement issued with the Vietnamese
Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, said Washington would establish a temporary
office in Hanoi to resolve cases of American soldiers who were listed as missing
in action or taken prisoner during the Vietnam War. But differences over
Cambodia continue to stand in the way of opening normal relations, American
officials say.

"In keeping with the discussions we had in Washington, we agreed that the United
States would establish a P.O.W.-M.I.A. field office in Hanoi on a temporary
basis," General Vessey said.

Reading the statement after two days of talks with Mr. Thach, he said both
Governments wanted to normalize relations and would continue talks on the
subject.

"Minister Thach and General Vessey both reaffirmed their Governments' desire to
normalize relations and agreed on the importance of continuing discussions to
resolve differences between them," the statement said. "They agreed that it
would be useful for them to meet again, at a date to be determined."

But Mr. Thach gave a noncommittal answer when asked by reporters whether he had
agreed to a plan presented by the United States, under which Washington would
normalize relations with Hanoi in exchange for Vietnam's cooperation in insuring
that a United Nations peace plan succeeded in Cambodia.

"I have not accepted and I have not rejected," he said.

General Vessey and Mr. Thach were officially meeting about the war prisoners and
those missing in action, an issue that the Bush Administration also sees as an
obstacle to normalization.

It wants Hanoi to help account for 2,278 American soldiers who are listed as
missing, were taken prisoner, or are known to have been killed in Indochina,
including 1,661 in Vietnam.

The joint statement said General Vessey had expressed American appreciation for
Vietnam's cooperation in improving efforts to resolve the issue.

"At the same time, General Vessey expressed the hope that even further progress
and greater results can be obtained in the future," the statement said.

Washington says the biggest stumbling block to normalization is the Cambodian
dispute. It wants Hanoi to make its ally in Phnom Penh back the United Nations
peace plan, which provides for disarmament of Cambodia's army and of guerrilla
groups before elections.

Western diplomats said the American delegation expected a response from Mr.
Thach to a four-phase plan presented in Washington last week to Vietnam's United
Nations delegate.

Under the American "road map" to normalization, Vietnam would virtually have to
insure peace in Cambodia before the United States would normalize relations.

The United Nations plan would have to be carried out, Cambodia's warring
factions disarmed, elections held and a national assembly formed before full
relations were established with Vietnam.

Western diplomats in Hanoi said that Washington was demanding too much of
Vietnam and that Hanoi officials were discouraged over short-term prospects for
normalizing ties.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 21, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 817 words



International 3-14

The first refugee camp in north Iraq was built by a battalion of U.S. marines as
part of what is expected to be an allied-protected zone for Kurdish refugees
inside Iraq.  Page 1

Washington's decision to intervene in Iraq's refugee crisis has raised concerns
that it will lead to an indefinite American military presence in a breakaway
Kurdish enclave, or a nascent Kurdish state. 1

Mission complete, Schwarzkopf leaves gulf 12

Kuwait's rulers pick new cabinet 13

The U.S. plan for Middle East peace ran into a mixed reception, with Jordan
endorsing the diplomacy by Secretary of State Baker and Israel beginning to
criticize it harshly. 14

Israelis fear they will take the fall if peace plan fails 14

Israel's farming success drains it of water 8

The war seems more complicated and ambiguous now to many Americans than it did
in the flush of victory. In interviews, many people were troubled by the plight
of the Kurds and the continuing chaos in Iraq. 14

The Soviet Union and Korea agreed to negotiate a mutual cooperation treaty and
to expand trade tenfold in an effort to assist the Soviet Union's faltering
economy. 3

U.S. to open an M.I.A. office in Hanoi 3

The nickname of Mikhail Gorbachev is "The Marked One." The name was once the
Soviets' affectionate tribute to their birthmarked leader. But it is now used
with the disrespect of someone dismissed as useless. 9

Bonn officer is shot near Soviet base in Germany 6

When half the village stops by for tea and television, it's not a problem for
the Mayor of a remote Chinese town of 174 people. More pressing in the village
of Baya are issues of marriage and land disputes. 10

Colombia's rising export: fake U.S. money 7

Brazil's chief revokes orders that cut tribe's Amazon land 4

 National 18-29

Medicare payment rules will change fundamentally under a new plan to be put into
effect. Under the plan, cost will be a major factor in the decision whether to
pay for medical services for the elderly. 1

Tests find electric pulse signals heart attack 27

A revolution in U.S. manufacturing has occurred: The nation, long derided as an
industrial has-been, is now one of the world's low-cost manufacturers -- lower
in many industries than Canada, Europe and Japan. 1

McDonald's new lean hamburger looks, smells and cooks just like a Quarter
Pounder. But with less than half the fat, it could be a blueprint for the future
of American fast food. 1

A group of Dutch computer intruders has been openly defying U.S. military, space
and intelligence authorities. Recently they broke into a military computer while
being filmed by a Dutch television station. 1

Invisible lines still divide the races in Summerton, S.C., a town with a major
part in the law outlawing segregation. Its role in the South's racial history
has created a stalemate that drags down both whites and blacks.  18

Delay called cause of halt in civil rights talks 18

Houston Journal: A house with a history may not have a future 18

Marshals faulted on drug policy 20

Iowa laser plan hits hard times 21

Future in mind, Choctaws reject plan for landfill 22

After flawed twin is removed, woman has full-term baby 26

The nation's largest libel judgement ever, $58 million, was awarded to a former
District Attorney who was accused by a Dallas television station of taking
payoffs for dropping drunken-driving cases. 19

Virginia judge says cross-burning law unconstitutional 28

Regional 30-40

President Bush's education proposal is being welcomed by two schools -- one
public and one parochial -- on the dreary fringes of Times Square. Despite
differences, leaders of each are willing to compete for students. 1

Protests at the City University of New York are dividing administrators, college
presidents and the police. The issue is how to handle the building takeovers
they say threaten to end the spring semester.  32

A yeshiva honors Japanese protector 36

Two families mourned their children, who were killed in an East Harlem hardware
store, while a third family wondered how their son could have snuffed out the
two lives, as the police say he did. 32

The killer of John Gotti's driver may be an associate of the Genovese family who
had a brutal fistfight with the victim more than a year ago, law-enforcement
officials said. 34

TV's "Most Wanted" brings arrest in killing of senator 34

Legal services lawyers' strike puts cases in limbo 36

Apartment service workers continue talks 33

Documents describe corruption in painters' union 40

Daily News struggles to regain its readers 35

Florio assails effort by Klan to gain members 37

Obituaries 38

A memorial concert celebrates Aaron Copland's legacy

Arts/Reviews 60

Campus Life 43-47

Fashion 50, 54

Life Style 48

Pastimes 61-62

Weddings 56-59

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 21, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR;
Bush's Plans for Kurds Stir Fears of Indefinite Military Role in Iraq

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1278 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 20


The Bush Administration's intervention in Iraq's refugee crisis has raised
concerns that it will lead to an indefinite American military presence in a
breakaway Kurdish enclave, or a nascent Kurdish state.

A number of Middle East specialists say they believe that President Bush, while
taking a substantial risk by sending United States military forces into northern
Iraq to establish and protect refugee camps, is addressing a humanitarian
imperative to rescue the majority of Iraq's 3.5 million Kurds, who are engaged
in a life-threatening exodus the scale of which is unparalleled in their
history.

Some of those specialists are relatively confident that Mr. Bush will be able to
extricate American forces after United Nations and other international relief
forces are able to assume the task of feeding and caring for hundreds of
thousands of Kurds.

But as the first large-scale campsites were being selected this weekend, the
uncertainty coursing through the Bush Administration was apparent.

A number of Government and outside experts say they fear that Iraq's opposition
will drag the United States into long-term intervention to protect "enclaves"
and "zones" where refugees will refuse to leave as long as Saddam Hussein is in
power.

Acting as 'Eyes and Ears'

"The best outcome would be to provide massive humanitarian aid with large
numbers of international personnel to supervise it," said Phoebe Marr, an Iraq
scholar at the National Defense University. "They could also act as the eyes and
the ears of the international community to prevent retribution by the Iraqi
Government, and as soon as possible the Kurds could be integrated back into Iraq
under some protection from the central Government."

"Now my fear is that the enclaves may become more permanent than we would like,"
Ms. Marr continued, "and the international involvement may be longer than we
like and the Kurds would not be integrated under reasonable terms into their own
country."

"Under understandable international pressure we are getting into something, but
we cannot yet see a clear way out," she said.

Mr. Bush's refugee relocation plan, shaped in consultation with Britain, France
and Turkey, is based not only on providing immediate humanitarian aid. Of
greater political importance, it also seeks to prevent a Kurdish migration
across Iraq's northern border into Turkey and reverse the tide of Kurds that has
already washed into Iran.

By keeping the Kurds in Iraq, the United States and its allies have set the
stage to try to force a political solution between the Kurds and the Baghdad
Government while also protecting Turkey, a member of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, Syria and Iran from instability and greater economic burden. The
open question remains whether the Kurds will move.

Getting Control of Refugees

The consequences of a sudden migration of more than two million Kurds out of
Iraq would only sow the seeds of future rebellions for all three nations, which
are home to a total of 20 million Kurds, some experts said. It could also set
off an extended guerrilla war in which Iraq's displaced Kurds might seek to
harass the Baghdad Government in perpetuity and inflame border tensions in the
region.

William Colby, former Director of Central Intelligence, said: "It seems to me
that we are back to basic policy that we don't want to dismember Iraq. That
means the Kurds will be consigned to living under Iraqi rule, and the test will
be if they can get enough guarantees to assure the decency of their treatment
for a solution."

An Iraq scholar, Christine Moss Helms, said: "Everything these Governments are
doing is to make sure this population of Kurds will be a controlled population.
At a minimum they are giving humanitarian aid, but in fact what you are doing is
getting them under control while the Turks are doing everything they can to make
sure these Kurds don't go further into Turkey."

That strategy also assumes that the United States and its allies will be able to
extricate themselves from Kurdish areas after they get their emergency program
of refugee centers up and running. United Nations officials thus far have
indicated that a great deal of negotiation will have to take place before United
Nations forces could step in and assume the task now being performed by
thousands of United States Marines and Army personnel backed by more than 100
combat and transport aircraft and dozens of heavy lift helicopters.

Short-Term Reconciliation

In addition, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata,
told reporters in Geneva Friday that she did not see how the allies would be
able to coax hundreds of thousands of Kurds out of the mountains while Mr.
Hussein -- the reason for their flight -- remains in Baghdad.

The critical political dimension of Mr. Bush's task in stepping into Iraq's
internal affairs is that of building that confidence among the Kurds, who so far
have shown no inclination to return to the homes they fled after their failed
uprising and the repression that followed it.

Baghdad's Control of Cities

Like it or not, Mr. Bush might be forced to cooperate with Mr. Hussein in
fostering a new internal security climate in Iraq. That will also make it easier
for Mr. Hussein to protect the integrity of his country as he struggles to
rebuild, sell oil and hold on to power.

Kurdish leaders, still disappointed at what they see as Mr. Bush's decision to
abandon their insurrection almost as soon as he had encouraged it, do not appear
to be opposed to a short-term reconciliation with Baghdad if it means an end to
the refugee crisis.

"If that cooperation is for the security and well-being of the refugees, plus a
guarantee for their safety, then, yes, it is a good thing," said Latif Rashid, a
senior official in the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan. "We consider the refugee
problem only temporary, but our goal is to get rid of Saddam Hussein, and we
will go on to achieve our national rights in a democratic Iraq."

As the American and allied relief effort moves forward, Mr. Hussein has actively
sought to protect Iraq's sovereignty from any intervention that might turn into
a permanent occupation or fragmentation of Iraq.

Mr. Hussein has challenged the legality of the military intervention while
seeking to displace it with a separate refugee assistance agreement signed in
Baghdad between Iraqi officials and a United Nations envoy, Sadruddin Aga Khan.

With 30,000 Iraqi Army troops estimated to be in the northern part of the
country, the Baghdad Government is most likely to maintain its control over the
major northern cities of Mosul, Zakho, Dohuk, and Erbil even as American
soldiers labor on the outskirts putting up tens of thousands of tents, kitchens
and portable hospitals to prepare for a carefully staged reverse exodus.

Risks of Another Vietnam

Mr. Colby, who witnessed as a senior C.I.A. official the incremental escalation
of the American intervention in Vietnam, said he did not believe the refugee
effort begun by Mr. Bush posed the same risks.

Still the operation runs strongly against the grain of United States military
officers who live by the post-Vietnam catechism that every military operation
must have a clear objective, achievable military goals in support of tangible
political objectives.

While the military has responded rapidly to Mr. Bush's directive to enter Iraq's
internal turmoil on a humanitarian mission, strong misgivings about the Kurdish
intervention are likely to persist, according to Pentagon officials.

"I can tell you the military wants to get out," said an Administration official.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 21, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Old Habits Ensnare the Middle East Again

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 3; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1250 words


APPEARANCES in the Middle East are almost always deceiving. The Persian Gulf war
was initially and widely acclaimed as a decisive victory for the United
States-led coalition. So it was, militarily. But it seemed decidedly less
glorious last week as 10,000 American soldiers scoured the harsh Iraqi landscape
seeking suitable terrain for vast refugee camps to save hundreds of thousands of
desperate Kurds, the unanticipated human debris of the conflict.

And any expectations that the victory of arms would reverse historical trends,
shatter traditional alliances, and bring gains for peace and stability in the
region seemed last week to have been very premature. They seemed to have been
overpowered both by patterns and rhythms long entrenched in Middle Eastern
politics and by the consequences of an event much more far-reaching even than
the war -- the disappearance of the Soviet Union as a player in that part of the
world.

"What initially looked like a watershed in the Mideast may turn out to be one
very long, loud hiccup," said a veteran diplomat in Tunisia, which opposed the
presence of American forces in the region. "It was the collapse of the Soviet
Union that made the gulf war possible."

From Morocco to Oman, in lands that backed the coalition and in those that did
not, anxiety about the region's future is growing once more.

Before the war, optimistic analysts in Arab capitals and in Washington predicted
that a decisive, quick military victory for the American-led coalition would
address several major causes of instability. First, the argument went, the
victory would make apparent the bankruptcy of Saddam Hussein's dictatorial form
of government and thus reinforce democratic trends. Second, it would bolster
prospects for economic development and dramatize the need to close the enormous
gap between rich and poor Arab countries. And it would shift traditional, but
outmoded, Arab political alignments; this, in turn, would enhance prospects for
peace between Israel and the Arabs.

Even before the war was fought, analysts were hailing the emergence of the
anti-Iraq coalition, which aligned wealthy Saudi Arabia with populous Egypt and
militarily powerful Syria. In contrast to the Arab League, which had been
rendered impotent by ideological, economic and geographic divisions, it was said
that this new alliance would be more stable and would operate on pragmatic,
realistic calculations. The Arabs' more extreme fringes would be neutralized and
their self-deluding mythologies and oratory about political unity would be
dropped.

But some analysts now fear that the new axis may itself be unstable. "Saudi
Arabia and Egypt have long been suspicious of each other, for history, envy, and
other good reasons," a senior Egyptian diplomat said. And many analysts say
Syria's recent pragmatism predates the war; it is, they argue, much more a
consequence of the decline of Damascus's traditional patron, the Soviet Union.
By the time the gulf crisis began last summer, Damascus had few options but to
seek economic and military support from the United States and the countries that
rapidly became its new coalition partners.

At the same time, the outcome of the war does not seem to have led very many
Arabs to abandon their dreams of pan-Arab or Islamic unity. And despite reports
anticipating its demise, the Arab League clings to life.

Prospects for economic development or for closing the gaps between rich and poor
nations have also not been enhanced by the war. The chances for sustained growth
in Egypt are not good despite Cairo's efforts to restructure its economy. Saudi
aid -- more than $2 billion in loans and debt forgiveness -- offers "a window of
opportunity to resolve our economic problems," said Boutros Ghali, Egypt's
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, "if we choose to use it." But there is
also strong temptation to use the aid to continue deferring the painful economic
restructuring that most Western economists say is essential to attracting
investment.

No assistance from the gulf countries, moreover, can be expected for the Sudan,
an economic basket case, or for Jordan and other poor countries that opposed the
coalition. Even a proposal by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d to establish
a bank for reconstruction and development was quickly rejected by the White
House. The Administration, instead, has sought reparations for Kuwait from
devastated Iraq.

Prospects for Arab-Israeli peace have been improved only a little. While Saudis
and Israelis shared the terror of being targeted by Iraqi Scud missiles during
the war, Riyadh and other coalition members today are resisting the
confidence-building measures being promoted by Mr. Baker on his tours of the
Middle East. And the Government of Yitzhak Shamir, though ready to endorse some
aspects of Mr. Baker's approach to setting up talks, is still resisting the
fundamental principle that underlies key United Nations resolutions -- trading
occupied territory for peace.

Perhaps most bitter of all to many Arab democrats is what they see as the Bush
Administration's endorsement of brutal dictatorship, even if it is still that of
Saddam Hussein, as the preferred form of government for Iraq. One uncomfortable
fact that the Administration had to contend with during the war was that with
the exception of Egypt, the Arab countries with the most active movements
seeking democratization -- Jordan, Yemen and Algeria -- opposed the use of
American forces to do battle with Iraq.  Edward Mortimer, a British analyst of
Arab affairs, commented in the latest issue of The New York Review of Books that
the Administration's standard seemed to be that "while dictatorship is regarded
as abnormal and in the last resort unacceptable if applied to Europeans, it is
assumed to be, for Arab and Muslim peoples, the only workable alternative to
traditional monarchy or to direct colonial rule by external powers."

Competing impulses weighed heavily on the Bush Administration last week as
American troops sought once more to keep the peace. Its repeated statements that
the Kurdish refugee rescue project would neither delay the homecoming of
American forces nor draw the United States even deeper into Iraq's tortured
politics reflected the enduring legacy of Vietnam -- a lingering fear of
entangling involvements in unwinnable or unpopular conflicts far from home.

In the end, that fear was overcome by worry that the victory in Iraq was being
sullied by seeming indifference to the plight of the Kurds, who had taken their
cue from American pleas for Iraqis to rise up against their despotic ruler and
whose straits now simply horrified many Americans. Mindful that the victorious
American forces had stood by while Saddam Hussein crushed the Kurds' rebellion,
Americans wanted President Bush to do something. So he did. But still American
officials made it clear that they would ultimately prefer for Iraq a
predictable, if nasty, dictator over an unpredictable effort to form a coalition
or democratic government that could yield to the "Lebanonization," or bloody
breakup, of Iraq.

This way of thinking, too, is nothing new. Through its support for the Shah in
Iran, its tilt toward Saddam Hussein during the Iran-Iraq war, or the new
reasons it has now found to work with the shrewd, patient and sometimes ruthless
President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, the United States has often shown that it
fears the consequences of encouraging democracy in the Arab Middle East.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: With plans to build and defend camps inside Iraq for Kurdish
refugees, Lieut. Gen. John Shalikashvili, left, commander of the American-led
operation, met with Iraqi Brig. Gen. Nishwan Danun, center, in Iraq on Friday.
(Pool photo via Associated Press)(pg. 1); Iraqi Kurds rushing a U.S. Marine
helicopter to snatch up supplies it was delivering last week to the refugee camp
in Isikveren, Turkey. (Les Stone/Sygma)(pg. 2)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 21, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SCIENCE FICTION

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1268 words


Futuristic fiction is supposed to be ahead of its time. Elizabeth Ann
Scarborough, who served as a nurse in the war in Vietnam, obviously wrote
NOTHING SACRED (Foundation/Doubleday, Cloth, $21.95; Paper, $10.95) before
Operation Desert Storm was conceived, but readers six months from now will have
no way of knowing that: her novel heralds a new subgenre that might be called
New World Order science fiction.

In the year 2069 the Pentagon has been subsumed into the North American
Continental Allied Forces (NACAF), which supplies professional soldiers to brush
fire war-makers around the world. NACAF allies are fighting on all three sides
of a conflict involving the Russians, the Chinese and the Indians. A NACAF
warrant officer, Viveka Jeng Vanachek, is shot down during an aerial mapping
mission in the mountains of Tibet. Taken captive by local guerrilla fighters,
she is imprisoned in a ruined lamasery, physically abused and brainwashed into
giving aid and comfort to the enemy. Or is she?

Cast in the form of a prison journal, this is one of those "don't believe
everything you read at first glance" narratives that get bogged down in their
own duplicity. Following the crisp opening chapter, the author wastes too many
pages trying to bring to life a situation that is, on the book's own terms,
unreal. Not only does the reader catch on long before the first-person narrator
does, but the writing itself seems brainwashed, lacking either the ring of truth
or the manic energy of a good lie.

Only when Ms. Scarborough (and Viveka's captors) drop the pretense and reveal
the true purpose of the prison camp does life return to the narrator and her
journal. The 42-year-old Viveka (Viv to her friends, of whom she has none when
the book begins) is an engaging sort once she has her wits about her, as when
she notes that "it's a form of cruelty to inflict comedy on the humorless." In
an overpopulated and increasingly suicidal world, her three undergraduate
degrees qualify her for no better employment than slinging fast food or being a
NACAF mercenary. But comes the revelation, her irrepressible flippancy nicely
undercuts the creeping pietism that seems to be an occupational hazard of
Tibetan sages.

                                    .  .  .

Not long ago the buzzword in science fiction was "extrapolation." This referred
to the consistency with which an author fleshed out a futuristic world from a
clear what-if? premise. A classic of extrapolation is Robert A. Heinlein's 1940
novel, "If This Goes On . . .," which posited an America run by a theocracy and
set itself the task of imagining, in some detail, how such a society would look
to one of its own members. The trouble with such books is that they tend to be
obsessive; the reader gets the feeling that none of the characters ever thinks
about anything else but the point the author is trying to make.

CARVE THE SKY (Morrow, $21.95) by Alexander Jablokov is one of a new breed of
novels (which includes works as different as "The Child Garden" by Geoff Ryman
and "The Ragged World" by Judith Moffett) that combine the virtues of what-if?
extrapolation with the messiness of real life. Mr. Jablokov sets his story on a
24th-century Earth that has emerged from some terrible times to give birth to a
newly vibrant culture not unlike 14th-century Burgundy. Mysterious organizations
like the Academia Sapientiae vie for power with the Gensekretarial Court of the
Union of States and Nationalities, whose Division of External Security employs
such worthies as Lord Monboddo, master of the House at Fresh Pond Verge,
Cambridge, Mass., and his seneschal, Anton Lindgren, in a ceaseless struggle for
ascendancy with the Technic Alliance, the Lunies, the Martians, the hard-nosed
crowd from the Asteroid Belt and a supposedly defunct cult known as the
Dispossessed Brethren of Christ.

If all this sounds confusing, not to worry. Did anyone in the 14th century
really understand all the nuances of the feudal system? Instead of worrying
about minutiae, Monboddo and his seneschal concentrate on important things like
art and its place in the precarious civilization they are trying to preserve.
The action -- and there is plenty of it, from street brawls in Naples to boar
hunts in the corridors of the Moon to a deadly showdown in deep space --
revolves around the provenance of a piece of sculpture only slightly longer than
a human hand. While it turns out to hold the key to humanity's future, for
Monboddo and Lindgren its beauty is as important as its power.

The influences on this fine first novel range from Alfred Bester to Umberto Eco,
but Mr. Jablokov has his own way with words, as in this intentionally flowery
quotation from a tale of deep space that forms part of the novel's cultural
background: "She thought of beauty, and of all she had been denied. . . . Her
eyes filled with tears, but the tears did not fall. Instead they moved about her
as she floated in the darkness, tiny liquid moons."

                                    .  .  .

THE SILICON MAN (Spectra/Bantam, Paper, $4.50) by Charles Platt is an oddly
bifurcated novel whose two sections read like excerpts from entirely different
books. What is even odder is that they come together in the end to form a
compelling narrative.

James Bayley, a dedicated agent in the Federal Bureau of Investigation's
Department of Technology-Related Crime, is tracking down the purveyors of some
nasty new handguns that can terminate brain function from a distance of 20 feet.
Before he can arrange for a collar, the not-so-mad scientists behind the weapon
kidnap him. Their leader, a disgruntled ex-60's idealist named Leo Gottbaum, has
invented a method of transferring a human personality to a computer in which,
barring a serious power outage, it will be immortal. Since the original human
being is killed in the process, Gottbaum wants to test it on a disposable
subject before using it on himself.

Up to this point, the book seems an entirely satisfactory specimen of a familiar
type, the high-tech detective story. But there are intimations that the author
has something else on his mind. Why does Mr. Platt take such care to evoke the
close family ties among Bayley, his wife, Sharon, and their 4-year-old son,
Damon, and to detail the bitter estrangement separating Gottbaum and his
31-year-old daughter, Yumi?

The answers become clear once Bayley, reconstituted inside a computer as an
"infomorph," discovers that there are virtually no limits to the experiences he
can have. The process has transferred all the functions of his nervous system,
including all his sensory functions, to the electronic circuitry and programmed
instructions that now hold the essence of his personality. If he wants to feel a
breeze on his nonexistent skin, he has only to think "breeze" and "skin" and he
feels it. If he wants to imagine himself standing 10 feet tall in Times Square
on New Year's Eve, he can do it. Are these experiences any less real than they
would be if he were still clothed in flesh? That is the 64-bit question Mr.
Platt addresses in the second half of the book.

I won't try to summarize his train of thought, other than to say that it is
philosophically and psychologically penetrating and that it leads to some
disturbing conclusions, especially when Gottbaum, the creator of the infomorph
universe, joins Bayley inside it. If love triumphs in a happy ending that seems
determined more by the desires of Mr. Platt than by the workings of his plot or
the thrust of his reasoning, that too seems only proper; authors, after all, are
the original infomorphs.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 21, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

POP MUSIC;
Mix-and-Match Music for a Zap! Age

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 2; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1847 words


On a Thursday afternoon at NBC's Studio 8H in Manhattan, Angelo Moore,
Fishbone's lead singer, was swinging from the rafters. Wearing a natty sharkskin
suit and pointed two-tone shoes rendered incongruous by his Mohawk haircut, he
climbed amplifiers, strolled on a ledge and dangled from the steel girders of
the "Saturday Night Live" set.

"He's already tested the whole set to see what's structural and what's not,"
said Fishbone's manager, Elliot Roberts.

For the band, it was a cramped stage, even if it did give Mr. Moore space to
toss his baritone saxophone, twirl a transparent cane, heel-and-toe-shuffle
sideways, drop to his knees like Al Jolson singing "Mammy" and race around the
risers. But there was barely room for his usual flips and somersaults, and no
crowd to leap into while he sang. The reaction was far less tumultuous than at
their previous New York City show, last July at the Palladium, where college-age
fans chanted "Fishbone!" while flailing and slamming on the packed dance floor.

Even so, the television cameras couldn't keep up with Mr. Moore, and the six
other band members weren't exactly standing still. Fishbone is hyperactive to
its core -- nearly as hyperactive as its music, which crams songs full of
everything from punk to gospel to heavy metal to funk to reggae. Six years after
its first album and about 13 years after the band got started, Fishbone's new
album, "The Reality of Our Surroundings" (Columbia), makes clear that they are
leaders and pioneers in a school of rock that doesn't have a name yet. As it
shakes up the old genres, Fishbone's music is busy testing what's structural and
what's not.

Billboard magazine has used the label "funk 'n' roll" for the music made by such
groups as Fishbone, Jane's Addiction, Living Colour, Faith No More, the Red Hot
Chili Peppers, the Royal Crescent Mob, Urban Dance Squad and Primus. But that
label oversimplifies the music, which has many more than two strands. The
emerging rock of the late 1980's and early 1990's is a stylistic free-for-all,
manic and raucous, melding some styles and crunching others together side by
side.

Since the early 1980's, rock has been changing under the pressure of hip-hop's
collages of samples, themselves a reflection of modern urban life's barrage of
information. Hip-hop disk jockeys can shift and layer styles as fast as they
change records on their turntables, and bands have been listening. In the new,
recombinant rock, the pacing has sped up to match the zap-around-the-dial
mentality of a generation brought up with electronic toys. For them, stylistic
purism can seem quaint and limiting. With a world at your fingertips, why not
try everything in reach? Maybe the music should be called zap-rock.

While innumerable bands still groom themselves to fit established categories,
rock evolves by hybridization and pilfering. The new bands accelerate the
process to warp speed. Faith No More's 1990 hit "Epic" was a rap/
metal/progressive-rock/mock-classical song; Fishbone's "Fight the Youth (With
Poisoned Minds)" merges the clanking bass lines of Yes, the syncopations and
horn-section riffs of Parliament-Funkadelic and the velocity of punk.

Performers' wardrobes telegraph the mix-and-match approach. Fishbone members
wear not just suits and Mohawks, but also neo-psychedelic colors, hip-hop jeans
and T-shirts, country overalls or the checkerboard patterns associated with ska
bands.

The new bands also refuse to typecast themselves with a single message. The
quick-changing music carries audacious lyrics, whether that means primal traumas
and taboo-tweaking from Jane's Addiction or heated political statements from
Living Colour and Fishbone. On each of Fishbone's albums, angry lyrics about
decaying inner cities mingle with hectic dance tunes and celebrations of lust.

For some bands, combining styles may be an attempt to appeal to as many of
rock's potential markets as possible. But for others, it's simply the way they
hear now. Fishbone plays as if it has soaked up a century of jazz and rock,
compacting them into songs so tightly wound they might explode.

"It's like a building," said Kendall Jones, Fishbone's guitarist and one of its
principal songwriters. "We have a foundation and we add floors as we progress,
but we can always travel freely through the building. And sometimes we try
indoor skydiving, too."

Fishbone got its start via school bus: as part of a desegregation program in the
late 1970's, junior high school students were bused from the housing projects of
South Central Los Angeles to the prosperous San Fernando Valley. There, the
future band members -- Kendall Jones, Phillip (Fish) Fisher (drums), his older
brother John Norwood Fisher (bass), Christopher Dowd (keyboards and trombone)
and Walter Adam Kibby II (trumpet) -- met Angelo Moore, who already lived in the
Valley. In his predominantly white neighborhood, Mr. Moore said, "I was the fly
in the buttermilk. I knew what it was to grow up and be black but not around
black people."

In a way, he was already a showman, acutely aware of the black entertainers'
images he now parodies on stage. "I would hang out Friday or Saturday nights in
the parking lots in the Valley, and everybody would be playing Led Zep from
their Camaros," he said. "And somebody would come up to me and say, 'Yo,
brother, do that real cool spade move; do that pop-locking move you was doing.'
And I'd go ahead and I'd do it, but a year later, I wondered why he felt he had
to talk to me like he was a black guy, and why he came to me to do that spin
move or that split move. It's been happening to me ever since elementary
school."

Like his affluent neighbors, Mr. Moore was a fan of punk rock and hard rock; his
new friends exposed him to funk, jazz and Fishbone's secret catalyst, gospel
music. "When Angelo first introduced me to punk-rock music, I thought it sounded
real sloppy," said Fish. "Of course it did -- that was part of what it was all
about -- but the beat was just falling apart. Where I had grown up, around the
church, the beat was locked up in the pocket, dead on it, real musical. Every
time we approach something like speed-metal or punk or upbeat ska, there's an
element of gospel in it."

Fishbone started performing in 1982 and released its first EP, "Party at Ground
Zero," in 1985. While the band already had its frantic stage presence, it came
across as a novelty act -- a late-breaking California sequel to the short-lived
English ska fad of the early 1980's. But with successive albums, "In Your Face"
(1986) and especially "Truth and Soul" (1988), Fishbone's songs grew tougher,
broader and harder to pin down. Fishbone wasn't just cute anymore; the songs
cackled and stomped and zoomed, yet the corrosive anger of "Subliminal Fascism"
and "Slow Bus Movin' (Howard Beach Party)" came through clearly. "It's a
two-in-one type thing," Mr. Moore said. "You can kick back and dance to the
music, but when you want to get informed, it's there."

Fishbone produced itself for the first time with "The Reality of Our
Surroundings." (Part of the three-year delay between albums was what Mr. Jones
calls "the producer shuffle.") The new album takes a step beyond "Truth and
Soul," moving away from fixed genres and embracing sonic grunge. On "Reality,"
Fishbone has traded crispness for dense, aggressive, bass-heavy arrangements
that have the grit of the hardest rap records, although the music has little to
do with hip-hop.

The spaces between instruments seem filled with distortion, vocal asides, stray
percussion, whoops and howls -- a rude pandemonium like the urban streetscapes
that Fishbone wants to conjure. The songs have muscle and they swing, but their
message is often bleak. "There's a war against blacks in the ghetto," Mr. Jones
said. "Like Vietnam and Korea and the Persian Gulf, it's called a police action,
but it's an undeclared war." "Sunless Saturday," the first single, cruises and
clanks like a Yes song, but Yes would shy away from its images: "I hear the
sounds of children laughing aloud/ A stumbling wino has attracted quite a
crowd."

In "So Many Millions (in the Neighborhood)," the narrator expresses ghetto
desperation bluntly: "I cannot get over legitimately." The song starts out like
a dissonant Parliament-Funkadelic march and grows ever more dense and
claustrophobic, as each hope is systematically destroyed. "You may have had a
chance to stop things before they start," the song charges. "But it's too late
because it's falling apart." "Junkies Prayer," spoken over ominous tape-looped
laughter, and the reggae-style "Pray to the Junkiemaker" pitilessly detail the
effects of crack addiction. The jaunty, music-hall bounce and waltz of
"Housework" carries the narrative of a latchkey child: "Pops is gone and mom's
workin' five and six days a week."

But Fishbone doesn't succumb to the deadly earnestness of protest songs. There's
too sure a beat, too much going on in the background, too much spunk; "Everyday
Sunshine" moves from despair to willed optimism and takes off with horns, organ
and call-and-response vocals like gospel by way of Sly and the Family Stone.

The album allows the possibility of fun amid the rubble. The honky-tonk funk of
"Naz-Tee May'en" proclaims "Ain't nothin' I'd rather be doin' than
hoochie-hoochie-hoochie-kooin'," while the eerie "Babyhead" works up an
elaborate candy/sex analogy. The zippy ska of "Pressure" warns, "You surely lie
when you get high on this pressure," but there's no denying the song's adrenalin
kicks.

Fishbone has had its own ideas for so long that the band is dubious about being
linked with any trend. "With a lot of contemporary artists that are
quote-unquote 'doing the funk-rock thing,' " Mr. Jones said, "it always sounds
like bad rap or a bad heavy-metal song, plus some of those slaps on the bass. It
doesn't sound cohesive to me."

Yet in the new rock, cohesion isn't as important as full-tilt momentum and the
pleasurable jolts that come with zapping between styles. Fishbone, meanwhile,
can concern itself with the more physical jolts that go with its pell-mell
performances. "Sometimes we collide, and we've got the bruises to prove it,"
said John Norwood Fisher.

Said Mr. Moore: "Sometimes I get impaled by Norwood's bass in my temple,
sometimes I collide with Kendall's guitar."

Added Fish: "And sometimes he'll get a drumstick in the back of his head. But
that's 'cause I'm mad when he doesn't move fast enough."

"Fighting Words From Fishbone"

And now another story of stolen faith and tragic glory
They claim to be your friends but all the while they taunt you with lies
They tell you what to think and how to face the world around you
You never question what you know
 inside is lax and untrue

Fight the youth
The youth with poisoned minds
Ignite the truth
Restore sight to these blind. . .
And if they suffer it's no fault
but their own.  -- From "Fight the Youth (With Poisoned Minds)"

Copyright (c) 1991, Bouillabaisse Music/Music Corp. of America (pg. 28)

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Fishbone, with the lead singer Angelo Moore (center)--pioneers
in a school of rock so new it doesn't have a name (Jack Vartoogian for The New
York Times) (pg. 1); Angelo Moore of Fishbone--a bleak message but the songs
have swing (Jack Vartoogian for The New York Times) (pg. 28)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 22, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1228 words



INTERNATIONAL A3-11

The Iraqi army began withdrawing from a swath of northern Iraq. Under orders
from the United States and its allies, two battalions left the area where
American forces are building a vast refugee camp. Page A1

The effort to return Kurdish refugees to Iraq moved forward with frantic haste.
But much about the project -- announced by President Bush last week -- remained
in doubt, including whether the Kurds would go. A8

From Iraq to Iran, Iran to Iraq and, hopefully, back again A8

In a century of exodus, the Kurds suffer in record time A9

The American military presence in Iraq to help aid the Kurdish refugees is
temporary, Defense Secretary Cheney and Vice President Quayle said, but they
declined to say when the soldiers would be withdrawn. A9

General Schwarzkopf returns home to a hero's welcome A9

The war has deeply scarred Baghdad -- though outwardly life there seems busy and
normal. The signs of the destruction caused by allied bombing, some obvious and
some almost imperceptable, are pervasive. A1

The effort to put out 500 oil-well fires in Kuwait is off to a slow start. With
fires extinguished in only 51 wells so far, relations between Kuwait and the
firefighters, most of them Americans, have become strained. A10

Fighting the oil-well fires, the frustrations pile up A10

Secretary of State Baker is trying to create a two-phase peace conference, with
Israel and its Arab neighbors meeting in main talks, and Israel and other Arab
countries discussing regional issues in side talks. A10

Israel acknowledges it has problems with Baker's initiative A11

Afghan rebels say missile killed 300 in rebel-controlled town A6

The Nicaraguan rebels are rearming in the northwestern mountains. The contras
say they feel betrayed because the Sandinistas still control the army and they
have not received land and tools promised them. A3

Canada's Prime Minister shuffles Cabinet ministers A3

Chancellor Helmut Kohl lost control of the government of his home state as
voters rebuked him for reversing pledges not to raise taxes. The loss will cost
his coalition its majority in the upper house of Parliament. A7

As the economy sags, President Gorbachev faces demands A5

News analysis: Gorbachev fails to woo Japanese business D1

Onna Journal: This battle of Okinawa silences the guns A4

NATIONAL A12-15, B6-8

The newest crop of college graduates face the bleakest job market in a decade,
especially in New York and the Northeast. Experts say the recession has shrunk
the pool of entry-level jobs by 30 percent from last year. A1

For one graduate, high hopes only met with rejections B6

The nation's farmers are concerned by predictions of a drop in farm profits,
despite the fact that last year their harvests were good, livestock profits
thrived and farmers enjoyed another year of record income. A15

The abundance of airline promotions offering reduced fares has generated much
consumer frustration. With airlines using a new booking strategy, many travelers
are finding the advertised fares very elusive. A1

Businesses are beginning to recycle or to expand recycling programs in response
to rising disposal fees and mounting government pressure. And many are finding
that recycling has unexpected benefits. A15

The fishing rights to coastal waters, long shared by any American with a boat,
are without fanfare being restricted. The Government is allowing regional
councils to give exclusive rights to the catch. A1

The secrecy around the space shuttle on military flights has been lifted. The
Defense Department is embarking on a mission unencumbered by classified
information -- a move that could save $80 million a year. A12

Questions raised about Sununu's trips aboard military aircraft A12

The idea of a national education test for students is being shaped to assess
critical thinking and problem solving. But the idea, which President Bush
advocated last week, is fraught with pitfalls and skepticism. A15

The legal battle begins in rape case at the Kennedy estate A14

Missouri Supreme Court to review of right-to-die case A14

Tampa Journal: Civic pride with a brush and a bucket A12

REGIONAL B1-4

A strike by building services workers -- including doormen and porters -- forced
apartment dwellers in New York City and Long Island to cope with carrying out
their own trash and running their own elevators. A1

A doorman loses his job to a strike, his classes to a protest B2

In one building, the strike is an inconvenience, not a disruption B2

A fire swept through a Bronx home, killing five members of a close-knit family
who had recently moved to New York City from Vietnam. Two other family members
suffered severe burns and other injuries. B1

Three people were shot to death in a restaurant in Lake Grove, L.I. One of the
victims, an off-duty Suffolk County police officer, apparently stumbled into a
domestic dispute at the restaurant. B3 A doctor is killed in Brooklyn trying to
stop a mugging B4

Political Memo: Governor Cuomo has frustrated city officials by sending what
they say are fuzzy signals about his positions on labor negotiations and whether
he opposes a state takeover of the city's finances. B1

New York at Work: Andrew Maloney has worked quietly out of the public's eye, but
as the man who would try John Gotti, the United States Attorney for the Eastern
District of New York has moved into full view. B1

New York Harbor's dank waterfront -- always overshadowed by the skyline --
attracted a different type of sightseer: members of the Steamship Historical
Society of America and the Tugboat Enthusiasts Society. B1

Crotona Journal: German engineering, Puerto Rican pride B3

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

Sports

Bruce McNall and Wayne Gretzky, the owner of the Los Angeles Kings and his star
player, have capped a series of big-money deals, inducing Raghib Ismail of Notre
Dame to play for their Canadian football team. A1

Baseball: Mets defeat Expos C1

White Sox win first at new Comiskey C4

Maas battles slump C5

Pirates beat Cubs, 13-12 C4

Basketball: Strategy changes in playoff season C8

Underdog Knicks look to Bulls C8

Column: Anderson on Rocket Ismail C7

Features: Sidelines C2

Question Box C8

Football: Cowboys take lineman as No. 1 pick C1

Focus on defensive players C1

Giants take Bunch, Michigan fullback C6

Jets select Nagle, Louisville passer C7

Golf: Six-shot victory for Nicklaus C3

Hockey: Exposure problems for N.H.L. playoffs C2

Tennis: Borg comeback draws the curious C9

Arts/Entertainment

Tribute to Audrey Hepburn C13

Oliver Smith and Ballet Theater C13

Theater: "Black Eagles" C13

"Ivy Rowe," a monodrama C15

Dance in Review C15

Word and Image:An opening for network series C13

"Today" co-host's start C16

Going rural on television C16

"Siro," novel of intrigue C18

Obituaries B12

Sean O'Faolain, writer

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A16

Braking the Soviet slide

How to save money on jails

Topics: Healthy fetal signs

Letters A16

William Safire: Shame of the statesA17

Anthony Lewis: Gangsters in charge A17

Lautenberg: Pulling the "green" over our eyes A17

Jeffrey M. Masson: My words, my case A17

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 22, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

5 Are Killed In House Fire In the Bronx

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 968 words


Tran Ba Suu survived a re-education camp in Vietnam, a high-seas escape from his
homeland and years of struggle to bring his relatives to his adopted country.
Early yesterday a fire whipped through his Bronx home, killing five members of
his close-knit extended clan and severely burning Mr. Suu.

The two-alarm fire at 2610 Grand Avenue in the Kingsbridge section incinerated
the 10-room Queen Anne-style house where 13 family members lived, said Tom
Kelly, a Fire Department spokesman.

Inside the charred hulk, whose roof had burned away, were the bodies of Mr.
Suu's mother-in-law, Ngo Thi Ky, 71 years old; his sisters-in-law, Tran Thi
Lyuen, 33, and Tran Thi Bach Mai, 37, and his nephews, Nguyen Duy Linh, 7, and
Nguyen Tran Thien An, 5. The five were among six relatives who had joined Mr.
Suu in this country a year and a half ago, said Tony Quan Pham, a family friend.


Smoke Detectors Helped

"He had a dream to bring the family over and to unite with them," Mr. Pham said.
"It came true for a year and now it's gone."

Mr. Suu suffered burns on his arms and face, while his brother-in-law, Nguyen
Thanh Quoc, was also injured. They were taken to Jacobi Hospital, where a
spokeswoman said they were in stable condition.

The fire started on the first floor of the three-story wood-frame house shortly
after 4 A.M. and took nearly three hours to control, Mr. Kelly said. More people
would have died, he said, except for the family's generous use of smoke
detectors throughout the house and their use of a chain-link safety ladder that
allowed Mr. Suu's wife and five children to clamber down to safety.

Mr. Pham said Mrs. Ky was awakened by the smell of smoke and woke Mr. Suu's
wife. Mrs. Suu scooped up her children, who range in age from 5 to 14, sent them
down the ladder and then followed them.

Thinking it was an electrical fire, Mr. Suu rushed downstairs to try to shut off
the electricity but was beaten back by the flames. He staggered to the street,
severely burned.

The shrill bleat of smoke detectors and the shrieks of people in the house
awakened neighbors on the quiet street. Angelo Moccia, a neighbor who was
already awake, heard the screams, but at first paid them little mind. "I thought
it was the bar crowd letting out," he said, referring to the taverns that line
Kingsbridge Road. "But then I heard screams that were more high pitched. It
sounded like kids."

Mr. Pham said Mr. Quoc, the brother-in-law, stumbled through the thick smoke on
the third floor, where he lived with his wife and two sons. Unable to find them,
he jumped from a third-floor window, bouncing off a second-story ledge before
landing, said Peter Scovetta, a neighbor who rushed across the street and
carried the injured man to safety.

By the time firefighters arrived -- within five minutes of the calls by
neighbors -- flames were shooting 25 feet above the house and licking at the
sides of two adjoining houses. Neighbors said the roar of the huge flames could
be heard a block away.

'A Very Hot Fire'

Mr. Scovetta said Mr. Suu and Mr. Quoc at first refused to go into the ambulance
while the fire was still burning. He said Mr. Suu was yelling for the others who
were still inside the house, while his children stood nearby looking stunned.

"It was a very hot fire," Mr. Kelly said, adding that the fire is believed to
have started accidentally.

Yesterday afternoon the scattered remains of children's clothing and school
notebooks lay in the debris. They were the few remaining signs of a family that
prized togetherness and schoolwork as the keys to success.

Mr. Suu had been a captain in the South Vietnamese Navy and spent several years
after the war in a re-education camp, Mr. Pham said. Shot and hospitalized after
an attempted escape, he managed to slip out of the hospital and take his wife
and two children by boat to Thailand, where they spent a year in a refugee camp.

After they arrived in this country in 1980, Mr. and Mrs. Suu were mugged in
their apartment twice at gunpoint. The family spent several years on public
assistance while he studied to be an electronics technician.

For the last five years, he has worked for the city as an electronics technician
on Wards Island. His children attend Catholic schools and his oldest daughter
studies at the Bronx High School of Science.

About a year and a half ago, Mr. Quoc and the five relatives who perished in the
fire joined Mr. Suu and his family. Mr. Suu had saved enough money to move into
the gray and white house on Grand Avenue, which he soon spruced up with white
oak paneling inside and old-fashioned wood doors in front.

"They had the neatest garbage on the block," Mr. Moccia said.

Neighbors said they often saw Mr. Suu working in his garden. The day before the
fire he had finished tilling the ground and planting sunflowers. That night, he
and a small gathering of friends and family celebrated his youngest son's
birthday.

Prayers of Remembrance

Last night at the Vietnamese Mass the families attended regularly at St.
Nicholas of Tolentine Roman Catholic Church, some 300 people gathered for a
somber service. "God console his family and offer him support in this time of
suffering," a priest said in Vietnamese. The special prayers of remembrance
echoed in the cavernous church as people wept softly.

"They were a beautiful Vietnamese family," said Mary Ann Kampwart, a neighbor
whose big dog, Sally, was a favorite playmate of the children. "When they moved
into the neighborhood they came around and introduced themselves to everyone."

Her eyes were red from crying all day.

"The screams were outrageous," she said, her voice choking. "I am an old woman
and I have never heard anything like that before, and I hope I never hear
anything like that again."

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of the Bronx highlighting 2610 Grand Avenue (pg. B4)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 22, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

25 Years Later, Honor for Audrey Hepburn

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1452 words

DATELINE: GENEVA


In 1966, Audrey Hepburn did what many working mothers would like to do: she gave
up her career so she would be there when her children came home from school
every day. And since the alternative was "being miserable" on movie sets, she
said, it was easily done.

Yet her decision broke the hearts of a generation of moviegoers for whom the
wide-eyed beauty of long limbs, innocent look and clipped English accent had
come to mean something special. They had, as Henry Higgins put it in "My Fair
Lady," grown accustomed to her face.

After her two sons grew up, though, Miss Hepburn again followed her instinct.
Instead of going back to acting, since 1988 she has been a special ambassador
for the United Nations Children's Fund, visiting destitute children in the third
world and raising funds in the developed world to help them.

But the legacy of her brief career is such that, today no less than in the
1950's and 1960's, the mere mention of Audrey Hepburn's name still evokes the
magic of such films as "Roman Holiday," "Breakfast at Tiffany's" and "Funny
Face" as well as the unique warmth of her presence on the screen.

On April 22, the Film Society of Lincoln Center pays tribute to this career in a
gala at Avery Fisher Hall in New York. Excerpts from her films will be shown,
while speakers will include the directors Billy Wilder and Stanley Donen and the
actors Gregory Peck, Alan Arkin and Tony Perkins, all of whom worked with Miss
Hepburn. Harry Belafonte will also speak about her work with Unicef.

Marvelous, but Terrifying

The tribute is part of the Film Society's series of annual homages that began in
1972 with Charlie Chaplin and has since included the likes of Fred Astaire, Bob
Hope, John Huston, Laurence Olivier, Elizabeth Taylor and Bette Davis. Last
year, James Stewart's career was honored.

"If they feel the body of my work is enough to be given an evening like this,
well, it's absolutely marvelous, but it's also absolutely terrifying," Miss
Hepburn said in a recent interview in Switzerland, where she has lived since
1964. "I've never been through anything like this before." Just in case she
blanks out, she said, she has written down her words of thanks.

Not that the world of cinema is now alien to her. She keeps in touch with old
friends from Hollywood and still loves watching movies. She also starred in
"Robin and Marian" in 1976 ("during my children's holidays") and had smaller
parts in "Bloodline" in 1979, in "They All Laughed" in 1981 and in Steven
Spielberg's "Always" last year.

But the Audrey Hepburn of popular memory dates back to the 22 films she made
between 1951 and 1966. She won an Academy Award for her first American-made
movie, "Roman Holiday," in 1954 and was nominated for an Oscar four more times
-- for "Sabrina," "The Nun's Story," "Breakfast at Tiffany's" and "Wait Until
Dark."

She also made an impact in her two appearances on Broadway. In 1951, playing the
title role in "Gigi" in the adaptation of Colette's novel, she was hailed by
Brooks Atkinson in The New York Times as "a young actress of charm, honesty and
talent." Three years later, she won a Tony Award for her performance in
"Ondine."

Today, as elegant as ever at the age of 61, Miss Hepburn said she was still
mystified by her success. Her career "sort of happened," she said, without a
plan, without driving ambition, with lots of fun and lots of luck. Backed by
talented actors, directors, writers and designers, she recalled, "there was
little left for me to do once I was in one of those movies."

Yet why, she was pressed, does she think she provoked such strong feelings of
empathy from her audiences? After all, she was not a sex symbol ("I sure
wasn't"), so what was it -- her beauty, her vulnerability, her sense of humor,
her sensitivity? -- that gave her that special aura?

"It's impossible for me to know," she said with hesitation, "but if you asked me
what I would like it to be, though it may sound presumptuous to say so, it's an
experience I've had with other performers who somehow make you open up to them.
For me, it always has to do with some kind of affection, love, a warmth."

"I myself was born with an enormous need for affection and a terrible need to
give it," she went on. "That's what I'd like to think maybe has been the appeal.
People have recognized something in me they have themselves -- the need to
receive affection and the need to give it. Does that sound soppy?"

In a long conversation, Miss Hepburn kept returning to her childhood to explain
her approach to life. Born in Belgium of a Dutch mother and an English father,
she spent her early years in England. But after her parents separated, she
returned to the Netherlands and went through the hardship and fear of World War
II under Nazi occupation..

Two Relatives Are Shot

"The rationing started and then, little by little, the reprisals began and the
resistance grew," she recalled. Her uncle and a cousin of her mother's were
shot, while a brother was sent to a labor camp in Germany. By the end of the
war, with no water or electricity in their home in Arnhem, she said, she and her
family were eating tulip bulbs to stay alive.

What kept her going, though, was her determination to become a dancer. She had
started lessons in England and tried to continue them in the Netherlands. After
the war, when she was 16, she won a scholarship at the Rambert Ballet School in
London. "My dream was to wear a tutu and dance at Covent Garden," she said, "but
I never thought I'd make it. I was too tall and I was far behind because of the
war."

Instead, Miss Hepburn soon was taking on fashion assignments and occasional
small parts in West End musicals. This led to small parts in some English
movies. And it was while shooting "Monte Carlo Baby" in 1951 in the French
Riviera that she was literally spotted on the beach by Colette as the ideal
person to play Gigi on Broadway.

William Wyler, who cast her alongside Gregory Peck in "Roman Holiday," did the
rest. And from then on, she starred in a succession of hits that ended with
"Wait Until Dark" in 1966. It was while shooting that movie that she decided to
stop acting. Sean, her son from her marriage to Mel Ferrer, had just started
school. "He was here and I was there and I was desperate," she said.

Luca, her second son, was born in 1970 of her marriage to an Italian
psychiatrist, Andrea Dotti. And while they kept a home in Rome until their
separation, her roots were always in her old farmhouse between Geneva and
Lausanne where she now lives with Robert Wolders, a Dutch former actor who was
previously married to Merle Oberon.

'My Fair Lady' a Favorite

Today she recalls her movie career without regrets. "It was always a rather
cheerful business, with lots of laughs and giggles and sweetness and caring,"
she said. "And we were a very close group. I made three films for Stanley Donen,
three for Willy Wyler and two for Billy Wilder."

She also worked alongside a parade of matinee idols several years her senior,
not only Gregory Peck, but also Gary Cooper, Cary Grant and Rex Harrison. As for
her favorite movie, she said, "it's like asking if I like chocolate cake more
than spaghetti." Then she added softly. "Perhaps it was 'My Fair Lady' because I
loved working with music. The reason I wanted to dance was because I loved
music. Music is the greatest helper in the world in all situations."

One movie she did not make was "The Diary of Anne Frank." Miss Hepburn said she
turned down George Stevens's invitation to play the doomed heroine because, she
recalled, "I could not deal with it."

Anne Frank's diary, she explained, described so many of the experiences that she
also had known in the Netherlands in World War II that just re-reading it was
almost too much. Yet last year, on a Unicef fund-raising occasion, she narrated
half an hour from the diary to the music of Michael Tilson Thomas.

Today, it is Unicef that consumes most of her energy. She has already made
grueling field trips to Ethiopia, the Sudan, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Mexico, Venezuela, Ecuador, Bangladesh and Vietnam. And much of the rest of the
time is given over to fund-raising, "talking my head off," as she put it. "I
just decided to do as much as possible in the time that I'm still up to it," she
said.

Yet her movie career keeps bringing her rewards. "I always love it when people
write me letters and say, I was having a rotten time and I just walked into a
cinema and saw one of your movies and it made such a difference," she said. "If
you want to be a little idealistic about the business other than just earning a
living, that's what you'd like, wouldn't you?"

NAME: Audrey Hepburn

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Audrey Hepburn, who will be honored by the Film Society of
Lincoln Center tonight. (Neal Boenzi/The New York Times); Above, Miss Hepburn in
"Sabrina." (Film Society of Lincoln Center) (pg. C13); Audrey Hepburn during a
1988 visit to Ethiopia as a special ambassador of the United Nations Children's
Fund. (John Isaac/Unicef) (pg. C18)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 23, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Richard Bolling, Missouri Liberal And U.S. House Insider, Dies at 74

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 882 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 22


Richard Bolling, who as a Representative from Missouri taught liberal Democrats
to use rules and caucuses to take control of the House, died here Sunday at the
age of 74.

Mr. Bolling apparently had a heart attack, said Representative Alan Wheat of
Kansas City, who succeeded the 17-term Missouri Congressman after he retired in
1982.

Mr. Bolling held a formal position of power, as chairman of the House Rules
Committee, for only his last four years in the House. He had lost votes for
leadership positions in 1962 and 1976. His sharp tongue, and especially his
barely disguised scorn for House Speaker John W. McCormack, were generally
credited with preventing his advancement.

As a lieutenant of Speaker Sam Rayburn, he was put on the Rules Committee in
1955, after only six years in the House, and came to wield vast influence. In
that post he fought the power of the committee's very conservative chairman,
Representative Howard W. Smith of Virginia, and Mr. Smith's Republican allies.

'The Liberals' Rayburn'

A longtime friend, Representative Morris K. Udall, Democrat of Arizona, once
called Mr. Bolling "the liberals' Rayburn," meaning he had his mentor's instinct
for effectiveness as an insider with a more liberal agenda.

Mr. Bolling worked with Mr. Rayburn to outflank Mr. Smith and win House passage
of the 1957 civil rights bill, the first since Reconstruction. Besides using the
rules, Mr. Bolling used outside pressure from civil rights and labor
organizations to insure a House majority.

He played a comparable role against Mr. Smith's opposition to the Civil Rights
Act of 1964, the measure that strengthened voting requirements, outlawed
discrimination, required Federal funds to be withheld from segregated school
systems, established the Justice Department's community relations service and
broadened the mandate of the Commission on Civil Rights.

A Critic Within the House

Mr. Bolling was one of the earliest and most vocal of the inside critics of the
way the House did business. In his book, "House Out of Order," published by E.P.
Dutton in 1965, he called for modifications of the seniority system so that
House Democrats could elect committee chairmen, and for open committee meetings.
With changes like these, he wrote, "I believe it is possible to restore
representative Government to the people of the United States."

Limits on seniority and open meetings were among the major changes in House
rules enacted in the early 1970's, with such younger Democratic representatives
as Mr. Udall, Donald Fraser of Minnesota, David R. Obey of Wisconsin and Thomas
S. Foley of Washington out in front and Mr. Bolling offering advice and help.

'Legislative Craftsman'

Today Mr. Foley, who advanced two years ago to the Speaker's role that Mr.
Bolling once sought, called the Congressman "a legislative craftsman of
unsurpassed skill, the wisest of counselors."

Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House majority leader, said
he had lost "a great friend and mentor." He said Mr. Bolling "was for civil
rights when drinking fountains and lunch counters were segregated, he was for
Congressional reform when power in the House was used to stifling new ideas."

Another ally, Mr. Obey, recalled today that Mr. Bolling had not only been frank
with his foes, but had also been "brutally honest with himself," acknowledging
that his bluntness cost him voters in leadership races. And, he said, Mr.
Bolling had the knack, with his friends, "to disabuse them of their own myths."
For instance, Mr. Obey said, Mr. Bolling demanded of opponents of the Vietnam
War to say what they were in favor of instead of what they opposed.

Besides the Rules Committee, Mr. Bolling served on the Joint Economic Committee.
He complained in 1981 that President Ronald Reagan was trying to impose a
"tyranny" on Congress through the budget process, which Mr. Bolling had helped
write into law in the previous decade. That year, Mr. Bolling announced that he
would retire to devote his time to writing.

Son of a Surgeon

Mr. Bolling was born in New York City May 17, 1916, the son of a surgeon from
Alabama. The family moved to Huntsville, Ala., when he was in a teen-ager, and
he earned bachelor's and master's degrees at the University of the South in
Sewanee, Tenn.

He had begun work on a doctorate at Vanderbilt University before entering the
Army in April 1941. He served four years in the Pacific and won the Legion of
Merit and the Bronze Star before leaving the service in 1946 as a lieutenant
colonel.

He found a job after the war at the University of Kansas City, where he advised
veterans, and was Midwest director of Americans for Democratic Action and
national vice chairman of the American Veterans Committee. With the Democratic
Pendergast machine in decline, he seized the opportunity to run for the House
and defeated the Republican incumbent, Albert L. Reeves Jr., on the coattails of
President Harry S. Truman, who swept Missouri.

He is survived by his wife, Nona; a daughter, Andrea Bolling; and two stepsons,
Jimmy and John Akin, all of Washington. A memorial service will be held at 4
P.M. Wednesday in Statuary Hall of the Capitol, and at 1 P.M. Friday at All
Souls Unitarian Church in Kansas City.

NAME: Richard Bolling

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 24, 1991, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

An obituary yesterday about former Representative Richard Bolling of Missouri
misidentified a survivor. Jimmy Akin is his stepdaughter, not his stepson.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard Bolling (The New York Times, 1981)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Powell Aide Named New Chief of West Point

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section B; Page 5; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 417 words


Lieut. Gen. Howard D. Graves, Assistant to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, was named yesterday as the next superintendent of the United States
Military Academy, from which he graduated 30 years ago.

His selection was announced yesterday in Washington by Secretary of Defense Dick
Cheney.

A Rhodes scholar, master parachutist and Army engineer with combat ribbons from
the Vietnam War, General Graves will step into his new assignment at West Point,
N.Y., in mid-July. He succeeds Lieut. Gen. Dave R. Palmer, who became
superintendent in 1986 and will retire at the age of 57, having spent 35 of
those years in the service.

General Graves, 51 years old, won his second-lieutenant's bars in the Corps of
Engineers in 1961. After that, he studied for three years at Rhodes House in
Oxford, England, earning Bachelor of Arts, Master of Arts and Master of Letters
degrees.

Combat Decorations

He then spent nine months in basic and advanced training at the United States
Army Engineer School at Fort Belvoir, Va., during the mid-1960's and later in
his career attended the Army Command and General Staff College at Fort
Leavenworth, Kan., and the Army War College at Carlisle Barracks, Pa.

He has returned to West Point before. He was an instructor and later associate
professor in the academy's department of social sciences for three years,
starting in June 1970.

As a major, he served as operations-and-training officer and later assistant
Division Engineer in Vietnam with the 8th Engineer Battalion (airmobile), 1st
Cavalry Division (airmobile), in 1968 and 1969. His combat decorations are a
Bronze Star Medal (with two oak-leaf clusters) and five Air Medals.

Other command assignments have taked him to the Dominican Republic, Germany,
Fort Bragg, N.C. and Fort Riley, Kan.

He reached flag rank as a brigadier in 1984 on assignment in Washington in the
operations and plans section of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He was awarded a
third star in July 1989 at the end of nearly two years as commandant of the Army
War College, a decade after he was a student there.

He took his place next to Gen. Colin L. Powell the same month. As Assistant to
the Chairman, General Graves has represented General Powell in inter-agency
policy making, particularly in the area of arms-control. Thus, he attended the
Bush-Gorbachev meetings in Malta, Washington and Helsinki, Finland. Most
recently, he accompanied Secretary of State James Baker to the Persian Gulf
region.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 25, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

New Faces, and New Roles, for the Police

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1812 words


Twenty years ago, the average American police officer was a white man from a
military background, without any college education. The handful of female
officers were not even allowed to ride in patrol cars after dark in some major
cities.

Today the police are more representative of the nation's racial makeup than many
institutions, including Congress. They are better educated than the typical
worker. And women do almost every job that men do. But those are not the only
things that have changed about police work.

The nature of the job has undergone a revolution, and, contrary to public
perception, statistics show that the streets of America are considerably less
deadly for police officers today than they were 20 years ago.

Last year 65 officers were killed in the line of duty -- the lowest number since
1968 and about half the peak rate of 120 officers a year in the early 1970's.
And now a typical police officer's day is spent settling family disputes and
doing other kinds of social work, answering calls that may go nowhere,
untangling traffic and filling out paperwork, said Comdr. Hugh Holton of the
Chicago Police Department, reflecting a sentiment expressed by other police
officers interviewed around the nation.

"Police work used to be like a laborer's job," said Commander Holton. "The only
real requirement was you had to be tough. Now, that's not what we're looking
for. You don't spend that much of your time actually fighting crime, I'd say
only 4 percent of the job."

As the nature of the job has changed, so has the typical police officer.

Image vs. Reality

According to studies by two police research agencies, the proportion of officers
with college degrees has more than quintupled in two decades: to 23 percent,
from less than 4 percent in 1970. And they are paid more money than the average
American worker -- with a median annual salary of $29,066 last year, as against
$21,580 for wage-earners as a whole, the Labor Department says. Police officers
widened that gap over the last decade.

"The job has become more complicated," Commander Holton said. "People are
demanding more. They want all kinds of services from us. It's come a long way
from the us-versus-them days."

While the streets are indeed less deadly for officers, police officials say a
single killing is too much. And there are variations from place to place: Some
cities have indeed become more violent. But in interviews around the nation,
officers and experts said nightly television images of military-style drug
busts, and constant talk about a "war" on crime has created an impression that
does not reflect modern reality among most of the nation's 500,000 police
officers.

The war image has also been used in defense of the videotaped beating of Rodney
G. King, the black motorist who was clubbed and kicked by white police officers
in Los Angeles last month.

With the spread of crack and the violence that has accompanied its sale and
distribution, the police are threatened as never before, the argument goes in
cities that experience a particularly high level of violence.

"There is a very thin line between the complete chaos of some of our cities and
civilization, and that thin line is our Police Department," said Father Robert
Rankin, who is the parish priest for Sgt. Stacey C. Koon, one of four Los
Angeles police officers charged in the beating of Mr. King.

Disputed Military Image

There are just as many police officers now per crime as there were 10 years ago.
And for all the talk about proliferation of semiautomatic assault weapons, most
police officers are still killed by ordinary handguns. Last year 48 of the 65
police shooting deaths were from small pistols. More officers were killed by
knives and fists than by shotguns.

"To cast the modern American police force in a military way -- as in the war on
drugs -- is wrong," said Darrel Stephens, director of the Police Executive
Research Forum, a nonprofit group that studies police issues. "It's not a proper
characterization."

When Commander Holton, a Vietnam veteran who has a master's degree, started in
police work in 1969, most police officers in Chicago were Irish-American. Now,
nearly 25 percent of the Chicago force is black.

'Everybody Called Us Pigs'

"It didn'tmatter what color you were, everybody called us pigs when I started
out," said Commander Holton, who is black. "We had to swallow a lot of insults."

Nationwide, Labor Department figures show that 13.5 percent of police officers
are black, higher than the civilian labor force average of 10.1 percent.
Hispanic officers make up 5.5 percent of the police departments in the nation,
as against 7.5 percent of the labor force.

There are very few Asian police officers, less than 1 percent, except in cities
like San Francisco and Seattle, where Asians are the dominant minority group.
Even then, it is difficult to recruit them.

"Among Asians, police work is not very well thought of," said a Chinese-American
officer, Ignatius Chinn, a 20-year-veteran of the Oakland Police Department, who
is beginning a new police job with the state of California.

'We Are the Community'

Police officers say they are no more or less racist than American society as a
whole. "Most cops are not rednecks," said Ed Striedinger, a homicide detective
in Seattle. "We are the community, whatever that racial makeup might be."

After interviewing 125 Chicago police officers for her new book, "What Cops
Know," (Villard Books), Connie Fletcher, a journalism professor at Loyola
University, found that police officers tend to develop prejudices against
whatever ethnic group commits most of the crimes in their precinct.

"One cop told me they end up with biases against the poorest people in whatever
town, be it blacks in Chicago, Hispanics in Los Angeles or Indians in the West,"
she said.

Mr. Striedinger said: "People don't call us when things are good. So all we see
is the bad stuff -- people doing awful things to each other. It's tough to
maintain a fair perspective."

Mr. Stephens, of the research forum, said the videotaped beating of Mr. King
created an impression that, "most police officers are brutal and racist, and
that nothing has changed over the last 25 years." But he added, "That's clearly
not the case."

Expanded Role of Women

Another change has taken place among police departments; there are now enough
women on police forces nationwide to fill a stadium: 41,148, according to the
1989 Federal survey. But Law enforcement is still a man's world. Women make only
about 8 percent of police officers.

As late as the mid-1970's, women had to wear heeled shoes on the job, were only
allowed to work with juvenile offenders, and in many cities, like Chicago, they
could not ride in patrol cars after dark. Often, they were kept out of more
dangerous police work because of minimum height, weight and strength
requirements, most of which have been replaced with tests that measure
endurance.

Now women serve on paramilitary police tactical squads, patrol in the most
crime-plagued parts of cities and make every sort of arrest. Their presence has
changed police work, many experts say. Along with the college graduates entering
police work, women are less likely to go along with the so-called Blue Wall, the
code of silence that keeps officers from testifying against one another in cases
of wrongdoing, according to people who study police behavior.

"Police recruiters used to be looking for somebody out of 'Starsky and Hutch,' "
said Rona Sampson, a former New York police officer who is a research consultant
on police affairs. "Now that police agencies realize that 95 percent of the job
has nothing to do with actually making arrests, they've come to value women
more."

But women are not immune from using excessive force. Ms. Fletcher identified a
tendency by some rookie female officers to over-react, trying to live up to a
tough image. "The cops call it the Dirty Harriet or Jane Wayne Syndrome," she
said. "You'll find that most brutality cases are with rookies, although not
necessarily women. They want to impress the older guys."

The ratio of police officers to citizens, about 2.1 officers for every 1,000
people, has stayed the same over the last 10 years, reflecting the hiring surge
that has kept up with population growth. But recruiters say that in contrast to
10 or 15 years ago, they are looking for a different type of person.

Recruiting Has Changed

"We used to use recruiting posters showing cops chasing somebody, advertising
that it was an exciting job," said John Stedman, a former police commander in
Alexandria, Va. "But 97 percent of the job has nothing to do with that. It's all
about knowing how to talk to people. We screen for drug use, criminal
background, but we don't do much screening for people who can get along with
other people."

Ms. Fletcher said, "What everybody kept telling me was that 99 percent of the
job is jawboning -- a good cop knows how to defuse the situation by talking it
out."

Still, the occasional adrenaline surge that comes with risk and pursuit are what
keeps many officers on the job, said Mr. Chinn, who until a few months ago was
an undercover agent in the most dangerous part of Oakland.

"No matter what anyone tells you about being burned out, or bored, cops like the
adrenaline rush," said Mr. Chinn. "The kind of job I had, even when I thought I
was going to get my head blown off, can be a lot of fun."

Perhaps because police work is unique, or because the pay has continued to rise
above the national average, there are far more job applicants than positions.
Nationwide, less than 10 percent of all people who apply for police work are
chosen. In Chicago last year, 30,000 people applied for 600 police jobs.

After passing civil service and physical endurance tests, police recruits are
sent to academies, where they may spend from 6 to 26 weeks learning about guns,
legal rights, investigative techniques and arrest procedures. In most cities,
rookies are placed on one-year probation. In the first three years on the job,
there is a high attrition rate, which personnel managers attribute to the gulf
between what a recruit expects of the job and the drudgery of daily work. There
is far less glamor or excitement than most recruits expect.

Police officers talk of receiving a "street degree," which comes only after
years on patrol. They say they develop their own world view, looking with
suspicion on people who fit a particular demographic profile, feeling that
nobody really understands them except other officers.

"They say that if you spend seven years as a cop, you can never really do
anything else," said Commander Holton, whose father was also a police officer.
"Even if you leave the department, you're a cop for life."

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Police work used to be like a laborer's job," said Comdr. Hugh
Holton of Chicago. "The only real requirement was you had to be tough. Now,
that's not what we're looking for. You don't spend that much of your time
actually fighting crime, I'd say only 4 percent of the job." (Steve Kagan for
The New York Times); "Most cops are not rednecks," said Ed Striedinger, a
homicide detective in Seattle. "We are the community, whatever that racial
makeup might be." (Matthew McVay for The New York Times) (pg. B10)

Graphs: "A Less Risky Job" shows number of felony slayings of police officers
per 10,000, from '65-'85. (Source: F.B.I. Uniform Crime Reports) (pg. A1);
"Reducing Danger" shows number of people killed by police officers in the U.S.
per million people from '70-'85. (Source: F.B.I. Uniform Crime Reports) (pg.
B10)

Charts: "Who Are the Police" shows percentage of men vs. women on the police
force; percentage of races (black, hispanic, white, other) on the police force;
median salary of police detectives and all workers; number of officers per
10,000 people in the U.S. from '65-'89. (Sources: F.B.I. Uniform Crime reports,
Labor Department, Census Bureau) (pg. B10)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 25, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Zany Styles, Serious Awards

BYLINE: By ELAINE LOUIE

SECTION: Section C; Page 10; Column 3; Home Desk

LENGTH: 768 words


A BLACK jacket woven of ribbon, a suede lace drawstring skirt and a mohair coat
with chenille "fur" cuffs and collars were some of the designs shown Tuesday
night by students of the Parsons School of Design at the 43d Fashion Critics
Awards show.

The show, which attracted more than 1,200 people, was held at the Marriott
Marquis Hotel in Manhattan and the proceeds benefited the school's scholarship
fund.

The clothes were designed by 66 seniors at Parsons. Sixteen students won 17 Gold
Thimble Awards. The awards are named for the fashion designers, including Adri,
Donald Brooks and Carmelo Pomodoro, who work with the students throughout the
school year and critique the finished clothes.

The designs ranged from rompers to ball gowns, but the main influence on the
students was the 60's, which ended before they were born. "The students think
the 60's were loose, carefree, Twiggy, makeup, dancing, music, Peter Max and
color," said Frank Rizzo, chairman of the school's department of fashion. The
students, he pointed out, forgot about Vietnam.

Lightheartedness prevailed, and yet the clothes showed the results of hard work.

Daniela Sarmento, who is from Belo Horizonte, Brazil, won the Isaac Mizrahi Gold
Thimble Award. Ms. Sarmento says she is enamored of texture and plain shapes.

"I wanted to weave a jacket that looked like a carpet," Ms. Sarmento told the
designer. She recalled his response: "Get a glass of wine, go to a ribbon store
and go crazy."

She bought 28 different ribbons made of rope, braid, satin, velvet, fake fur,
marabou feathers and pompons, laid them on a carpeted floor and wove them.

To hold the ribbons in place and keep the shape of the jacket, she used 650
straight pins.

One hundred and sixty hours later she had a jacket whose texture resembled a
carpet of rounded hills and valleys, with fluffy pompons descending to velvet
plains. "Isaac made me do this," Ms. Sarmento said. "Never again."

Ragnhild Ustaheim, from Oslo, won the Adri Gold Thimble Award for two linen
trapeze dresses designed for evening. Ms. Ustaheim learned that less is more.

Initially, she said, she was going to make a dress with "stripes, checks,
prints, embroidery and pompons." Then the fashion designer Adri gave her two
lengths of embroidered linen, one black, one white. Ms. Ustaheim re-embroidered
the fabric and made silk flowers on which she sewed sequins.

"It's still embroidered and sequined, but it's clean," Ms. Ustaheim said. "It's
white, white, white."

Calvin Klein gave Andrea Sheets, to whom he awarded his Gold Thimble, a
different lesson in minimalism. Ms. Sheets, who is from San Francisco, wanted to
make a suede lace drawstring skirt to be worn over a unitard. She had planned to
layer the suede so it would stand up at the waist.

"Calvin said it would have too much bulk, too much construction," Ms. Sheets
said. And so she and Mr. Klein doubled the material above the drawstring waist
so that pulling the waist tight would make the fabric stand up.

The unitard was to be made of ribbed jersey, but Mr. Klein said that that would
have been bulky. The solution was a smooth jersey.

Robert Best, who is from Bountiful, Utah, won the Designer of the Year Award.
For spring, Mr. Best, under the tutelage of Charlotte Neuville, designed a pink
satin hooded jacket to be worn over navy-blue sequined stretch pants.

For fall, Mr. Best made a brown wool crepe peplum jacket and a red bustle-back
silk faille skirt. The outfit seems to demand a pert, sassy attitude on the part
of the wearer.

The outfits that seemed the most outrageous were designed as part of an
elective, noncredit course in costume design, given each year by Mr.  Brooks.
This year, he asked the students to design costumes that combined the 20's, the
Ziegfeld Follies and animals.

Many models, dressed variously as a penguin, zebra, ostrich, poodle, toucan and
octopus, pranced down the runway. But a lobster won the Donald Brooks Gold
Thimble Award. The lobster, designed by Grace Fooden and Leighton Coleman 3d,
had claws two-and-a-half feet long, made of red-orange silk charmeuse.

Not quite as fanciful was the Parsons Award, which was given to Lee Abraham,
chairman of the Associated Merchandising Corporation, for his contributions to
the fashion industry over 47 years.

"His special concern, as a member of Parsons's board of governors for 14 years,
has been bringing the design and marketing sides of the industry closer
together," said Jonathan F. Fanton, president of the New School of Social
Research, of which Parsons is one of seven academic divisions.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Blue suede lace skirt designed by Andrea Sheets.; A lobster
costume by Grace Fooden and Leighton Coleman 3d won an award.; Fall outfit by
Robert Best, named the school's Designer of the Year. (Parsons School of Design)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 25, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Women's Magazines Take Top Awards

BYLINE: By DEIRDRE CARMODY

SECTION: Section C; Page 22; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 626 words


It was good day yesterday for women's magazines: Glamour won the National
Magazine Award for general excellence for magazines with a circulation of more
than one million and Family Circle won the award for public interest. They beat
out finalists that included Time, The New Yorker and U.S. News & World Report.

Women's magazines constantly battle an image of focusing only on what some
regard as frivolous or home-making subjects, so the awards were particularly
sweet. Jacqueline Leo, editor in chief of Family Circle, saluted the American
Society of Magazine Editors, who sponsor the awards, "because in recognizing our
achievement you salute and honor all women's magazines."

The award to Glamour, which also won in 1981, elicited a special round of
applause because Ruth Whitney, the magazine's editor in chief for 24 years and a
popular figure in the industry, has long presided over the awards. "It's fun to
give these out but it's more fun to get them," Ms. Whitney said after the
ceremony at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in Manhattan.

Glamour was praised for being "packed with valuable service targeted perfectly
to its readers," who are well-educated young women. It was cited for dealing
with tough subjects that included campus rape and a mother's rights versus fetal
rights.

Family Circle won for "Toxic Nightmare on Main Street," a detailed investigation
on toxic contamination in Jacksonville, Ark., by Stephanie Abarbanel that was
praised as a "daring and enlightening report."

The awards, which are now in their 25th year, are administered by the Columbia
University Graduate School of Journalism. The winners are chosen by a panel of
editors, art directors and journalism professors. This year there were 1,251
entries from 285 magazines. The awards were given out at a luncheon that drew
more than 1,200 people.

Of particular interest to that audience was the award for reporting, which went
to The New Yorker for "The World of Business: Deal of the Year," an analysis of
the merger of Time Inc. and Warner Communications by Connie Bruck. Several
tables of Time Warner editors and executives clapped politely when the award was
announced.

New York magazine and Conde Nast Traveler each won two awards. New York won an
award for Personal Service for "Sparing the Child," by Michael W. Robbins, about
child abuse, and an award for Special Interests for three articles by David
Denby, the critic, making sense of the dizzying array of stereo components
available to consumers.

Conde Nast Traveler won the general excellence award for magazines with 400,000
to one million circulation for its range of material from hard-hitting reports
on airline safety to elegant essays and striking photography. It also won the
Design award for overall excellence of its visual presentation.

The general excellence award for magazines in the 100,000 to 400,000 circulation
category went to Interview for its "dead-on timely magazine journalism." The
general excellence award for magazines under 100,000 circulation went to The New
Republic for "its weekly blend of passionate engagement, skeptical argument and
original reporting reinforced by a strong sense of values."

Other awards were Feature Writing to U.S. News & World Report for its special
report "Vietnam Story" by Joseph L. Galloway; Photography to National Geographic
and its editors Wilbur E. Garrett and William Graves; Fiction to Esquire for
three short stories by Saul Bellow, Rachel Ingalls and Reynolds Price; the
Essays and Criticism award to The Sciences for three essays by Hans Christian
von Baeyer, and the Single-Topic Issue award to The American Lawyer for "its
tough-minded look at the drug epidemic and the failure of the justice system to
control it."

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 25, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 22; Column 4; Style Desk

LENGTH: 173 words


"This is KATIE KELLY, not KITTY KELLEY," said the voice answering the phone
yesterday, with extreme precision.

Katie Kelly, the former television entertainment critic who is not the author of
the book about NANCY REAGAN, said: "For weeks I have been wondering why no one
will accept my phone calls. Even my neighbors who all know me are confused. They
think I'm Kitty Kelly and wonder why I don't repaint the front of my house, if I
have all that money."

What's more, she said, sometimes she is confused with KAITY TONG, a news anchor
with WABC-TV.

Actually, Katie Kelly has not been on television since she left NBC in December
1989. She spent most of last year in Vietnam tutoring Amerasian children before
she returned to New York in February. Now she is sponsoring PHUONG TUAN LE, 23,
and awaiting the arrival of two more young people in June.

"I will just have to put a lot more clothes rods in the closets," she said. She
will discuss her experiences at the Muhlenberg Library, 209 West 23d Street, on
May 2 at 7 P.M.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. to Give Vietnam $1 Million; Assistance Is First Since the War

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1173 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 25


The Bush Administration said today that it would provide financial assistance to
Hanoi for the first time since the Vietnam War, approving a small but
symbolically significant aid package for Vietnamese disabled during the
fighting.

The announcement that $1 million would be made available for artificial limbs
comes less than a week after the two nations agreed to open an office in Vietnam
to resolve the cases of American soldiers missing since the war. It represents
one more cautious step in a slow warming of relations that began two years ago.

Ties Hinge on Cooperation

Administration officials reiterated that an initiation of full diplomatic
relations or the lifting of a 15-year trade embargo would hinge on Hanoi's
cooperation in accounting for all missing American soldiers and in reaching a
diplomatic settlement to the civil war in Cambodia.

But in the statement announcing the aid, Richard H. Solomon, Assistant Secretary
of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, also pointedly expressed
appreciation for Vietnam's program of economic reforms.

State Department officials said the Agency for International Development would
funnel the $1 million in aid through private American humanitarian groups, which
will produce the artificial limbs in Vietnam.

The limbs will go to people who suffered their wounds during the Vietnam War,
including soldiers from the North and South Vietnamese armies, members of the
Vietcong and civilians.

Officials said the program would be similar to efforts for the disabled in
Afghanistan, Uganda and Mozambique. They said they could not estimate how many
people would be treated.

"It's a sign of new cooperation," said a State Department official who monitors
Vietnam. "But it is not a step toward resuming diplomatic relations." No
Government officials will be sent to Vietnam to work on the aid program, he
added.

Mr. Solomon told the Senate subcommittee on East Asian and Pacific affairs that
the United States had conditionally pledged aid involving artificial limbs and
child care in 1987, when Vietnamese and American officials first agreed to work
together on accounting for the missing soldiers.

"We have found some improvements in cooperation, but limited results," Mr.
Solomon said, "and Vietnam really needs to accelerate unilateral and joint
efforts to achieve the results we are seeking."

Role of Office in Hanoi

Referring to the temporary office on M.I.A.'s that will be opened in Hanoi, he
said: "It will have no diplomatic or political responsibilities, and should not
be seen as a first step in the normalization process. It can, however, help to
accelerate normalization once a Cambodia settlement is signed."

The United States still lists some 2,276 Americans as missing or unaccounted for
in the Vietnam War. Since August 1987, Vietnam has turned over more than 288
sets of remains, but only 117 have been identified as those of Americans. Most
of the others were judged not to be the remains of Americans or could not be
identified.

Ann Mills Griffiths, executive secretary of the National League of Families of
American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia, said the aid program was "a
very positive move," adding: "We are hopeful the temporary office may facilitate
greater results. But that is up to the Vietnamese."

Gen. John Vessey, the special envoy to Hanoi on prisoners of war and the
missing, has focused on 119 "discrepancy cases" in which the United States
believes that soldiers were seen alive after their planes were shot down or they
were otherwise separated from their units.

Progress in 13 Cases

Kenneth C. Quinn, a Deputy Assistant Secretary of State who is working with
General Vessey, told the Senate subcommittee that American-Vietnamese technical
teams had made progress in 13 of those cases by digging up remains and
retrieving other evidence.

Economic aid to Vietnam has long been a center of controversy. During
negotiations with the Carter Administration in 1977, Vietnam insisted that the
United States had an obligation to contribute billions of dollars toward the
country's postwar recovery.

The Vietnamese based their claim on two documents. One was the Paris cease-fire
agreement of 1973, which pledged American support for Vietnam's reconstruction.
The second was a letter sent by President Nixon to Prime Minister Pham Van Dong
after the cease-fire that reportedly pledged more than $4 billion in food and
reconstruction aid.

Neither the Ford nor the Carter Administration accepted Hanoi's argument,
maintaining that its invasion of South Vietnam in 1975 broke the cease-fire
agreement.

The prospect of diplomatic ties vanished in December 1978, when Vietnam invaded
Cambodia to overthrow the Khmer Rouge regime of Pol Pot. But relations slowly
began to improve in 1989, when Hanoi removed the last of 140,000 Vietnamese
combat troops from Cambodia.

Although Vietnam still provides a considerable number of military advisers to
Phnom Penh, the Bush Administration moved to increase cooperation last July by
opening talks with Hanoi on ways to make peace in Cambodia.

U.S. Licenses Aid Groups

Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d went a step further that month when he said
the Administration would encourage private American groups to offer humanitarian
aid to Vietnam. The Administration has since licensed 36 organizations or
individuals to provide $4.3 million in relief.

Administration policy drew a good deal of criticism today from both Republican
and Democratic senators.

Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, a Vietnam veteran and a Democratic critic
of the Administration's Vietnam policy, welcomed the announcement.  But the
senator, who will travel to Hanoi next week, suggested that the Administration
was "holding the people of Vietnam and our own relationship and our own benefits
that we gain from it a prisoner -- not just to our feelings about the Vietnam
War, but prisoner also to the Cambodian conflict."

He said the missing soldiers could be more rapidly accounted for if the
Administration expanded its trade and communications with Hanoi.

Senator Robert C. Smith, Republican of New Hampshire, asserted in testimony
before the subcommittee that United States intelligence agencies had not been
aggressive enough in following up "live sighting reports" of American servicemen
who could still be alive in Vietnam.

Talk of Sighting P.O.W.'s

Mr. Smith complained that the agencies had "repeatedly denied" Congressional
requests to review "first-hand accounts from refugees who say they have seen
American P.O.W.'s in captivity in Southeast Asia, some as recently as January
1991."

Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, said he agreed with Mr.
Smith. "I'm not criticizing Vietnam as much as I am our own Government," Mr.
Helms said, referring to information on the missing servicemen. "I've never
heard as much double-talk as I have gotten each time when you try to reason or
learn something from our Government."

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Assistant Secretary of State Richard H. Solomon announced aid
package for Vietnam. (Andrea Mohin for The New York Times) (pg. A7)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1216 words



INTERNATIONAL A3-9

The White House voiced skepticism over President Hussein's "agreement in
principle" with Iraqi Kurds and said that the Administration is still committed
to building camps for refugees in northern Iraq. Page A1

The Kurds, too, distrust the accord with President Hussein on Kurdish autonomy,
and even though many may face starvation in the mountains, it is not at all
clear that they will agree to return home. A1

News analysis: President Hussein has suppressed the Kurds, executed their
guerrilla leaders and razed their villages. So when he and Kurdish leaders
announced an accord, many Kurds were puzzled. A8

The United States extends safety zone in northern Iraq A8

For Kurdish refugees, a Saudi town instills hope A9

Iraq offered a conciliatory message to the allied nations. The new Prime
Minister, Saadun Hamadi, said Iraq was moving toward democracy and would meet
the United Nations terms for lifting sanctions. A9

The United States fears rising tension between Iraq and Iran A9 Five people are
killed in burning pool of oil in Kuwait A9

The Soviet Union agreed to support a Middle East peace conference with the
United States, Foreign Minister Bessmertnykh announced, adding momentum to
Secretary of State Baker's peace mission. A6

Pessimistic over peace, Israel adds to West Bank settlements A6

South Africa extends cutoff date for political prisoners A3

The Administration offered Vietnam $1 million in aid for those disabled during
the Vietnam War. The assistance, the first since the war ended, represents one
more step in the slow warming of relations. A1

President Gorbachev offered to quit as the leader of the Communist Party, but
the Central Committee voted overwhelmingly not to consider the offer, silencing
a chorus of invective from hard-line Communists.  A3

United States and Soviet Union near accord on arms treaty A7

Kourou Journal: Remaking things French far from France A4

NATIONAL A10-18, B6

Rupert Murdoch has agreed to sell many of his magazines in the United States,
including New York magazine, for more than $600 million. The Australian
publisher, who owns 20th Century Fox, will keep TV Guide. A1

Political Memo: Iowans are waiting for the 1992 Presidential campaign to begin.
Nobody thought it would be like 1988, but at a time in the season when they are
usually tiring of candidates, there are none to be found. A1

The Senate approved a spending plan for the next fiscal year totaling $1.4
trillion after rejecting efforts by Democrats to shift money from the Pentagon
to domestic health, education and welfare programs. B6

Dick Cheney outlines $70 billion in savings at the Pentagon B6

The Richmond, Calif., School District declared bankruptcy, 18 months after it
was singled out by the Bush Administration as a model for reform. The district
said it would close its doors after classes on Tuesday. A10

Government cuts Stanford University's payments sharply A10

Exxon said that it hoped to salvage the $1 billion civil portion of a proposed
legal settlement of the Exxon Valdez oil spill. A Federal judge threw out the
$100 criminal portion of the agreement on Wednesday. A10

Talks begin after the Government seizes orange juice A18

United States abortion rate fell 6 percent from 1980 to 1987 A12

A legal battle over the guardianship of a brain-damaged woman between her
parents and her lesbian lover ended when a district judge chose a third party to
act as the disabled woman's legal guardian. A12

Philadelphia settles lawsuit by survivor of police siege A12

Robbery investigation of motorist who was beaten is droppedA14

Five executives cleared in case of dangerous job conditions A14

The New York Times's publication of a profile of the woman who has accused
William Kennedy Smith of rape and the publication of the woman's name have
ignited a bitter debate over journalistic standards. A14

New evidence supporting cold fusion was announced by two teams of researchers.
Both published new theories explaining the phenomenon, which was hailed as a
major discovery but fell into disrepute. A18

NASA says the space shuttle's problems have been repaired A14

REGIONAL B1-5

The national junior chess champions are the Raging Rooks -- a chess team from
Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Junior High School in Harlem that beat 60 other teams,
including the defending champion, the Dalton school. A1

A surgeon who has the AIDS virus must inform patients, a judge in New Jersey
ruled. It is thought to be the first ruling to weigh the protection of a
doctor's confidentiality against a patient's right to know. B1

Mayor Dinkins asked commissioners to contemplate severe cuts considered almost
unthinkable only a few weeks ago -- from eliminating the city's recycling
program to closing branch libraries across the city. B1

Tensions mount as building workers' strike continues B3

On witness stand, former mob leader recalls life of crime B4

Students opposed to budget protests that have shut Borough of Manhattan
Community College sought to end the takeover by confronting the protesters.
Students at City College began discussions to end their protest. B1

A Bronx teacher is charged in rape of 13-year-old student B3

A defiant Larry Davis gets 25 years to life for 1986 murder B3

New Jersey's gun lobby is supporting a gun control measure in an effort to
weaken the current law -- which not only bans the sale of assault rifles but
also requires those who already have them to get rid of them. B1

Jurors in the Warmus trial tell the judge they are deadlocked B2

Bergen and Essex Counties agree on trash-disposal plan B5

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

Weekend

Carnegie Hall still the center of gravity C1

For Children C3

Simon & Schuster rejects book C28

Theater: "The Secret Garden" C1

On Stage, and Off C2

Film: At the Movies C6

"Spartacus" C6

"Drowning by Numbers" C8

Music: Mario Bauza, a concert at 80 C22

Dance: City Ballet's "Beauty" C1

Art: "Sculpture of Indonesia" C27

Auctions C22

Restaurants C20

Word and Image: TV Weekend C28

"Thicker Than Water" C30

NBC's "Expose" C30

Obituaries

Joseph S. Lord, a Federal judge D17

Laz Barrera, trainer of horse racing's Triple Crown winner D18

Law Page B9

At the Bar

Developers and others use new tool to quell protests

Overcoming historic ban on jury duty

Sports B10-16

Baseball: Yanks' starting rotation in disarray B13

A total loss for the Mets B11

Basketball: Knicks humiliated by Bulls B11

Old man Malone keeps it coming B13

Columns: Anderson on the Giants B14

Lipsyte on Ismail B11

Hockey: Penguins eliminate Capitals B16

Tennis: McEnroe rejoins Davis Cup team B15

Television: "Wide World" at 30 B14

Track and Field: Villanova women win medley relay B15

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A28

Soviet reform, revived

Judge Holland's surprise

A better way to honor Dr. King

No favors for China's gulags

Letters A28

Anthony Lewis: Court in a hurry A29

A. M. Rosenthal: The presence of heroes A29

James Leonard: Concessions or no, boot Hussein A29

Alfie Kohn: Competition vs. excellence A29

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Judge Joseph Lord 3d Dies at 78; Broke Will on All-White School

BYLINE: By GLENN FOWLER

SECTION: Section D; Page 17; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 425 words


Joseph S. Lord 3d, a senior judge of the Federal District Court in Philadelphia
who was known for his decisions on rights issues, died on Tuesday at
Presbyterian Hospital in Philadelphia. He was 78 years old and lived in the
Germantown section of Philadelphia.

He died of cardiac arrest, his family said.

Judge Lord was perhaps best known for a landmark decision that invalidated the
will of Stephen Girard, a merchant and financier of the American Revolution who
founded Girard College in 1831 as a free boarding school for "poor, white,
fatherless boys."

In a case brought by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People, Judge Lord ruled in 1967 that Girard could no longer refuse admission to
poor orphan boys "on the sole ground that they are not white." Today the student
body is predominantly black and one-third female.

Appointment to Bench

Judge Lord was born in Germantown and received bachelor's and law degrees from
the University of Pennsylvania, where he was captain of the boxing team in 1933.
He served as a Navy lieutenant commander in the Pacific in World War II and in
1946 he became a partner in the Philadelphia law firm of Richter, Lord & Levy.

After brief service as the United States Attorney in Philadelphia, he was named
to the Federal bench by President John F. Kennedy in 1961. In 29 years as a
district judge, he made many rulings that were unpopular with government
officials.

In 1970, Judge Lord allowed anti-Vietnam War groups to use John F. Kennedy
Stadium in Philadelphia for a rock concert; in 1971 he overturned a state law
that cut off loans or scholarships to students for "moral turpitude" and in 1972
he ruled that a national wiretap law was illegal.

An avid golfer, Judge Lord teed off in a game with John Cardinal Krol, the Roman
Catholic Archbishop of Philadephia, not long after issuing a decision
overturning a law long sought by the Cardinal that would have used state money
to reimburse parents of pupils in parochial and other nonpublic schools for
tuition.

When the judge asked what Cardinal Krol's handicap was, the Cardinal shot back:
"You are."

Judge Lord is survived by his wife, the former Helen Kaltenbacher; a daughter,
Mary Frances Halton of Plymouth Meeting, Pa.; two stepsons, Lawrence
Kaltenbacher of Glen Mills, Pa., and John Kaltenbacher of Blue Bell, Pa.; four
brothers, Judge Charles Lord of Common Pleas Court in Philadelphia; Edwin, of
Littleton, Colo., William, of Fort Wayne, Ind., and John, of Strafford, Pa., and
seven grandchildren.

NAME: Joseph S. Lord 3d

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Judge Joseph S. Lord 3d (United Press International, 1976)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 27, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1196 words



International 2-6

Kurdish refugees began returning to Iraq as allied troops took effective control
of the northern town of Zakho. But Kurdish rebels re-emerged from their mountain
hideouts and sought to stem the refugees' return. Page 1

American troops will stay in Iraq only "as long as it takes" to take care of the
refugees, President Bush said. He expressed doubts that President Hussein could
find peace with Iraq's ethnic and religious groups. 4

Kurd cuts a commanding figure for refugees and Americans 4

The failed uprising of Iraq's Shiites repeats the religious feud that has
dominated southern Iraq for a millennium. Karbala, the site of the original
clash between Shiites and Sunnis, is now occupied by tanks. 5

Iraq says it will disband army and end ban on travel 5

General Powell to the British: It's KOH-lin, not KAH-lin 5

Israel failed to give all the responses that Secretary of State Baker said he
needed to continue organizing an Arab-Israel conference. As a result, he said,
he and President Bush would have to reappraise the next step.  6

Muslim and Christian militias begin to disband in Lebanon 3

Ethiopian rebels continue to advance on the capital, Addis Ababa. With
Government troops retreating, the country appeared to be falling into anarchy.
The United States advised all Americans to leave. 3

Britain and Ireland clear way for talks on Northern Ireland 3

Anticipation of peace in Cambodia now seems to have been premature. A draft
treaty negotiated among the superpowers at the United Nations has caused
considerable nervousness in Phnom Pehn and Vietnam. 6

Moscow Journal: Where a millionaires' club is a rights group 2

National 8-12

More banks are effectively bankrupt than regulators had recognized and therefore
the Federal program that insures bank depositors is "nearly insolvent," the
nation's top auditor told the Senate Banking Committee. 1

The economy shrank more rapidly in the first three months of the year than it
did at the end of 1990, as national output recorded its first consecutive
quarters of decline since the recession of 1981-82. 1

Procter & Gamble agreed to change the name of a popular brand of orange juice.
The company said it would drop the word "fresh," which the Food and Drug
Administration had attacked as misleading. 1

Agriculture Department delays issuing pyramid of nutrition 9

In reverse, Congress goes to Detroit to woo automakers 8

The United States is wasting money on unnecessary military bases, Gen. Colin
Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said, adding that the Government
must be "vicious" in closing installations. 1

Navy submits to Congress plan to upgrade its fleet of planes 10

The nation's black mayors gathered in Cleveland, but their meeting was jolted
when they learned that the host, Mayor Michael White, had been summoned before a
grand jury investigating his business dealings. 8

An experimental school in Chicago has attracted national attention for its
success in integrating preschool Hispanic children with mental and physical
impairments into classes with students without disabilities. 8
 A debate over naming rape victims has divided an Iowa newspaper and a woman who
publicly told of being raped. At issue is a bill in the Legislature to bar the
release of a victim's name until an arrest is made. 11

Judge rejects request for review of law on naming rape victims 11

A twin of the giant Keck telescope in Hawaii will be built with a $74.6 million
grant from the W. M. Keck Foundation. The new telescope will operate in tandem
with the first, doubling the observatory's power. 9

Scientists in Arizona discover catacombs used by Indians 12

A series of fog-related auto accidents have safety agencies grouping for relief.
Officials meeting in Tennessee said they were aware of the danger, but that they
had rarely taken advantage of new technologies. 11

Band of tornadoes kills 28 in Kansas and Oklahoma 11

Strike in Montana spreads to state hospital workers 12

Regional 27-30

The protest that has crippled CUNY appeared on near collapse. The police stormed
Bronx Community College and recaptured it, and students at La Guardia Community
College abandoned their redoubts. 1

Students at La Nueva Raza Institute occupied the building when the marshal
arrived with eviction papers. The students, from 12 to 19 years old, vowed to
hold it until someone moved to save their bankrupt school. 27

Superintendent is suspended for not disclosing 1974 conviction 29

The building service workers' strike underlines the transformation of the board
that bargains for the building owners. Since the 1980's boom of conversions, the
apartment dwellers have become the landlords. 27

The drop-in centers for the homeless that Mayor Dinkins has praised as a
national model may fall to the ax of New York City's fiscal crisis. The proposed
closing of the eight centers would save $3.8 million a year. 27 The Apollo
Theater won a reprieve when its state and private lenders declared a six-month
moratorium on loan repayments. The theater was scheduled to close on June 1
because of severe financial problems. 29

A plan for a JFK-La Guardia rail link is unraveling 28

Base closings and weapons cutbacks are expected to shatter the economic base of
southeastern Connecticut, which depends more on military spending than almost
any other region in the country. 1

Is Governor Cuomo up and running? Mr. Cuomo said in an interview that he would
like to travel around the country denouncing the national government, sparking
speculation about his Presidential plans. Again. 28

Immigrant workers win lawsuit against Donald Trump 28

Jury acquits NYU graduate of inciting a riot last summer 28

Business DIgest 37

Arts/Entertainment
 Curb on imported Mayan artifacts16

Haiti recalls Graham Greene fondly 15

Theater: Joyce Carol Oates plays 14

Music: Sinopoli and the Philharmonic 15

Music in Review 18

Dance: Meredith Monk 15

Limon Dance Company 16

Consumer's World 52

When college financial aid is denied

Hybrid bicycles: the best of two styles

The newest electronic organizers

Obituaries 13

Carmine Coppola, conductor and composer for his son's films

A. B. Guthrie Jr., Pulitzer novelist

Jean-Baptiste Cerrone, manager of dance troupes

Sports 31-35

Baseball: Viola beats Pirates for third victory 31

Clemens penalties upheld 31

Yanks win in 11th 33

Basketball: Knicks face mountain of questions 31

Column: Berkow on Knicks 31

Features: SportsLeisure 35

Soccer: World Cup in New York still possible, barely 35

Track and Field: Razorbacks win a thriller 33

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials 24

The Court sets a death agenda

Safe sex, safe contraception

Taiwan belongs in GATT

A no-confidence vote for jails

Letters 24

Russell Baker: Tale for springtime 25

Tom Wicker: A fiery parallel?  25

Orville Schell: Capitalist slavery in China 25

Michael Oppenheimer: Climate catastrophe, the rerun 25

Robert Gangi: Throwing money down the jails 25

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 27, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Ruler Shrugs As Plan for Peace Stalls

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 579 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, April 25


Wide anticipation of an imminent settlement of the Cambodian war now seems to
have been premature.

Western governments have generally assumed that Phnom Penh's Vietnamese-backed
Government can not last more than a few years without a peace treaty ending
Chinese military aid to the Cambodian rebel alliance.

But a draft treaty carefully negotiated by the United States and other key
members of the United Nations Security Council, with little reference to Phnom
Penh's goals, has stirred nervousness here and in Hanoi. And the Cambodian
Government, however shaky, seems to think it can hold on.

It is politically impossible for any Cambodian faction to reject the United
Nations draft outright. But the Phnom Penh Government, concerned about
sovereignty, disarmament and a possible return of the Khmer Rouge guerrillas to
power, has proposed enough "amendments" to the plan to block it for some time or
even derail it.

From the perspective of Phnom Penh, the challenge from the rebel coalition is
far from dire, Cambodian officials and Eastern European diplomats say. They say
the Government may have much to gain from delaying a plan that would strip it of
much of its power and then hold elections that the regime is likely to lose.

"Many predicted doom for us when the Vietnamese troops withdrew" in September
1989, nearly 11 years after their invasion to unseat the Khmer Rouge, a senior
Cambodian official said. "But almost two years later, we're still here, and
we're managing pretty well."

Phnom Penh does not feel enough pressure to sign a risky peace. "Everyone is
tired of the war," a Soviet diplomat said. "But there is no hurry. This is not a
collapsible economy, and there isn't that much fighting."

Officially, the Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen and the chairman of the
National Assembly, Chea Sim, have accepted the United Nations plan as a treaty
"framework" and "a good basis" for negotiations.

But little talk has transpired since December between Phnom Penh and the United
Nations or among the Cambodians. A new meeting of the Supreme National Council,
which includes members of the Government and the three opposition factions, has
been expected since mid-April; now diplomats say it may not happen before June.

All sides have agreed to abide by United Nations calls for a cease-fire until
the meeting is held, but the rainy season brings a kind of truce anyway.

A sharp decrease this year in aid from the Soviet Union and other countries in
Eastern Europe has resulted in higher inflation, power cuts and a general
worsening in living conditions. But the Government has coped.

Militarily, the Khmer Rouge rebels have gained some ground in the dry season,
extending routes of communications and supplies.

But they have avoided big battles with the Government army, which is said to
have a "backstop" of at least several thousand Vietnamese troops.

Phnom Penh's Stake

"It's not a wonderful army," the Vietnamese Ambassador, Ngo Dien, said. "But it
seems enough to face the other side.

"The problem for the regime is not whether the solution is Communist or
non-Communist," he said, "but what happens to them and what they've built and
acquired in the last 10 years."

Vietnam maintains that its influence on Phnom Penh is waning, despite Western
pressure on Hanoi to push the Cambodians to settle. Conservatives in Hanoi,
including the army, are unhappy at the prospect of multiparty elections next
door.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. COMPANIES ARE NOT ALLOWED TO OFFER TOURS

BYLINE: BY NANCY SHARKEY

SECTION: Section 5; Page 29; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 423 words


Ever since a Connecticut travel agency was penalized more than $75,000 in 1989
for promoting trips to Vietnam, a violation of United States Treasury Department
law, American tour operators and veterans organizations have been loath to
challenge the regulation.

A Treasury Department spokeswoman, Barbara Clay, said that no American company
or Vietnam veterans organization had permission to operate tours to Vietnam.

One luxury tour operator, Abercrombie & Kent, in conjunction with Society
Expeditions, is set to offer a 17-day cruise along the Vietnam coast. "If and
when the U.S. Treasury Department lifts the embargo," said a spokeswoman, Janice
Wolf, "we'll be able to act as quickly as possible."

Tour operators are being careful to comply with Treasury Department regulations
because of the costly case waged against the Government by Lars-Eric Lindblad,
who owned the now-defunct Lindblad Travel Inc. Mr. Lindblad said the two-year
court battle, with its high legal fees, contributed to his firm's bankruptcy in
1989.

In 1987, Mr. Lindblad had received a special Treasury Department exemption
permitting groups of 15 to 18 to tour Vietnam. When the license expired, he
decided to challenge the law on constitutional grounds and offered another tour.
A Customs agent signed up and raided the company.

"Travel in my opinion is not ordinary trade," he explained after his final
appeal was exhausted. "Travel is a way of communication. To embargo travel is
like burning books or imprisoning journalists."

He also argued that the Treasury sanctions, issued under the 1917 Trading With
the Enemy Act, were inconsistent with the State Department's policy that permits
Americans with a valid visa to travel to Vietnam.

The Society Expeditions trip, planned for the line's 160-passenger Society
Adventurer and to be marketed by Abercrombie & Kent, would be the first private
cruise along the Vietnamese coast in 40 years. The tentative 17-day
Singapore-to-Hong Kong itinerary would include the Mekong River, Ho Chi Minh
City, Cam Ranh Bay, Quy Nanh, Danang, Hue, Haiphong and the Gulf of Tonkin,
Halong Bay, with a bus trip to Hanoi, and the Hainan Strait.

Prices are not set, but Ms. Wolf said a comparable 17-day Society Expeditions
cruise started at $4,600 to $6,400 for a standard cabin, excluding air fare.

The company's alternative cruise goes from Singapore to Hong Kong by way of
Borneo and Thailand. More information: Abercrombie & Kent, 1520 Kensington Road,
Oak Brook, Ill. 60521-2141; 800-323-7308.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Many Vietnamese, It's Still Saigon

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER;  STEVEN ERLANGER is the Bangkok bureau chief of The
New York Times.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 8; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 3436 words


IN Ho Chi Minh City, a lot of the bad old Saigon ways are back -- from the bar
girls and beggars to the pickpockets and motorcycle cowboys. But it's a new
generation, of course. The kids, who were barely talking when this city fell to
the North Vietnamese in April 1975 and the last American was choppered away,
seem to be hearing the siren song of the West through Japanese headphones
smuggled from Thailand or sent by relatives in the United States.

Vietnam's aging leadership is bewildered by the collapse of a socialist ideology
to which they have devoted their lives. Vietnam's youth, with little patience
for doctrine, has taken on its own ideology: "song voi," or living quickly.

This is especially true in the south, with a long and freewheeling capitalist
tradition. There was never much affection for socialism here, or for any other
form of order.

This makes Ho Chi Minh City -- still commonly referred to by the name of its
most prominent district, Saigon, which also remains the name of its gorgeous,
busy river -- a particularly interesting place to visit now, when Vietnam finds
itself caught between a crumbling authoritarianism and a resurgent
individualism.

For Americans, who are legally free to travel to Vietnam but prohibited from
doing business with the country, Saigon holds a deeper interest. The city
encapsulated the death of one kind of national dream and remains a metaphor for
unfinished healing. A Vietnamese friend says that Americans will never
completely come to terms with the Vietnam War, which was justified on abstract
grounds of "anti-Communism" and "standing up for freedom," until they come to
terms with Vietnam and the Vietnamese.  A visit here has provided many Americans
with that solace.

For others, it may provide a degree of self-satisfaction, because the influence
and presence of Vietnam's major socialist ally, the Soviet Union, is rapidly
falling away, the country is going through a transition -- more of a stumble,
really -- back to the West, with whom southern Vietnam always felt more
comfortable.

Whether it's tea dancing performed for the middle-aged and older, with French
dance music dating from the colonial years before 1954, or the extraordinary
sights at the new Superstar disco, out near Tan Son Nhut airport, with its
up-to-date sound system and lights, the direction is clear.

And there doesn't seem to be much the divided politburo in Hanoi can do.
Vietnam, like the rest of the region, is going to be dependent on its capitalist
neighbors and the West, and on their currencies.

So after a long period of nervousness about encouraging tourism, tourists are
now welcome. And Vietnam has gone to considerable if still insufficient lengths
to simplify its bureaucratic procedures, fix up its hotels, take some of the
ideological boilerplate out of its tours and, in general, treat inquisitive
strangers more like guests and less like "agents of the imperialists and their
henchmen," in the memorable phrase of one official guidebook to Ho Chi Minh
City, published in 1985.

Still, as ever, a bit of caution is always in order, even if street kids and
touts of all kinds generally greet big, sweating foreigners these days in
English instead of Russian. Some of these cute kids will want to sell you things
-- especially books, stamps and maps.

Others are likely just to be blunt, asking for money, rubbing their stomachs and
saying: "I'm hungry." Others may begin, after ascertaining your nationality, to
tell a long, discursive story of woe, which usually has to do with oppression
and re-education by the Communists after a long life of service to the
Americans.

A number of these stories are likely to be true, in full or at least in part.
But while you're standing there trying to decide, or trying to be polite but
firm, someone else may be feeling around for your wallet, or slicing open your
shoulder bag.

I've caught more than a few little hands digging around in my trouser pockets,
where I don't keep much cash. Other friends have had their sunglasses stolen
from their shirt pockets and their watches whipped off their wrists.

Also beware of street-corner moneychangers: they are excellent switchers of
bundles, and many visitors have found themselves with a wad of currency
consisting mostly of 200 dong notes (worth less than 3 cents) rather than 5,000
dong ones. The official rate is close to the free-market one anyway. There's no
reason to be paranoid, either. But in a phrase used by a new generation of
American soldiers in the Gulf, "Enjoy yourself, but don't let your watch stop."

Nor does it help to be too boisterously or obviously a rich stranger from the
United States. While Vietnamese, especially in the south, have maintained an
extraordinary affection for Americans and seem to like ready talk and easy
bonhomie, there are certainly some Vietnamese, their lives and families
disrupted or destroyed by the war and its aftermath, who are horrified that
Americans are wandering around again with those same big smiles.

A Vietnamese guide from the north told me of hiding in bomb shelters in Hanoi
from American planes and studying in the jungle; another spoke haltingly of
trying to give first aid to the dying; another, telling a recent incident,
described one villager screaming at another villager, who was talking to an
American television team: "How can you speak to these people who bombed us? I
helped pick pieces of your father from the coconut trees!"

In the interests of politeness, if nothing else, it is also a good idea to be a
bit reticent about politics, at least until you gauge the views and moods of
your questioners. Many Vietnamese, for instance, are embarrassed by the boat
people fleeing the poverty of home; others will want your advice on how to flee
themselves.

Vietnamese officials and tour guides, who do, after all, work for the state, are
generally patient, but probably don't like political proselytizing any more than
you do. Some, including some of the friendly cyclo, or pedicab, drivers, also
work for the police or the Interior Ministry and, as in every other country,
those who toil for these particular institutions tend to have a slightly
different sense of humor than everybody else.


FOR example, the gorgeous hill resort of Dalat, which means "city of love,"
where Theodore Roosevelt once maintained a hunting lodge some 200 miles from Ho
Chi Minh City, remains off-limits to American visitors. It seems, Vietnamese
officials say, that a group of American veterans created a sort of demonstration
on a visit there and offended the local authorities. Other Vietnamese say there
have also been antigovernment difficulties with the Montagnards, the ethnic
minority who fought so well for the Americans and the southern regime.

But so long as you really are just a curious tourist and obey obvious and easy
rules -- your visa is in order, your customs form is complete and you make sure
your hotel or tour guide registers you with the police in each city you visit --
you should have little difficulty.

Most Vietnamese will simply want to ensure that you're happy, and will go to
great lengths to please you, whether by hospitality or kindness.

Where in New York City, for example, can you get a massage at table?

One night, with friends and a stiff neck, I went for dinner at Madame Dai's.
Suzanne Dai is something of a legend: a Paris-trained lawyer, she was an
opposition member of the southern regime's National Assembly. After 1975, when
the practice of private law fell away under the new order, she began to serve
meals in the library of her law office at 84A Nguyen Du Street, near the Roman
Catholic Cathedral and in walking distance of most hotels. She calls the
restaurant La Bibliotheque (telephone: 99510), but it is really her salon,
filled with her friends, her cats, her still useless law books and some of the
antique ceramics she will be glad to discuss.

The food is decent enough, but one comes for the conversation (English works but
French is better) and the atmosphere. Mrs. Dai quickly ascertained that my neck
was giving me trouble, then called over a waitress. She ordered me to take off
my shirt and started massaging my neck, back and shoulders hard, with Najatox, a
Vietnamese ointment that contains a bit of snake venom. She finished off the
process with spoonlike instruments made of bone. It worked wonders, at least for
several hours. A meal for two, with wine, is about $10 to $15.


FOOD and service have improved a lot in the last few years, now that private
restaurants are legal and there is more money in private hands. With more
private farming, too, there is more fresh produce of good quality, and better
beef, though most of it is really water buffalo. The French bread, as ever, is
very good, as are the soups at street stalls.

For decent Vietnamese food, try the cafe or dining room of the refurbished
Continental Hotel, 132 Dong Khoi Street (the old Tu Do Street for Americans, and
Rue Catinat for Graham Greene and the French; telephone 99201). The traditional
Vietnamese spring rolls, cha gio, are particularly good here; dip them in nuoc
mam, the national seasoning, a clear, salty sauce made from fermented fish. Cha
ka, fish fillet on a bed of fresh dill, is also fine ($15 for two, with beer).

Dong Phat, 79-81 Nguyen Cong Tru Street, is a Chinese-Vietnamese place, popular
and cheap. The froglegs in garlic are good ($6 to $8 for two, with beer).

Bo bay mon, or "beef seven ways," another popular southern dish, usually begins
with a sort of beef fondue and ends with soup. Customers seek out their favorite
versions at different restaurants.

Currently the best restaurant in the city is Le Mekong, serving French cuisine
with Vietnamese highlights and owned in part by the family of an American
Vietnamese. Good crayfish ravioli and fish; the meat is probably the city's
finest, as is the service. (159 Ky Con Street, 91277; $20 for two without wine.)

It's nice to meet people for a drink at the Cyclo Bar of the Cuu Long Hotel,
once again being called the Majestic, at the river end of Dong Khoi Street ( 1
Dong Khoi Street, 95515). It's my favorite hotel in the city, with large rooms,
river views and a friendly and helpful staff, including telephone and telex
operators. Good rooms start at about $55, about $30 less than the Continental
and about half that of the Saigon Floating Hotel, a modern but soul-less
Australian-run place for businessmen anchored about a block upriver from the
Majestic.

The Rex Hotel (Ben Thanh), 141 Ngyuen Hue Street, has a nice rooftop bar with
odd topiary and good views over the city, especially at sunset. Many people also
like the nearby Caravelle Hotel, or Doc Lap, at the Lam Son Square end of Dong
Khoi.

Between the Majestic and the Caravelle, along Dong Khoi, are some of the city's
nicest and most expensive shops, especially for
antique (so they say) ceramics, lacquerware and embroidery. Walk and look, and
take a quick left-hand detour onto Nguyen Thiep Street. On the left -- after
Cafe Lan Thanh, known as the Casino Bar, an old G.I. hangout, are some nice
shops for embroidery and knickknacks, including the one at the Kodak sign. Ask
for Jean Nguyen Khac Doan, who speaks French and English and is friendly and
reliable.

Some of the ceramics are lovely and still good buys, if you bargain hard. Better
yet, have a Vietnamese do it for you while you
wait outside. But some people have had beautiful antiques taken from them by
Customs at the airport as national treasures, so beware.  Embroidered
tablecloths, placemats, napkins, nightgowns and children's clothing are nice and
comparatively cheap. There are also many old watches for sale from former
colonialists, including Soviets, and good fake Rolexes are common. Russian
caviar is a good buy, too (95 grams of beluga for $15), when it can be found.
Snake-venom rub (Najatox) is also available.

You can go most places on foot, along the wide boulevards with lots of trees
that are one of France's nicest legacies here. The tamarind trees in the small
park near the cathedral are especially nice, as is a stroll along the river.

You can go anywhere in the city by pedicab, and most of the drivers around the
hotels speak some English and want to learn more. I find the pedicabs, known as
cyclos, very relaxing. Take a cyclo on a tour of the sights -- everything is
closer than you imagine, from the river to the old Presidential Palace to the
old American Embassy (14 Le Duan Street), now an oil company. See the main
market of Cho Ben Thanh, and if you have time, the Vinh Nghiem Pagoda on Nguyen
Van Troi Street and some of the Chinese temples in Cholon (literally Big
Market), the city's Chinatown, and the Binh Tay market there. But get your
hotel's advice on current rates of payment for cyclos, and by all means settle
on a price beforehand. It can help to reserve a cyclo for the day.

The War Museum, on Vo Van Tan Street, is also worth a visit, to see the first
guillotine brought here from France as well as American tanks, artillery and
other instruments of war, including the infamous tiger cages of Con Dao island
prison. There are also embryos in jars said to have suffered from American
defoliants and a separate display devoted to China's millenium of depredations
against Vietnam.

You might also want to take a day trip to the beaches at Vung Tau, about two
hours away by car. There are many air-conditioned Japanese cars and vans
available for tourists, and drivers know how to put in a clean fuel pump when
the Soviet gasoline takes its toll. Southern roads, given the American love of
road building, are still quite good. The crab is good at the new Hai Au Hotel,
on Ha Long Street near Bai Dua beach. A first-class room is $30.

It is worth stressing, finally, that Vietnamese in general like Americans and
admire them, and quite a few people in Ho Chi Minh City now have relatives with
American passports, who are themselves coming back to visit in increasing
numbers.

In the elevator at the Rex Hotel one day, a Vietnamese woman in a silk dress,
lots of jewelry and an extraordinary coiffure asked my nationality. "I'm
American," I said.

"I'm American, too," she said, which is what I knew she would say, and which I
found moving in a way I still don't fully understand.

THE BASICS FOR PLANNING A TRIP

Making the Arrangements

While all the Thai tour companies are associated with the state company, Saigon
Tourist, it is possible to purchase only air tickets, visa and hotel of your
choice in advance, and travel independently during the day. Some companies
require only two people to make up a tour. One may contact Saigon Tourist
directly at 49 Le Thanh Ton Street, which crosses Dong Khoi. Telephone 30100,
30102, 98914.

One reliable firm is Diethelm Travel, Kian Gwan Building II, 140/1 Wireless
Road, Bangkok 10330. Telephone: (66-2) 255-9150. Fax: (66-2) 256-0248. Telex:
81183. It offers various Saigon tours ranging from 4 days/3 nights for $695 a
person double occupancy, including visa, airfare, hotel, food, tours, transfers,
to 8 days/7 nights for $1,140; also a Saigon-Hanoi tour of 7 days and 6 nights
for $1,250; and other Vietnam-Cambodia or Vietnam-Laos tours.

Contact a tour company well in advance of arrival in Bangkok, because it will
need personal and passport information (including photos and a $100 deposit) .

Exotissimo Travel offers a minimum of a two-night tour in Saigon for $570 a
person double occupancy, and an additional three nights for only $135 more, for
those who want to organize their own trips. Prices also include visa, airfares,
hotel, food, transfers and tours. They want passport information, photos and a
30 percent deposit 10 to 14 days before departure. Exotissimo is at 21/17
Sukhumvit Soi Nanatai 4, Bangkok 10110. Telephone (66-2) 253-5240. Fax: (66-2)
254-7683.

Air Vietnam

Travel on Hang Kong Vietnam -- Air Vietnam, known among connoisseurs as Hang On
Vietnam -- has the drawbacks in lack of comfort of any Soviet-equipped airline.

Do remember, however, on the plane or in the arrival hall, to fill out two
identical customs forms as well as a simpler police registration form.  Be
accurate on the customs forms, including how much cash you are carrying, your
camera, Walkman, jewelry, watch and so on. You will get back one copy and the
police form. Don't lose either. Since the nation is still highly security
conscious, the police form must be taken by the hotel or tour guide to be
stamped in each city you visit, or you may face arrest, a fine and possible
deportation.

You must reconfirm your ticket before departure. When leaving , you must fill
out another customs form, which officers will compare with the first.

Do not allow any film to go through Vietnam's primitive and very high-powered
X-ray machines.

Health Tips

Contact your doctor about any shots, and consider updating vaccinations and
getting a gamma-globulin shot against hepatitis A.

Take toilet paper, decent soap, fresh batteries and washable clothes. It's a
good idea to take a thermometer, aspirin, a strong anti-diarrheal medication, a
general antibiotic, antibiotic cream, bandages and a good insect repellent.

Reading

"The Vietnam Guidebook" by Barbara Cohen (Harper & Row; $16.95) is useful and
not yet too dated. For pleasure, Norman Lewis's "A Dragon Apparent" (Eland
Travel Classics; $11.95), offers the charming story of his Indochina journey of
1950; at the time, the French held sway and Norodom Sihanouk was teen-age King
of Cambodia. You might alsotake "A Quiet American," by the late Graham Greene
(Penguin; $4.95), who once lived across the street from the Continental Hotel
and used it to great effect in the novel.  S. E.

U.S. RESTRICTIONS
 While American citizens may travel to Vietnam, they must be careful how much
they spend there. No American travel agent is allowed to sell Vietnam tours
without a license from the Treasury Department. And while one may telephone the
United States from Vietnam, it is illegal to call Vietnam from the United
States.

These are all ramifications of the 1917 Trading With the Enemy Act, which
prohibits business with certain countries, currently including Vietnam,
Cambodia, North Korea and Cuba.

Under pressure from American businessmen and the Congress, relations between
Washington and Hanoi are improving slowly, with Washington recently offering
Vietnam a "road map" in stages to normal relations. But it is predicated on a
peace settlement in Cambodia, which the Vietnamese say would come more easily
once normal diplomatic relations are in place.

For now, then, American Embassy officials in Bangkok say these rules apply to
Americans visiting Vietnam:

* No more than $200 a day (this is plenty of purchasing power) may be spent
there.

* No more than $100 worth of Vietnamese merchandise, purchased for personal use
and put in accompanying baggage, may be taken back.

* Credit cards may not be used, an increasing burden, since many Vietnamese
hotels now take Visa. Hotels will not take a Visa card from an American passport
holder.

But the American dollar is the only foreign currency of any use in Vietnam, so
you must take in cash, including a fair number of small-denomination bills. You
may also use American Express Travelers Checks in many Vietnamese hotels,
especially in Ho Chi Minh City, but they are subject to a handling fee of 3 to 5
percent.

While food and drink may be paid for in Vietnamese dong, room, telephone and
telex charges must be paid for in dollars, and many merchants prefer them. Don't
change more than $40 or so at a time.

For all these reasons, it makes sense to pay for as much of your trip as
possible in Bangkok, where American credit cards are accepted, and receive
vouchers for transportation, room and meals. The $200 spending limit does not
apply to purchases in Thailand.

Getting a Visa

To get a tourist visa, the Vietnamese Embassy in Bangkok insists you must buy a
tour. Visas for group tours are issued routinely and should take no more than
two weeks. This is most efficiently done in Bangkok. A listing of agencies
appears on page 29. It is a good idea to begin applying for a visa by telephone,
telex or fax before you arrive. Visas for independent American tourists are
harder to obtain. While the Vietnamese Embassy charges only $14 for a tourist
visa, however, some tour companies will charge you $100 for the service. It is a
good idea to ask what the fee will be.  S. E.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: From left to right, pedicabs at the ferry landing on the Saigon
River (Ed Grazda); schoolchildren in Ho Chi Minh City (Steven Erlanger/The New
York Times), and a bar in the Kim Do Hotel with bust of Ho Chi Minh on counter.
Graham Greene lived in an annex across the street from the well-known Hotel
Continental. (pg. 8); Women at the Saigon River ferry, top and above left, and
traffic in Ho Chi Minh City, above right. (pg. 9); Young people of Ho Chi Minh
City are reverting to Western ways. (pg. 29)(Photographs by Ed Grazda)

Map of Vietnam showing location of Ho Chi Mihn City (pg. 9)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HUNGARY RESISTING MOSCOW'S SHADOW

BYLINE: By CELESTINE BOHLEN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 857 words

DATELINE: BUDAPEST, April 27


With two months to go before the last Soviet soldier leaves Hungary, the
Hungarian Government is pressing for a new relationship with its giant neighbor
that will be free of any lingering hint of Moscow's once-fast embrace.

In negotiations over a new bilateral treaty, Hungary has resisted language
proposed by Moscow that would ban either country from joining any alliance that
could be considered hostile to the other, or from allowing its national
"infrastructure" to be used by a potential aggressor against its neighbor.

Diplomats here say that both Poland and Czechoslovakia have raised similar
objections to clauses in Moscow's draft proposal for new bilateral ties with its
former allies, which some say could lead to the "Finlandization" of Eastern
Europe.

Language barring membership in hostile alliances was included in a treaty signed
recently between the Soviet Union and Romania. It was hailed by President
Mikhail S. Gorbachev as "a good building stone" for new security arrangements in
Eastern Europe.

The collapse of the Warsaw Pact military alliance has opened the way for Eastern
Europe's new democracies to redefine their relationship with the Soviet Union,
and to find new ways to guarantee their own security.

A Right Not to Tied to Moscow

In a recent interview, Jozsef Antall, Hungary's Prime Minister, said that
Budapest wants a treaty with Moscow that guarantees its right to enter into
groups and alliances of its own choosing, without any obligations to the Soviet
Union. Western officials have put a damper on Eastern European hopes that the
NATO umbrella might soon be extended eastward, but Mr. Antall said his
particular concern was Hungary's pursuit of membership in the European
Community.

"We cannot take on any obligation that could disturb the European Community," he
said. "We would not like to accept draft wording that would say we could not
join such a union."

Mr. Antall is expected to go to Moscow later this spring to sign the treaty, but
so far no date for the trip has been set. Hungary's center-right Government,
which celebrates its first year in power next month, has been criticized by the
opposition for failing to keep relations with Moscow on a smooth track.

In the interview, Mr. Antall stressed that Budapest wants "good-neighborly"
relations with Moscow, citing Hungary's pledge that its territory will not be
used as a staging area for any attack against the Soviet Union.

Doubts Security Concerns



Mr. Antall said he doubted that Moscow's ban on membership in "hostile"
alliances stems from real security concerns.

"What I think is that the Soviet Union prefers to have a security zone between
its borders and NATO," he said. "It is certain they are worried about being
isolated. Furthermore, it would be a big mistake to consider the Soviet Union as
representing one particular will. I am sure Mr. Gorbachev has different ideas
than some conservative groups or the leaders of the different republics."

Soviet troops are now on the way out of Hungary and Czechoslovakia. The deadline
for withdrawal from both countries is June 30, while 1994 is set as the deadline
for the final pullout from what was once East Germany.

Disbanding the old military and economic structures has not been easy for
Moscow. The final dissolution of Comecon, the old Soviet-led trading bloc, has
been held up several months after Hungary and other Eastern European members
objected to membership in a successor organization proposed by Moscow that would
have included Cuba, Vietnam and other Communist countries.

"This is a process that the Soviet Union obviously has to get used to," said Mr.
Antall. "It keeps protecting its own interests even while it is withdrawing."

Main Threat Is Instability



For Hungary, the main threat in the region today is not military attack, but
instability caused by economic crisis, social tensions and nationalist
flare-ups. Its solution is to criss-cross the region with bilateral treaties,
and add a thin protective layer of loosely-defined groups pledged to mutual
cooperation.

"We would find it detrimental if between a unified Germany and the Soviet Union,
there were a so-called scurity vacuum," Mr. Antall said. "One thing for sure, we
don't want to be neutral."

In recent months, Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia have moved closer together
on a number of issues, capping their cooperation with a summit meeting last
February at Visegrad, Hungary. These three countries have increasingly set
themselves apart from Romania and Bulgaria, two Balkan nations whose moves
toward a market economy and Western democratic institutions are seen to be
lagging behind.

Yet the three nations have been careful to avoid anything that could suggest a
regional security arrangment in the center of Europe. Mr. Antall said the three
are concerned that such a move could be interpreted -- both in the East and in
the West -- as an alternative to economic and political integration into western
Europe.

"It could be a dead end," said Mr. Antall of any attempt to set up a central
European treaty organization.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'To Kill or Not to Kill,' That Is the Question

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 10; Column 6; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 207 words


Following our recent great success in the gulf, we Americans may be tempted to
see war in a more positive light than we did after Vietnam. However. . . . Not
too much about the gulf war was "good." True, our technology worked wonderfully,
giving "war is hell" a new electronically enhanced, speed-of-light,
Nintendo-remote feeling. And we lost amazingly few "good guys" (if you hold the
definition strictly to Americans and allies).

One aspect, though, stands out as an unqualified success: Congress applied our
democratic principles in a way that set a new high-water mark for public
reasoning about when, why and how to go to war.

Now we're told that those in Congress who voted against the war are politically
dead. ["County G.O.P. Sets the Tone of Its '91 Campaign," March 24.] Which
suggests that, in the next crisis, there will be no debate before the headlong
charge to battle. Is that what Americans want?

Men of conscience spoke and voted on both sides of the war issue, as they were
elected to do, as they were moved to do. For the very soul of our country, I
pray we never stop electing men and women of wisdom, conviction and courage to
agonize over the question "to kill or not to kill."

DAVID M. CONNAUGHTON
Katonah

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
Seagal Packs More Than a Wallop

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13; Column 5; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 947 words


We may as well face the fact that our reigning action-movie star is a guy with a
scowl, a ponytail and an attitude he himself has referred to (while in
character, of course) as a "superior state of mind." We should also acknowledge
that Steven Seagal, whose first three films have had worldwide box-office and
video receipts totaling more than $200 million, and whose new "Out for Justice"
was the nation's top-grossing film last week, is someone to be reckoned with.

To those who maintain a polite distance from the whole bone-crunching genre, Mr.
Seagal may take a little explaining. He is big, handsome, imposing, colossally
confident and not quite like any other actor who has ever made a killing, so to
speak, in the action field. Only from afar would it be possible to confuse him
with someone like Jean-Claude Van Damme, a more typical self-defense star and
another recently arrived contender for the action crown.

The Belgian-born Mr. Van Damme (familiarly known as "the muscles from Brussels")
doesn't say much, and he functions as a conventional slugger. In the recent
"Lionheart," he played, believe it or not, a fugitive from the Foreign Legion
forced to make his living by fighting in bouts staged to entertain America's
idle rich. The far hipper and more exotic Mr. Seagal has even less in common
with this approach to martial arts than he does with the nice-guy, sheepishly
heroic Chuck Norris.

What Mr. Seagal (pronounced say-GAL) offers instead is a clever, uncategorizable
hybrid of physical prowess, fortune-cookie wisdom, law-and-order politics,
street-smart bravado and, above all, the confident, insouciant manner of a
natural-born star. Put him in the midst of a crowded Brooklyn street scene, as
"Out for Justice" does, and he can still manage to look more like a visiting
dignitary than the plainclothes police officer he's supposed to be. Granted,
when the plain clothes include a gold chain, a black vest (worn sans shirt) and
a black beret, inconspicuousness is probably out of the question. Ridiculousness
is a better bet, but Mr. Seagal has a brash assurance that's attractive, and it
extends well beyond anything a wardrobe department could devise.

Mr. Seagal's appeal also derives in part from his background, which his films
reflect. "Above the Law," his first feature, began with a series of baby
pictures and a biographical voice-over presenting the now-familiar facts: that
he became fascinated with martial arts at an early age, that as a teen-ager he
went to live in Japan, that he remained there for a long time and became a
sufficiently celebrated teacher of aikido to later meet the kinds of Hollywood
power brokers who might expedite his becoming an overnight movie star. The
"Above the Law" sketch leaves that last part out, but it is clearly an important
part of the story.

There is an element of mystery, too, since Mr. Seagal has described one of his
hobbies as "organizing special investigations and security task forces to
protect public figures," and since the plots of his films have often involved
long time gaps and peculiar personality changes. In "Above the Law" he began as
a C.I.A. operative in Vietnam and reappeared 20 years later in Chicago to expose
corruption among Governmen officials. In "Marked for Death," he was transformed
from a violent Federal drug agent into a simple, small-town soul. "Try to find
the gentle self inside you and allow that person to come back," he was advised
by the priest to whom he confessed his many sins. Of course, he was later forced
to wipe out a small army of Jamaican drug dealers, just to preserve his small
town's peace of mind.

In "Hard to Kill," he lost his family in a shootout and languished for seven
years in a coma before waking up and falling in love with his nurse (played by
Kelly LeBrock, Mr. Seagal's wife). Scenes in which he self-administered an
herbal cure and acupuncture to speed the healing process undoubtedly contributed
to the Seagal mystique.

There are also his teasing, mocking humor and his stylish strut, both of which
presumably make Mr. Seagal's appeal to women greater than that of the usual
action star. And there is the odd contrast between savagery and serenity: in
"Out for Justice," he gouges one villain with a corkscrew but also befriends an
abandoned puppy. Because he loves animals so very much, he feels obliged to
clobber the guy who abandoned his little dog.


Not even Mr. Seagal's more likable qualities are apt to make him palatable to
those who don't believe an argument should be settled with a meat cleaver, it's
true. His primary audience remains one that would be extremely disappointed to
see a Seagal film in which no one got hurt. And at present, playing a beloved
neighborhood hero named Gino Felino, he may be in danger of lapsing into
self-parody, since all four of his roles seem very similar despite their films'
wildly disparate plots. Even his trademark nonchalance ("If I find out you lied,
I'm gonna come back and kill you in your own kitchen," he remarks in "Out for
Justice") is beginning to wear thin.

It doesn't have to be so. Mr. Seagal, who has expressed a desire to break out of
the action genre, really does have the makings of a more versatile performer,
one whose sleek good looks, celebrity manner and easy humor are more than a
match for that ferocious frown. He also has an audience that will obviously
follow him anywhere. And he has a role model, if he chooses to notice it. If
Arnold Schwarzenegger is possible -- as a friend of small children, comic
talent, romantic leading man and world's most bankable screen actor -- then
Steven Seagal is possible, too.

NAME: Steven Seagal

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Steven Seagal in "Out for Justice"--Is he the next Arnold
Schwarzenegger? (Warner Brothers)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 28, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Mr. Scully's Architecture Class Is Dismissed

BYLINE: By JOHN TIERNEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 944 words

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN, April 27


Vincent Scully did not want to retire, but Yale University insisted, and so it
was time for the last lecture of the class he started teaching in 1947. He was
not expecting it to be all that different from the others until he arrived on
Friday to see that the audience more or less constituted the course title:
Modern Architecture.

Sitting there among the freshmen taking the introductory course was Philip
Johnson, 85 years old, the designer of the A.T. & T. Building and so much else.
Not far away was Maya Lin, 31, who designed the Vietnam War Memorial during her
senior year at Yale in 1981. Scattered around the auditorium were dozens of
other architects somewhere in between those two ages.

Their presence was probably best explained by David M. Childs, who is working on
two of the largest current projects in Manhattan, at Columbus Circle and on
Donald J. Trump's land along the Hudson River. Mr. Childs could not make it on
Friday -- he was busy on a building in Brussels -- but he sent along a letter:

"Thirty years ago a sophomore pre-med student went to listen to a 53b lecture.
One hour later, he decided to switch to a major in architecture. Thank you for
changing my life."

Mr. Scully took one look at the assemblage of architects, walked out the door to
compose his thoughts and then came back to the stage. "It's very hard to begin,"
he said. "I'm simply very intimidated." But then the lights went out, the slides
came on and he was in his element.

Mr. Scully has put forth his theories in many media -- 15 books, countless
articles, a series of public television programs that he narrated -- but it was
his course lectures that made him, in Philip Johnson's words, "the most
influential architecture teacher ever." The lectures consistently attracted
hundreds of students, many not even taking the class, and they customarily ended
with ovations.

The last one began quietly with talk about "contextuality" and "healing the
wounds that the modern age has inflicted upon our cities." Slides appeared of
new towns built during the last three decades in the suburbs of Paris -- places
with lakes dotted with concrete islands -- and soon he was waving the wooden
pointer in exasperation and rolling along in passionate cadences.

"They are without question . . . the most degraded setting for human life that
mankind has ever managed to throw together," he said. "So utterly and completely
degraded. So utterly without any order, without community, without a sense of
neighborhood. In some of these there aren't even any sidewalks."

There were sounds in the audience. Mr. Scully had them moaning about sidewalks.
He pointed to a row of houses covered with solar panels.

"Here is a fellow who wanted to do something about solar energy. So everything
about his house has to do with the reception of light. What it does, of course,
is utterly destroy the building's presence on the street." The architect had
forgotten about "buildings all getting along with each other."

"It looks like a world that's been chewed by rats," he said, and asked how a
people who built Paris could have gone so wrong.

The answer came when pictures of another development appeared. Mr. Scully
happened to be in some of the pictures, and he acknowledged his presence to be a
lamentable distraction, but he explained, "That's because they were taken by my
wife, who, not being an architect, feels that human beings should be in the
picture, too."

The audience applauded, and afterward the visiting architects said the sentiment
probably summed up Mr. Scully's career as well as anything.

"He gave you the feeling that architects should make a positive difference in
people's lives," said Ms. Lin. "He gave you a feeling of social responsibility,
and it influenced me when I did the Vietnam Memorial. I wanted to do something
that dealt not with politics or glory but that focused on individuals'
experience."

Mr. Scully was an early champion of historic preservation and crusaded against
1960's urban redevelopment schemes, particularly in New Haven, where he was born
70 years ago. He championed the work of Robert Venturi in the revolt against
abstract modernism -- the glass boxes on the Avenue of the Americas -- which
culminated in post-modern structures like Mr. Johnson's A.T. & T. Building.

'We All Want to Please Vince'

"His magnetic personality persuaded me time and time again," Mr. Johnson said.
"He opened our eyes."

The visiting architects represented a wide variety of styles and buildings --
Cesar Pelli and the World Financial Center, Kevin Roche's wings at the
Metropolitan Museum, Leon Krier and the new villages designed for Prince Charles
-- but they had one thing in common, said Robert A. M. Stern.

"In some deep nefarious way we all want to please Vince," said Mr. Stern, whose
shingle-style houses in the Hamptoms were inspired by "The Shingle Style and the
Stick Style," a book by Mr. Scully published in 1955. "He's a high moralist, and
he keeps reminding us of the high standards we have to live up to."

Mr. Scully seemed uncomfortable with both their praise and with being honored
upon his retirement. He had wanted to keep teaching, but Yale has mandatory
retirement at age 70. He will have an emeritus position next year, in which he
will teach a class, but not his famous introduction to modern architecture.

How did he feel when he got his first glimpse of the visiting architects?

"It was too much," he said. "One wants to get through the last lecture without
inflicting some terrible psychodrama of aging on the students. I was just hoping
these guys don't break me down."

NAME: Vincent Scully

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vincent Scully receiving a standing ovation Friday night after
his final lecture in Modern Architecture, a class he has been teaching since
1947 at Yale University. (Stephen Castagneto fo The New York Times) (pg. 30)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Shuttle's Crew Members: 5 Are on First Space Trip

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 639 words


Michael L. Coats
Mission Commander

Captain Coats, 45 years old, is a graduate of the United States Naval Academy
who grew up in Riverside, Calif. He became an astronaut in 1979, and this is his
third space flight.

Captain Coates has two master's degrees: in science and technology
administration from George Washington University in 1977 and in aeronautical
engineering from the Naval Postgraduate School in 1979.

Captain Coats flew 315 combat missions in Southeast Asia.

He and his wife, Diane, have a 17-year-old daughter, Laura, and a 12-year-old
son, Paul.

L. Blaine Hammond Jr.
Pilot

Lieutenant Colonel Hammond, 39, graduated from the Air Force Academy in 1974 and
received his wings at Reese Air Force Base, Tex., in 1975.

Since becoming an astronaut in 1985, Colonel Hammond has been assigned to
several technical projects. This is his first shuttle flight.

Colonel Hammond grew up in St. Louis. He obtained a master's degree in
engineering science and mechanics from the Georgia Institute of Technology in
1974.

He and his wife, Lela, have an 11-year-old daughter, Vanessa, and a 3-year-old
son, Michael.

Guion S. Bluford Jr.
Mission Specialist

Colonel Bluford, 48, is a member of the Air Force and a native of Philadelphia.
He graduated from Pennsylvania State University in 1964, and after earning his
wings the next year flew 144 combat missions in Vietnam.

He received a master's degree in aerospace engineering from the Air Force
Institute of Technology in 1974 and a doctorate in 1978. He also received a
master's degree in business administration from the University of Houston in
1987.

Colonel Bluford joined the space agency in 1979 and served on shuttle flights in
1983 and 1985. He and his wife, Linda, have two sons, Guion 3d, 26, and James,
25.

Gregory J. Harbaugh
Mission Specialist

Mr. Harbaugh, 35, became an astronaut in 1988, and this ishis first flight.

He grew up in Willoughby, Ohio and joined the space agency after graduating from
Purdue University in 1978 with a bachelor's degree in aeronautical engineering.
He received a master's degree in physical sciences from the University of
Houston in 1986.

Mr. Harbaugh has a commercial pilot's license. He and his wife, Carol, have two
daughters, Kelly, 3, and 10-month-old Dana.

Richard J. Hieb
Mission Specialist

Mr. Hieb, 35, was born in Jamestown, N.D. This is his first space flight.

A graduate of Northwest Nazarene College in 1977, Mr. Hieb received a master's
degree in aerospace engineering from the University of Colorado in 1979. That
year he joined the space agency, and became an astronaut in 1986.

He and his wife, Jeannie, have two children, a daughter, Lindsey, 4, and a son,
Jonathan, 1.

Donald R. McMonagle
Mission Specialist

Lieutenant Colonel McMonagle, 38, was born in Flint, Mich., and became an
astronaut in in 1988. This is his first space flight.

A graduate of the Air Force Academy in 1974, Colonel McMonagle attended test
pilot school in 1981, graduating as outstanding pilot in his class.

He received a master's degree in mechanical engineering from California State
University at Fresno in 1985. He and his wife, Janyce, have a 1-year-old
daughter, Heather.

Charles Lacy Veach
Mission Specialist

Mr. Veach, 46, considers Honolulu his hometown. He graduated from the Air Force
Academy in 1966 and served as a fighter pilot with a variety of assignments for
14 years, flying 275 combat missions in Southeast Asia and spending two years
with the Air Force demonstration squadron, the Thunderbirds.

He joined the space agency in 1982, working as an engineer, research pilot and
instructor pilot until his selection as an astronaut in 1984. This is his first
space flight. He and his wife, Alice, have two children, Marshall, 19, and
Katherine, 16.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of the space shuttle Discovery crew before liftoff at
Cape Canaveral, Fla. Clockwise from left were Lieut. Col. L. Blaine Hammond Jr.,
Lieut. Col. Donald R. McMonagle; Richard J. Hieb, partially obscured, Col. Guion
S. Bluford Jr.,center, Charles Lacy Veach, hidden by Gregory J. Harbaugh, second
from left, and Capt. Michael L. Coats. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

2 Welcomes For Veterans Of Gulf War

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 961 words


Amid cheers and tears, the Harlem Hellfighters received a rousing welcome
yesterday afternoon upon their return from the Persian Gulf war, while Nassau
County held a homecoming for its returning troops complete with brass bands and
fluttering flags.

Inside the 369th Regiment Armory in Harlem, the 123 returning members of the
719th Transportation Company of the New York National Guard entered wearing
camouflage fatigues and jaunty Australian-style floppy hats as relatives and
friends dressed in lace church dresses or crisp suits engulfed them in tight
hugs.

The armory is lined with photographs of the battalion's heroes, who were awarded
the Croix de Guerre in World War I, and the names of famous past battles.

Some veterans spoke not only of the new challenges they faced in the gulf but of
the old fears they expect to confront at home.

"I expect it to be a rough summer," said Capt. Dennis E. Bush, commanding
officer of the 719th and a police officer in East Harlem. "Sometimes I felt that
I was more safe there than on the streets of New York. At least there I knew who
the enemy was."

Without Adequate Training

Mayor David N. Dinkins said in remarks to the troops, "your tremendous
dedication and sacrifice, and your untold dignity and courage, pay tribute to
the highest ideals of this nation."

A transportation unit composed of middle-aged bus drivers, police officers and
Civil Service workers, the unit's members had complained on the eve of the war
that regular Army officers had little respect for their experience or tradition.

The members said they thought that they would ferry supplies in the rear, but
were stripped of their vehicles and men and posted near the Iraqi border without
adequate training.

A Pentagon investigation found no irregularities in how the unit was prepared or
deployed. The commander of the National Guard in New York State is still
investigating the accusations. No mention was made of it yesterday.

The city's other returning veterans will have to wait until June 10, when the
city plans what Mr. Dinkins called "the greatest ticker-tape parade" in the
city's history. The Mayor will have to settle for the distinction of having the
largest parade, since Nassau County upstaged the city yesterday.

"We're not competing," said Gregory Wynne, an aide to the Nassau County
Executive, Thomas Gulotta. "We're just first."

Mr. Gulotta originally predicted 50,000 people would watch the parade before
joining an extravaganza of music, speeches and song inside the Nassau Coliseum.
The Nassau County police estimated that from 20,000 to 25,000 people watched the
returning troops march. The returning troops were joined by veterans from
Vietnam, Korea and World War II.

"We really appreciate it," said Sgt. 1st Class Jim Kernan, of the 414th Civil
Affairs Company of Utica, N.Y. "Nassau County did an exceptional job especially
since a lot of us have been in the service many years and have come back many
times. But I've never come back to anything like this."

Along blocks lined with streams of flowing yellow ribbons and lampposts decked
with yellow bows, some spectators yelled out their thanks.

Veterans from many wars marched, including marines in sharp blue dress uniforms
and those from the Gulf in their tan desert fatigues. Color guards held their
flags stiffly aloft in the mild breeze, which also carried the strains of brass
bands and bagpipes.

Mr. Gulotta marched alongside the widow of Sgt. Joe Murphy of the Army, who was
the county's only resident to die in the war.

Mr. Gulotta first proposed the parade six weeks ago, when he placed
advertisements in local papers. Corporations donated goods and funds while
volunteer groups agreed to guide traffic and police officers on the routes.

Spectators who remembered the bitterness over the Vietnam War chased away those
disconcerting memories with the sight of yesterday's parade.

"During Vietnam, public opinion was against the Government and it was taken out
on the troops and that's wrong," said Jeff Mullalay, a Hicksville resident who
stood along the route with his wife and son.

Further along the route, a spectator held a sign reading "Come Home Soon" -- a
reminder that some families still had loved ones in the desert. Lisa Koshinski
needed no signs to remind her that her husband Capt. William Koshinski was still
overseas. She had been crying in a nearby parking lot before joining the parade.

"He's the one who needs to see this," she said. "I just hope the feelings are
like this when he returns."

In Harlem, Sgt. Joe Bradford sipped a rum and Coke and pondered another familiar
sentiment.

"Every soldier in the 719th is coming back to the same problems that were there
when we left the city," said Sergeant Bradford, who left his job as a truck
driver and is unsure where he will now find work.

"I'm just proud to be alive," he said.

The men were lauded from quarters as lofty as the Joint Chiefs of Staff, with
Gen. Colin L. Powell sending a letter of congratulations, to as local as a
Harlem junior high school.

At one point in the homecoming, a hand with a tiny American flag peeked through
the partition that bisected the armory. The wall separated the desert veterans
from veterans of another struggle -- the 150 homeless men who call the armory
home.

Four shelter residents stood by the end of the partition, a security guard
hemming them in.

Behind them, many of the shelter's residents slept, curled up in blankets atop
spartan cots. Others milled about or shot a game of pool, out of view of the
dignitaries and families.

"A lot of these guys had been in Vietnam," one of the homeless men said of the
others in the shelter. "See the kind of welcome they're getting now."

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The 719th Transportation Company as it returned to Harlem
yesterday from the gulf war. The soldiers bowed their heads during a prayer.
(Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times); In Nassau County, a parade was held on
Charles Lindbergh Boulevard near the Nassau Coliseum, to welcome returning
veterans. (Ruby Washington/The New York Times) (pg. B5)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Our Saigon Friends Still Need Help

BYLINE: By James Webb;  James Webb, Secretary of the Navy during the Reagan
Administration, is author of "Fields of Fire," a novel.

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1236 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va.


Sixteen years ago tomorrow, North Vietnamese tanks rolled into Saigon, ending a
struggling democracy and handing the U.S. its most complete international
humiliation. It is painful to recall how many Americans welcomed South Vietnam's
fall, believing the Communists' war effort was driven more by a desire for
national unification than by totalitarian ideology.

Those who accepted such assurances from Hanoi's leaders had some justification.
After all, "independence and freedom" had been Ho Chi Minh's slogan. The
Communist negotiators in Paris had shared a Nobel Peace Prize for the 1973
accords, which specified that "the South Vietnamese people's right to
self-determination is sacred, inalienable, and shall be respected." They said
that "the South Vietnamese people shall decide themselves the political future
of South Vietnam through genuinely free and democratic elections under
international supervision."

The results of North Vietnam's conquest were, of course, markedly different. The
Communists sent almost the entire young leadership of the South into
re-education camps, where many thousands died and the strongest languished for a
decade and more, only to return as virtual non-citizens. Even their children
still suffer discrimination; according to the International League for Human
Rights, one in three South Vietnamese is categorized as "compromised because of
family ties."

The Communist Government aligned itself closely with the Soviets and gave them
their first warm-water naval bases in the Pacific. It developed a disastrous
state-run economy that allowed no individual initiative and made Vietnam one of
the world's poorest nations.

Internally, it continues to preach hatred toward the U.S. and those who fought
alongside us. One need only visit the former residence of President Nguyen Van
Thieu -- now an "exhibition house" of U.S. "war crimes" -- to see how vitriolic
the propaganda remains.

These failed policies have caused unprecedented criticism from within the party,
which is struggling to find new solutions to the nation's problems. Respected
voices such as that of the now-exiled Bui Tin, an army colonel and deputy editor
of the party daily, and Nguyen Khac Vien, Vietnam's best-known historian, have
urged officials to embrace democratic freedoms or face, as Mr. Vien put it, "the
last chance of the party to continue its leading role." He said that "otherwise,
nothing can prevent its degeneration."

In response to the criticism and to reduced Soviet aid, Hanoi permitted economic
liberalization, which has stirred the beginnings of rejuvenation, particularly
in the south. But Hanoi has also intensified the repression of political
dissenters. The International League for Human Rights reports that a wave of
arrests that began a year ago has grown into the largest such campaign since
1975.

Nguyen Dan Que, a prominent physician arrested last June, has spent 10 of the
last 12 years imprisoned without charges for leading a nonviolent democracy
movement like those in Eastern Europe. When Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska
repeatedly asked to see him while visiting Vietnam this month, he was coolly
rebuffed by the chairman of the Council of Ministries, Do Muoi, and Interior
Minister Mai Chi Tho. I was with Senator Kerrey, and the official message
conveyed to me after a five-day wait was that Dr. Que was "recently arrested,"
that he was still "undergoing interrogation" and that it would be inappropriate
for him to be visited from "the outside."

That this decision came directly from the Interior Minister indicates how
tightly even nonviolent dissent is controlled. In other areas of national life,
Hanoi officially proclaims equal treatment of its citizens, but officials
implementing Government policy, carrying hatreds from the war, seem to practice
de facto apartheid: Those who served the former South Vietnamese Government and
their families are denied employment, education and medical benefits.

Bui Tin, frustrated with the lack of movement toward democracy, says the leaders
"don't need good advice -- they need psychiatric help." He says, "They are . . .
there for self-interest and not the common good." But Washington has not pressed
this issue; instead, it has focused on Vietnam's external affairs rather than on
demanding better treatment for those who fought alongside us.

For example, although the State Department announced last week that $1 million
will be earmarked for much-needed prosthetic aid for amputees in the south, it
received no guarantees that former South Vietnamese soldiers will get such help.

Richard H. Solomon, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific
Affairs, announced earlier this month that the normalization of U.S.-Vietnam
relations could begin as soon as Hanoi met two conditions -- that it help end
the Cambodian civil war and that it invigorate the effort to resolve the issue
of Americans still missing in action.

While both conditions are important, neither is relevant to the reasons we
severed relations in the first place. Nor will they help those who fought at our
side; Hanoi considers its treatment of those "compromised because of family
ties" an internal matter and has not put it on the table. But the plight of
those suffering because of loyalty to the U.S. is not a matter our negotiators
should waive. We simply cannot turn a blind eye to past commitments.

The restoration of relations with Vietnam involves complex emotional, diplomatic
and economic issues that are perhaps without precedent in our history. We have
never before abandoned an ally on the battlefield -- an ally, incidentally,
whose casualty rate was 40 times ours -- and not returned. It would be ironic if
we normalized relations as a reward for Vietnam's support of free elections in
Cambodia while not addressing the need for democracy -- and full equality -- in
Vietnam itself.

This is not to say normalization should not occur. There are sound humanitarian
and economic reasons to become involved in Vietnam again. Moreover, Vietnam's
loosening of economic restrictions has U.S. business worried that other
countries will make irreversible inroads.

Japan is exploiting the economic liberalization. Last year, 2,000 Japanese
Chamber of Commerce members visited Vietnam, and 15,000 are expected this year.
France, Singapore and Australia were visibly represented during my trip to Ho
Chi Minh City, which is beginning to radiate a hopeful vibrancy after the years
of war and internecine retaliation.

But unless an agreement that allows U.S. investment to flow freely into Vietnam
also guarantees that the benefits flow to all Vietnamese -- especially our
former allies and their families -- that agreement would be viewed as little
more than capitalist greed, a prop for the regime and reinforcement of the shame
felt by those who supported us.

Vietnam is the great unfinished morality play of our time. The main issue the
renewal of relations poses is whether we can sort through past errors while not
forgetting the sincere intentions of our failed effort to preserve South Vietnam
from Communism. The coming months offer Americans, no matter what their position
on the war, a chance to show respect for those whom we abandoned under fire,
keeping the faith when we did not. And many have paid grievously behind a wall
of silence whose terrors are only now beginning to be fully unveiled.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

From Being a Failure at Ballet To a Success in 'Miss Saigon'

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1091 words


In the 1970's, Hinton Battle was taking classes at New York City Ballet. He had
studied at the School of American Ballet, had already made his Broadway debut at
age 16 as the scarecrow in "The Wiz" and was hoping to dance for the master,
George Balanchine.

But Balanchine, City Ballet's co-founder and chief judge, ended the
5-foot-9-inch student's hopes with two words: "Too short."

"I was disappointed," Mr. Battle says. "But you go on. It might have been the
best thing he could have done for me."

It probably was. Mr. Battle soon began focusing on the theater, with impressive
results. He has won two Tony Awards as best supporting actor in a musical, for
"Sophisticated Ladies" in 1981 and "The Tap Dance Kid" in 1984. Now he is back
on the New York stage in "Miss Saigon," and he is considered a leading contender
for a third Tony nomination in that same category.

In Sin-Filled Bangkok

Mr. Battle plays John, the marine who introduces the show's two star-crossed
lovers -- his sergeant friend, Chris (Willy Falk), and a Vietnamese bar girl
named Kim (Lea Salonga) -- just before the fall of Saigon in 1975. Three years
later, John heads a committee to help the bui doi, the abandoned so-called
half-breed children fathered by American servicemen, and discovers Kim and her
child living with her former boss, the Engineer (Jonathan Pryce), in sin-filled
Bangkok.

His big show-stopping moment comes at the beginning of Act II, when he delivers
a rousing gospel-style plea, complete with choir and documentary-film clips, for
the homeless bui doi, the "children of the dust."

"I like his strength," Mr. Battle says of John. "I like his conviction. To me,
he's a real marine. He loves hard, plays hard, parties hard, works hard. He
carries through on everything he does. He's a real gutsy guy, with a lot of
heart. I like that in him."

Like his character, Mr. Battle doesn't like to sit still either. "It drives me
nuts," he says. "I've got to be doing something, writing music, thinking up
ideas, coming up with projects. And sometimes I'll go out and dance until the
sun comes up. But that's what's so hard about doing eight performances a week on
Broadway. When you do a show, you can't do things like that as much."

Disarray and a Dog

Mr. Battle is sitting in the living room of his 26th-floor apartment in the
Murray Hill section of Manhattan, his back to an unobstructed view west to the
clouds over the Hudson. The room is in a bit of disarray, with assorted objects
heaped on its spare modern furniture, in part because of his recent move from
Los Angeles and in part because of the arrival of a new roommate: Tama, a
Dalmatian puppy, who for the moment is confined to the kitchen, locked in by a
wooden gate.

"He's 3 1/2 months old, and he's untrained," Mr. Battle says of his new pet.
(The actor is less specific about his own age, which he gives as
"thirtysomething, like the television show." Based on his "Wiz" debut, he would
be in the neighborhood of 32 years old.)

In recent years, Mr. Battle has spent much of his time in Los Angeles. In fact,
he says, he almost turned down the role of John rather than return to New York.

"I was busy with a lot of projects out there," he says. "I was doing quite well.
I had set up house and everything, and I thought: 'Oh, man, if I take the part
I'll have to get rid of the car. I'll have to close down one house and open up
another. So much trouble. And after all, it wasn't the lead role."

But in the end, he says, it was the show itself and the quality of the part that
led him back East.

"It was a different kind of role for me," says the performer, who until now has
been better known for his dancing than for his singing. "One that New York
audiences haven't seen me do. There's no dancing. It's all singing and acting,
and I thought it would be good to do something new."

A Plan Goes Awry

Mr. Battle was born in West Germany, where his father was serving in the
military. His family traveled around before settling in Washington, where he
first began studying for the ballet. Dance had been on his mind from an early
age, and he attended the School of American Ballet with the hope of joining City
Ballet.

He took a job in "The Wiz" in 1975, he says, to pay for his schooling.
Afterward, he decided that maybe he wanted to do ballet again. Then came the
encounter with Balanchine, and then a year as a soloist with Dance Theater of
Harlem. But in 1978, he returned to Broadway, in Bob Fosse's "Dancin'." And he
remained for a while, garnering those two Tonys.

After portraying the dancing uncle of "The Tap Dance Kid," Mr. Battle decided to
take a break from the New York stage. "I purposely stayed away," he says. "I got
kind of burned out. 'Tap Dance Kid' was a really hard show, and I also wanted to
branch out and do other things. I was getting into choreography. I got tired of
performing all the time."

He choreographed for Anita Baker and Sister Sledge, among others, acted on
television and in 1988 starred in the "Sophisticated Ladies" tour of the Soviet
Union. He choreographed rock videos and last year appeared at the Kennedy Center
in Washington in "Stardust," a musical production that didn't make it to
Broadway.

'Please Make It Work'

"Choreographing is a whole different feeling," he says. "You create it, you give
it to the dancers and they have to bring it to life. And meanwhile, you're
standing backstage and thinking, 'My life is in your hands; please make it
work.' "

When the call came for "Miss Saigon," Mr. Battle says, he was spending his days
choreographing and acting in a television musical series called "The Boys,"
which had just gone into production but which was abruptly canceled when two
other musical series, "Cop Rock" and "Hull High," did not do well. At night, he
was choreographing and performing in a show with the singer Joni Mitchell.

Despite the cancellation, he says, he still had those doubts about returning to
New York. It's clear that he has left at least a little bit of his heart in Los
Angeles.

"When I first moved out there, I hated it," he says. "But after I lived there
for a while, I really started to like it. As someone said, 'In New York, you
exist; in L.A., you live.' "

On the other hand, he says, he is happy that he made the decision. "New York has
other elements that Los Angeles can't match," he says. "There's that surprise,
that excitement. Something exciting is always happening in New York."

Like Hinton Battle performing in "Miss Saigon."

NAME: Hinton Battle

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hinton Battle in apartment on East 38th Street. (William E.
Sauro/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 30, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Blocs Battle to Draw Chinatown's New Council Map

BYLINE: By FELICIA R. LEE

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1523 words


In a Chinatown garment factory, where scraps of cloth clutter the floor like
vegetation, Margaret Chin is working the room. For most of the women at the
sewing machines Ms. Chin represents their vision of the future: She hopes to
become the first Asian-American member of the New York City Council.

"There are a lot of things I don't know," said Ly Phung Quan, an employee at the
factory who came to America from Vietnam. "I ask Margaret for help and she helps
me."

But Ms. Chin's quest for elective office is far more complex than is apparent
from a morning round of handshakes and appeals for voter registration.

In many ways, her candidacy is emblematic of the city's redistricting. The
political and racial complexities that permeate her manuevering to get a
predominantly Asian-American district are being played out in neighborhoods
across the city, as well as on the New York City Districting Commission itself.

Districting Commission Can't Agree

The 15 members of the commission, which is charged with increasing the current
35 Council districts to 51, are battling one another as they work to draw the
lines that will shape the city's legislature well into the next century.

Yesterday, just two days before the deadline for submitting a preliminary plan,
the commission said it was so divided that it would submit competing maps for
several areas. [Page B4.]

The entire process has been an object lesson in contradictions and questions.

In areas like Chinatown where nonwhite minority residents do not have enough
voters for a bloc, should they form coalitions with whites, as Ms. Chin hopes to
do? Or should two ethnic minority groups -- like Asian-Americans and Hispanic
residents on the Lower East Side -- form a dual-minority district and select a
consensus candidate, as some groups hope? When several minorit groups vie to
maximize their numbers with boundary lines, which group has the more pressing
case if political reality favors only one or two?

The district that Ms. Chin hopes the commission will draw to enhance Chinese
voting strength and her candidacy would have a plurality of whites. It allies
Chinatown with parts of SoHo, TriBeCa, and Battery Park City. Her supporters
call it Plan A, but its detractors call it self-serving gerrymandering that
links seemingly disparate groups -- Chinatown garment workers and SoHo artists.

It is a coalition that twice made Ms. Chin, a 37-year-old counselor at La
Guardia Community College, the Democratic State Committeewoman for the 61st
Assembly District.

The racially balkanized Lower East Side area she hopes to represent is divided
into three factions on districting. One seeks a district to maximize
Asian-American votes, another seeks a district to maximize Hispanic votes and a
third seeks a coalition district in which Asian-American and Hispanic voters are
roughly equal. Moreover, Greenwich Village homosexuals contend that Plan A would
take some constituents they need for a gay district.

Splitting the city into roughly equivalent proportions means each district would
have a population about 143,580, or 70,000 fewer people than in the current
districts.

Neither Hispanic nor Asian-American residents have the numbers on the Lower East
Side to form a true minority district. In order to elect a minority candidate,
many political experts say that a district needs a voting population that is at
least 65 percent minority. Despite its ethnic imprint, Chinatown has only 8,000
Chinese voters, a number that lags far behind its booming population figures.

"We are the last group to get energized and politicized," said Doris W. Koo,
executive director of Asian-Americans for Equality. "The time has come." Ms. Koo
noted that the percentage of Asian-Pacific Islanders in the city had grown to
slightly more than 7, from slightly more than 3 percent in 1980.

Ms. Koo is the mastermind behind Plan A. The district of 137,195 people would be
39.3 percent white, 5.4 percent black, 16.6 percent Hispanic and 38.4 percent
Asian-American. Representatives of some non-Asian groups complain that Plan A is
intended to splinter other constituencies.

Ms. Chin says that while she wants to maximize her chances, she does not want to
do it at the expense of other minority groups.

"There's never going to be enough in terms of where people live," Ms. Chin said
of minority representation in Council districts. "The main thing is, wherever
they are, how do you get people involved? We have a need in Chinatown for
housing, for better health care, day care, bilingual education. We are blocks
from City Hall but we have never been represented."

Antonio Pagan, the director of a development corporation on the Lower East Side
and a Council candidate, said "from an overall perspective there should be no
conflict."

"But you can't get yourself a district based on our backbone," said Mr. Pagan.
"Some of the core census tracts in Plan A are 70 percent Latino."

Mr. Pagan's group, the Puerto Rican-Hispanic Political Council, envisions a
district that includes Tompkins Square Park, Astor Place and Loisaida -- a
predominantly Hispanic chunk of the Lower East Side. It would be 37.8 percent
Hispanic, 16.8 percent Asian-American, 35 percent white, and about 9.9 percent
black, depending on how the lines are finally drawn.

"We'll get Asians and they'll get some Hispanics," Mr. Pagan said. "We're both
all over the place. But we're opposed to an Asian-Latino district. It defeats
the purpose of minority empowerment and allows the incumbent to win by getting
the votes of other groups."

'Our Only Fighting Chance'

Ms. Koo said Asian-Americans and Hispanics were trying to work things out, block
by block.

"We don't want to be two minority groups fighting, but they have to realize we
have to maximize our numbers," Ms. Koo said. "This is our only fighting chance.
If you look at the city, seven, eight or up to 10 districts can be Latino."

Although there is a growing Korean population in the city, especially in the
Flushing area of Queens, the largest Asian-American concentration is still in
Chinatown.

Elaine Chan, a Lower East Side tenant organizer and the spokeswoman for Lower
East Siders for a Multi-Racial District, said the group envisioned a district
that combined Chinatown, Loisaida and a part of a Jewish neighborhood. The
racial configuration would be 36 percent Asian-American, 34 percent Hispanic, 9
percent black and 21 percent white.

Ms. Chan, whose plan had been denounced earlier, was assailed yesterday by Ms.
Chin's and Mr. Pagan's backers, who contended that since Ms. Chan announced her
candidacy for a Council seat yesterday, her advocacy of a Asian-Hispanic
district was self-serving.

"Elaine Chan is a very nice person who doesn't know anything about anything,"
Mr. Pagan said.

Margaret Fung, executive director of the Asian-American Legal Defense and
Education Fund, said individual candidates should be irrelevant to the
Districting Commission. "The Districting Commission needs to focus on its job of
drawing lines, and not what specific candidates want for themselves," she said.

Mr. Pagan and others like him are wary of such racial coalitions as those
proposed by Ms. Chan. Mr. Pagan says that in the kind of district Ms. Chan's
group favors, whites vote as a bloc and minority candidates split the rest of
the vote.

Eager for Their Own District

He cited, for example, Carolyn B. Maloney, who represents an East Side district
that includes wealthy whites, blacks and Puerto Ricans, and Stanley E. Michels,
whose Upper West Side district includes black and Dominican voters now eager for
their own district.

Of the 35 Council members, six are black and three are Hispanic. Miriam
Friedlander, who currently represents Chinatown and the surrounding communities,
is believed by many Asian-Americans and Hispanic people to privately favor a
district combining the two minority blocs, thereby enhancing her chances of
winning.

Ms. Friedlander said yesterday that she supported a district made up of
Asian-American and Hispanic voters because otherwise both communities would have
their voting blocs diluted by white voters.

"I'm working to get minority representation first," Ms. Friedlander said. "I
will not run in such a district."

John Magisano, president of the Gay and Lesbian Independent Democrats, said
there were enough census tracts for everyone. His group supports most of Plan A,
as well as a strong Hispanic district.

"There is a little bit of overlap," Mr. Magisano said of Plan A in relation to a
gay district. "We want the southern boundary at Houston. Margaret's people want
to go north of that. Zip code area 10014 is one of the gayest neighborhoods in
New York. We're not willing at this point to give up that area."

So on the way to the City Council, the lines are drawn and redrawn, minority
groups battle and compromise, and incumbents exert whatever behind-the scenes
influence they can. And people like Ly Phung Quan, the Chinatown garment worker
who earns about $5,000 a year, hope someone remembers the reason behind it all.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Margaret Chin, in coat, collecting signatures from her mother,
Ying Chee Chin, standing, and other workers at a Chinatown garment factory on a
petition for City Council redistricting Plan A, which would create a district
including Chinatown. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 30, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Freeing Kuwait Didn't Justify Destroying Iraq;
The Hitler Comparison

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 295 words


To the Editor:

In a speech commemorating Holocaust Memorial Day, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir
of Israel linked Saddam Hussein to Adolf Hitler. This comparison has been made
since the war in the Persian Gulf began, and by Jews as much as anyone. Yet when
the United States invaded Panama, we didn't think of Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega
as a Hitler. Nor anyone in Korea or Vietnam, where 58,000 Americans died.

Why only Saddam Hussein? The answer is that it was a war in which Israel, though
not a participant, played a major role. I can understnd Mr. Shamir's purpose,
for he is the Prime Minister of Israel and will go to any lengths to further its
cause. But why would American Jews make such a comparison?

Hitler's aim was the annihilation of Jews, no matter where they lived. Saddam
Hussein's aim is the annihilation of Israel. Since Israel and Iraq are still
technically in a state of war, it's perfectly natural for each to wish for the
annihilation of the other. The difference, however, is that Hitler made war on a
people.

My father must be turning over in his grave. At least once a month in the early
1940's I accompanied him from Brooklyn to Manhattan, to the somber gray offices
of the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society, where he fruitlessly inquired about his
brother and sister who were still trapped in Europe. The brother was taken
outside Paris and was never heard from again. The sister survived Auschwitz but
not before witnessing the murder of her husband and two young children.

If there is a country to evoke on Holocaust Memorial Day, it is Germany, the
third wealthiest country in the world today. But it has nothing to do with
Saddam Hussein or Yasir Arafat or any other Arab who ever lived.

DAVE GOLDMAN
New York, April 15, 1991

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 30, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Bangkok Journal;
Thailand Coup Casts Up a Most Reluctant Premier

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1157 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 29


Anand Panyarachun must be one of the world's most ambivalent leaders. His
appointment as Thailand's interim Prime Minister is "the biggest accident in
Thai history," he says, and he is eager to finish his work, promote new
elections and be gone from a post he never wanted in the first place.

Two months after a military coup, Thais feel secure enough to grumble more
loudly about the country's affairs, but Mr. Anand, 58 years old, is not normally
the target. He is usually greeted with deference and pleasure, which makes him
uncomfortable.

A worldly figure, he is credited with attracting an experienced Cabinet and
exercising a moderating influence on the both the tone and the policy of
Thailand's military rulers.

He and his Cabinet are running the country in partnership with the military
until a new Constitution is written and new elections take place. Under an
interim Constitution, elections must be held by April 30, 1992; Mr. Anand wants
them sooner. If they are later, he said recently, he would resign.

A Politician 'by Chance'

Mr. Anand, a former Ambassador to the United States and delegate to the United
Nations, left diplomacy for business after an earlier generation of coup leaders
accused him of Communism. He has become a politician now, he said in an
interview, "not by choice, but by chance."

When told that many people were surprised he accepted the job from the military,
Mr. Anand laughed and said, "So was I." Twirling his hands above the lap of an
elegantly cut gray suit, he said, "I must have had a temporary lapse of mental
awareness," and then he laughed again.

The coup, which took place on Feb. 23, was much-rumored but still unexpected,
because most Thais thought coups outdated in a more democratic age. The ousted
Prime Minister, Chatichai Choonhavan, was the first directly elected leader
since 1976, and he had a solid parliamentary majority.

But politics and business were thoroughly and visibly intertwined, and many
Thais grew tired of Mr. Chatichai's "no problem" response to criticism. The
military felt its own considerable interests under threat.

Thais 'Got Carried Away'

Thais were wrong to think the generals would do nothing, Mr. Anand said. "In a
way, the Thai people got carried away by this total freedom of expression, by
this illusion that there was a political or civilian control over the armed
forces," he said. "When a country that has gone through decades, centuries of a
predominant military role in the ruling of country, you can't just throw them
out. They have face, too."

Political control over the military is still "an essence of a democracy," he
said. "But it must be evolutionary. You can't just impose it. It must be agreed
to by the military." You have to start with confidence-building measures, he
said. "If one side feels manipulated by the other, that's where the conflict
arises."

The Ultimate Goal

Some Thais suggest it is Mr. Anand who is being manipulated by the military, to
give the coup an acceptable face, especially to the West. "I haven't lived up
until this year in order to be manipulated," he said with some heat.

He waited a moment, then said, "Every politician, every political leader, even
in a fully democratic society, must always be manipulated by circumstances."

And it so happens in Thailand the military is a factor that must be reckoned
with. In other countries it is trade unions, or newspapers, or intellectuals, or
the new left or the old right."

Angry now, he said: "Would they like me to be completely independent? So that I
can be a real live dictator?" When it was suggested that some Thais thought he
would be preferable to others they could think of, he laughed again.

The ultimate goal, he said, "is still to achieve a fully democratic regime." But
democracy requires evolution and cannot be put into place overnight. "In the
past, we've often been preoccupied with the form, rather than the substance of
democracy," he said. Adequate political participation is still lacking; so is a
full understanding of democratic "rights and responsibilities," which is not
just a matter of constitutions.

"Government of the people, by the people and for the people -- it's easier said
than done," Mr. Anand said. "If we want to have democratic rule, we have to earn
it."

It is obvious Mr. Anand has his misgivings, especially over the continuation of
martial law, which he says will be lifted early in May. He also seems
uncomfortable over some abrupt policy changes the military has pushed through
the National Assembly, like the recent dissolution of trade unions at state
enterprises. Martial law prevents demonstrations against the new law, but it is
not unpopular among many Thais, who regard state workers as highly privileged.

The military also wants to end the common practice of vote-buying and thinks
that can be accomplished by a complete separation of the executive and
legislative branches. But for Mr. Anand, vote buying "is merely a symptom of the
national system, which is cancerous." There is a "total malady of the society,"
he said, rooted in greed and distorted social values.

"It's part of corruption and corrupt practices," he said. "It goes into the
Civil Service system, where many are quite capable but not paid enough; it goes
into business practices; it goes into every sector.

"Of course," he added bitingly, "if the top leadership does not set a good
example, there is no constraint."

Much to Be Done

In his short time in office, he said, there is much that can be done to improve
the tax system; to toughen penalties against narcotics trafficking, which would
gratify Washington, since much of the heroin in America is shipped through
Bangkok; to improve the commercial code, and to begin to deal with Thailand's
AIDS epidemic through better education. He also wants to defuse a battle with
Washington over Thai abuses of intellectual property, with widespread copying of
music, videos, software and prescription drugs.

By 1976, Mr. Anand had risen to the top Civil Service post in the Foreign
Ministry, under Mr. Chatichai. After the fall of South Vietnam, he helped
negotiate a withdrawal of American forces from Thailand and better relations
with Indochina. But after a military coup, he was accused of being a Communist
and transferred to an inactive post.

He was later reinstated, but shipped off to Bonn as Ambassador. He resigned and
went into business in 1979, and says he was very surprised when the army
commander, Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon, a junior military attache in Mr. Anand's
Washington Embassy in 1972, asked him to become Prime Minister.

"I had quite a few concerns in my mind," Mr. Anand said, "particularly since I
hardly knew them, and they hardly knew me." But General Suchinda's answers were
"sincere," Mr. Anand said. Still, when the time limit on his tenure was
mentioned, he broke in to say, "Thank God."

NAME: Anand Panyarachun

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: After a military coup in Thailand two months ago, Anand
Panyarachun, right, was appointed to serve as interim Prime Minister until a new
constitution is written and new elections take place. Thais now feel secure to
grumble more loudly about the country's affairs. Mr. Anand held a lunch for
disadvantaged Thais recently to discuss hardships. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Conference on Boat People Sidesteps Repatriation Issue

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 124 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, April 30


An international conference meant to decide the fate of Vietnamese boat people
today sidestepped the issue of whether to force them to go home if they do not
face persecution.

The 29-nation meeting here reaffirmed a 1989 plan for the refugees. It did not
answer the question of what to do if they do not go home voluntarily.

The issue has pitted Vietnam and the United States against other Southeast Asian
nations and Britain, whose colony in Hong Kong has received more than 50,000
Vietnamese.

The two-day conference, due to end Wednesday, endorsed a statement reaffirming
the plan, in particular "that persons determined not to be refugees should
return to their country of origin in accordance with international practices."

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Vets Built Memorial Themselves

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 202 words


To the Editor:

In "The Unforgotten Vietnam Vet" (Op-Ed, April 18), Eric T. Dean Jr. cites the
four-day tribute and large crowds who attended the dedication of the Vietnam
Memorial on Veterans Day 1982 as evidence that Vietnam veterans were not
neglected.

The Vietnam Memorial does recognize the sacrifices of those who served in
Vietnam, but it was not built by the American people or their Government. It was
conceived by the Vietnam veterans, who struggled for years against official and
public indifference. They finally raised the money and built it themselves.

And the four-day tribute, during which the memorial was dedicated, was also
conceived, organized, paid for and sponsored by the Vietnam veterans themselves.
No one did it for them. Even the reading of 57,939 names at the Washington
Cathedral that Mr. Dean mentions was sponsored by the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
Fund, the veterans' group that built the memorial.

As for official support, the dedication ceremony for the Vietnam Memorial was
attended by neither the President nor the Vice President. Not one member of the
Cabinet attended either, not even the Secretary of Defense.

STEVEN H. YORK
Washington, April 18, 1991

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Vets Built Memorial Themselves;
The Hostile Reaction

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 716 words


To the Editor:

As a Vietnam veteran who teaches and writes on the war, it was with keen
interest and a growing sense of astonishment that I read "The Unforgotten
Vietnam Vet" by Eric T. Dean Jr. (Op-Ed, April 18). Mr. Dean's thesis is that
American society, contrary to conventional wisdom, has been obsessed with
welcoming home the Vietnam veterans. Vietnam veterans, he argues, were neither
unpopular nor neglected. Since I have never met a Vietnam veteran who does not
say that coming home was one of the most difficult and wrenching aspects of the
entire experience, this thesis deserves further comment.

Mr. Dean makes two good points, and happy ones: a higher percentage of Vietnam
veterans used the G.I. Bill than veterans of earlier eras, and they have a
higher median income than their peers. Virtually everything else he says is
nonsense.

He constructs his argument by a facile and misleading use of evidence. For
example, he uses a 1980 Harris poll to demonstrate that most Americans did not
blame the veterans for the war. This obscures that most veterans returned home
during the years 1966-72, a period of infinitely greater social tension over the
war than 1980. Thus, Mr. Dean is guilty of one of the worst mistakes a historian
can make: the projection into the past of views that were subsequently arrived
at.

The accounts of what most Americans now consider mistreatment of veterans in
1966-72, and there are dozens of books and studies on the subject, are too
numerous and well documented to be challenged by a poll taken years later.

Mr. Dean's account of the parades, the memorial dedication and Vietnam Veteran
Recognition Day in the 1980's are subject to similar criticism: better late than
never, but late nonetheless. Certainly, these events were far too late to affect
the homecoming of most veterans.

When soldiers in service to their country return from risking their lives, we
commonly employ cultural rituals to demonstrate social gratitude. The parade for
the Desert Storm soldiers scheduled for June in New York City is an example of
such a ritual. During the difficult readjustment to civilian life in the 1960's
and 70's, they were absent for most Vietnam veterans, and in many cases replaced
with outright hostility.

I doubt that Mr. Dean ever experienced as an undergraduate, as I did at the
University of Massachusetts in 1973, a professor ordering him in a class to
explain what it felt like to "murder innocent peasants in Southeast Asia." Or
being told by a fellow student that she had "a real moral dilemma" over whether
to invite him to a party at her home. Or countless other demonstrations of
animosity that do not show up in polls.

Mr. Dean also uses the 1980 Harris poll to argue that most veterans report a
very friendly reception from families and close friends. Though some veterans
became estranged from their families and friends because of the war, like many
in their generation, that was not a widespread problem, nor do I know of anyone
who said it was. It was the reaction of society at large that was hostile; that
is, people you did not know. That hostile reaction was so widespread and
blatant, many of us simply stopped telling people we were veterans to avoid the
abuse.

In addition to the weakness of his case, Mr. Dean ignores abundant evidence that
strongly suggests Vietnam veterans deserve special treatment: the high
percentage of Vietnam veterans among the homeless; the mental illness, suicides,
broken marriages, lost relationships, the alcoholism and drug abuse.

Perhaps these problems would have developed in these people in any event. Many
of them, however, are directly related to their wartime experience and their
rejection by society on their return. That most Vietnam veterans have adjusted
well doesn't mean we can forget those who have not. Nor can we forget why they
have not.

I doubt very much that Mr. Dean has discussed these matters with many Vietnam
veterans. Had he done so, it might have added a perspective that would allow him
to comprehend the experiences of others in a historical context. In many cases,
as in this one, the conventional wisdom is correct.

DOUGLAS J. MACDONALD
Assistant Professor, Political Science
Colgate University
Hamilton, N.Y., April 18, 1991

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia's Voiceless - A special report.;
No Haven From Agony for Cambodians

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2880 words

DATELINE: O KOKI, Cambodia


There is a Cambodian proverb that neatly sums up the life of Say Nom and her
husband, Chel Chim, and the circumstances of their country, after more than 20
years of superpower intervention, immeasurable brutality, invasion and civil
war.

"In the river, there is the crocodile," the Cambodians say. "On the river bank,
there is the tiger. If you go to the forest, there are the thorns. If you go to
the market, there is the policeman."

For the millions of ordinary Cambodians, who have suffered some of the most
brutal conditions devised this century, there still seems nowhere to turn, no
safe haven.

Their leaders, elected by no one, continue to maneuver for advantage, while
their own prospects, already dire, continue to deteriorate.

Despite politic smiles among the warring factions, positions are hardening. A
United Nations peace plan is faltering on 20 years of hatred and intrigue, while
regional powers and superpowers continue to intervene and the number of refugees
increases.

The four Cambodian factions, whose intermittent meetings have been exercises in
public relations and futility, are supposed to meet again in late May or early
June. But the factions -- the Phnom Penh Government, originally installed by
Vietnam, and an awkward alliance of the Communist Khmer Rouge and two
non-Communist groups -- still cannot agree on the composition of a council to
embody Cambodian sovereignty or who will lead it.

The Cambodian war grinds on, following its own seasonal cycle and wearing away
at the spirit. This is a low-intensity war of particular cruelty to farmers and
civilians -- of landmines floating in the rice fields and claymores strung up in
the trees, of kidnappings and political killings, conscription and
"re-education," banditry and coercion and displacement.

Small increases in Western aid, limited by a diplomatic embargo of a Phnom Penh
regime originally installed by the Vietnamese, are dwarfed by cuts in aid from
the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, preoccupied by their own chaotic
transformations.

So the lives of ordinary Cambodians, who have no political voice, worsen in one
of the world's poorest countries, where one child in five dies before the age of
5 and there is one doctor for every 36,000 people, where malaria and
tuberculosis are rampant and 15 percent of tested blood carries hepatitis.

This too is the direct result of a war that blocks development, keeps 35 percent
of agricultural land fallow and produces 300 amputations a month because of
mines, which have grown like mushrooms all over the country.

"Many more die from malaria, tuberculosis, bad hygiene, unclean water and
malnutrition than from the war," said a foreign doctor. "The children especially
are not shot by bullets, but it is the war that kills them."

In a hospital in Mongol Borei, in northwest Cambodia, the International
Committee of the Red Cross runs a busy surgical unit. But the tuberculosis unit
"is simply a dying ward," a relief official said. "Nobody feeds the patients.
There's no food anymore, except what relatives bring." In the maternity ward, a
Cambodian doctor tried to extract tissue from a woman without an instrument,
without anesthesia and without wearing a glove. Within four hours she was dead.

In a civilian hospital near Siem Reap, there are about 280 patients. About 60
have war-related injuries; 75 percent of them are from mines.

"Last year we amputated the wife," a doctor said matter-of-factly. "This year we
did the husband, from the same rice field."



Daily Life
A Steady Struggle For a Cup of Rice

With the fighting and a drought, nearly 10 percent of Cambodians are now
displaced by the war, a record number, and there is not enough rice to feed
them. Programs aimed at longer-term development are being transformed into
emergency relief, and a new $11.8 million appeal has gone to donor countries,
just as the world is transfixed by the dramatic refugee crisis among the Kurds.

Inside Cambodia proper, Mrs. Say Nom, Mr. Chel Chim and their three children are
among the nearly 200,000 villagers in nine provinces who have abandoned their
homes, an increase of about 50 percent since October, says the Cambodian Red
Cross.

In Banteay Meanchey province, next to the opposition's sanctuaries in Thailand
and where the fighting has been most severe, 13.5 percent of the population is
displaced. In nearby Battambang, the figure is 9 percent; in Kompong Chhnang,
7.8 percent; in Kompong Speu, an hour's drive from Phnom Penh, it is 5.2
percent.

Mrs. Say Nom, 23 years old, has traveled a long way to reach this ratty thatched
hut in this blisteringly hot refugee camp called O Koki, 11 miles from Kompong
Speu town. She came here with her family a year ago, walking 20 miles from her
village, Trapeang Chor, which had again fallen under Khmer Rouge control.

'I Hated the Khmer Rouge'

But her journey from Trapeang Chor began earlier, when the Khmer Rouge took
power in 1975. Although a peasant child, she was separated from her parents. She
was an "old person," in Khmer Rouge parlance, as opposed to the urban "new
people" who suffered the most. She was sent to Kompong Chhnang and worked in a
"children's mobile group," moving from rice field to rice field.

"I didn't know exactly what that regime was," she said as she nursed her
3-month-old son. "But it was a hard time for me. I didn't have my parents or
enough food. I was sick. I was always in the fields. I hated the Khmer Rouge;
they kill when they can, but no one could say anything."

After the Vietnamese invasion, Mrs. Say Nom moved back to Trapeang Chor, met her
husband, Mr. Chel Chim, 29, and had their first two sons, now 5 and 4. But at
the end of 1989, few months after Vietnamese troops withdrew, the Khmer Rouge
were infiltrating Trapeang Chor.

"When they came back, I couldn't believe it," she said. "I had tried to escape
during the Pol Pot time. I had three years of experience with them." After six
months of despair, she said, she left her village again.

A year ago, O Koki had nothing; refugees lived under blue plastic sheets. Now,
with help from the Cambodian Red Cross and Western agencies like Unicef, most
people have housing, water and some rice fields.

Rations of Rice

But even here, in this settled camp, a far cry from the dispersed groups of
internal refugees elsewhere in the country -- the adult ration of 35.2 pounds of
rice a month has been cut to 22 pounds, the original children's ration, which
itself has been cut to 17.6 pounds. But in fact there has been no rice ration at
all since March.

Unicef also came and dug 13 wells for O Koki's 1,800 families (7,450 people,
3,300 of them under 15). But Oh Thuch, a camp administrator, says the wells are
not deep enough, and 11 of them are not in use, their pumps broken. Unicef says
that only four pumps were broken and three were fixed. But O Koki's water
problems are more complicated.

A canal brought water from the mountain, but it has been polluted by the camp's
water buffalo. Efforts to build a dam before the rainy season are stalled by a
missing bulldozer, which lacks enough fuel to finish the job. The camp does have
a large bunker to protect officials from shelling, but it is also incomplete.

Mrs. Say Nom is dealing with her baby son, who has bad diarrhea, as her husband
explains that he earns money gathering firewood -- if he's lucky, $4.40 to $5.88
a month. He only forages within a half-mile of the camp. "It is too dangerous,"
he said. "There are too many mines."

He has two oxen, but one is missing, and he is afraid for it. "There are lots of
mines," he said. "Sometimes five cattle a day will step on mines."

What about returning to Trapeang Chor? "I was told my house was destroyed by the
Khmer Rouge," he said. "The houses are gone, and the coconut trees, and now
there are many mines."



Terror
Minds, Not Hearts: Khmer 'Education'

Intimidation of the populace comes from all sides. Refugees say they leave their
villages because they are tired of the pressure, from the Government by day and
the Khmer Rouge or other factions by night.

At Sala Kraw, a camp eight miles north of Sisophon, the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front attacked in mid-February. About 10 people were killed, and the
soldiers looted from the poor, a charge that the front denies. Asked why they
remained at Sala Kraw, refugees said they wanted to return to their village
three miles away, but three young men sent to reconnoiter were all killed by
mines. Whose mines, no one knows.

Just outside Sisophon, a market for firewood has grown up, selling the remains
of the houses of those who have left their villages.

The Khmer Rouge, too, pursue their war of disruption and intimidation. To some
villagers, the Khmer Rouge show a friendly face, buying ducks and rice, and
sometimes they marry village women. They speak to the villagers about politics.
But often they kidnap or kill village heads and teachers, and take the young men
to serve as porters.

The Khmer Rouge say they are concentrating now on "political work." Six weeks
ago, new arrivals at a refugee camp in Kampot said the Khmer Rouge came to their
village and took 100 people with them to the forest for "education." They were
told that there are two sides in the Cambodian struggle: the Phnom Penh regime,
which is corrupt, and the side of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's former
King, with whom the Khmer Rouge are allied.

After four days, the villagers were freed, minus a handful of children. They
were told that if the election went well, they would see their children again.
If not, they would not.

"How will they vote?" asked an experienced aid worker. "More important, can the
United Nations prevent this kind of intimidation?"

Told of this conversation, Mr. Oh Thuch sighed. "We live in both war and peace,"
he said. "The life of the people here now is like living in a cave. They can't
go outside."



Help From Outside
Days of Drudgery In the U.N. Camps

Relief officials trying to help the displaced inside Cambodia fear creating a
permanent state of dependency. "We don't want to create another border," they
say.

The Thai-Cambodian border is a classic case of the bad effects of good
intentions. It is a crucial part of the story of Cambodian dislocation. Even for
those on the border, life is worse.

To the 200,000 or so internal refugees must be added the nearly 400,000
Cambodians who have been living in or near Thailand since the Vietnamese drove
out the Khmer Rouge 12 years ago. Most of these Cambodians have been leading
lives of stupefying boredom ever since in United Nations-supervised camps,
beholden to whichever political faction happens to administer them and allowed
no choice as to affiliation.

After Vietnamese troops withdrew in September 1989, thousands of these refugees
were encouraged or forced to follow the factional armies into Cambodia to
populate areas with high rates of malaria and little water.

These included Cambodians under the American-backed non-Communist factions of
Prince Sihanouk and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, whose
otherwise uninhabitable "liberated zones" are financed by American and Southeast
Asian aid, some of it funneled by the factions from the nearby United Nations
camps, meant to be neutral.

Last year, the Khmer Rouge alone moved at least 100,000 people under its control
into its own harsh "liberated zones." Most of these people had never been
counted by the United Nations, because the Khmer Rouge kept them in "hidden
camps" to which outsiders had no access.


Drought, Malaria, Mines

Now, however, again because of war, drought, malaria and mines, many of these
Cambodians are now returning, or trying to return, to the United Nations camps.
While the population of these camps was down to 250,000 a little over a year
ago, pleasing the Thais who themselves are tired of the refugees, it is now up
to 333,400, a record number, United Nations officials say, and for budget
reasons, food rations have been cut.

But even this figure does not include 15,000 to 20,000 Cambodians under Khmer
Rouge control who are stranded along the border, with little food, medicine or
shelter, these officials say. Pushed about the map for the last 12 years, they
are prevented from entering United Nations camps by the Khmer Rouge, with the
acquiesence of the Thai military.

When asked if they want to enter, the refugees answer: " 'We don't know; we must
wait for our leaders to tell us,' " a U.N. official said. "It could be loyalty.
I think it's fear."

Phaly Nuon works with the women of Site 2, the largest United Nations-assisted
camp. "All these leaders play politics and they play games," she said on a
recent visit. "People don't ask me about politics. They just ask me, 'When can
we see Cambodia again? When can we go home?' "

Chea Sokha, who works with orphans, said, "We hate this closed camp, but we know
it." In Cambodia, if they can go home, where will they live? What will they do?
Will their families accept them? "People have all these questions," he said,
"and they worry about the Khmer Rouge."

As the United Nations envisages it, Democratic Cambodia is a lovely idea, he
said. "But our country is poor, and our leaders think only of their own
interests. We just know the name of democracy, not the details."



Hopes for Peace
'The People Want To Be Left Alone'

The West is still pushing a United Nations solution, because it promises an
election, the best chance for the non-Communists, who are hapless on the
battlefield and whose leaders are getting old. Son Sann of the front is 78;
Prince Sihanouk, who symbolizes the resistance, is 68.

The United States, which bombed and invaded Cambodia in the early 1970's to try
to halt North Vietnamese supplies from reaching South Vietnam, condemned the
invasion by Hanoi in 1978. Washington supports the non-Communists with $20
million a year in nonlethal aid and has been instrumental in the drafting of the
United Nations treaty. Washington urges all factions to accept it.

Washington has made normal relations with Vietnam conditional on a Cambodian
settlement, but pressed by Congress, recently agreed to open a temporary office
in Hanoi to handle inquiries on Americans missing in action from the Vietnam War
and to provide $1 million for prosthetics for Vietnamese veterans of the war.

But the Soviet Union, Vietnam and China, diplomats say, are not pushing their
clients very hard to accept the draft treaty as it stands, because it seems to
favor a non-Communist solution. And both Phnom Penh and the Khmer Rouge, which
have good reasons to fear an election, seem to think time is on their side.

'The Bitterest Kind'

A senior Phnom Penh official mused aloud: "What is the resistance after Sihanouk
dies?" Perhaps, he suggested, Hanoi and Beijing will reach an accommodation;
perhaps the war will wind down.

It is politically impossible for any Cambodian faction to reject the United
Nations draft outright. But Phnom Penh has outlined enough "amendments" to block
the plan for some time. And if Phnom Penh should finally agree, many diplomats
think, the Khmer Rouge will suddenly discover crucial objections.

"This is still mainly a war between two factions of a single Communist Party,"
said an East European diplomat. "Those are the bitterest kind."

As in Afghanistan, said an agronomist with long experience in the countryside,
Phnom Penh, with Hanoi's quiet help, can hold the line for the next five years.
"The price will be high, but not enough to lead to peace or force this side to
fall. But the political price for the West to support the resistance zones will
be high, too."

The result, he felt, will be effective partition and a further deterioration of
agriculture and security, with a fight for resources and aid.

"There will be more suffering," he said, but not by the leaders of the four
factions, or by the Thais, the Chinese, the Singaporeans or the Americans, or by
the relief workers, the diplomats or the visiting press.

'Peace Is Up to Them'

"It will be the rural people," he said, "the ones who think only of where they
can get the next bag of rice and how to avoid the fighting. The people want
peace and to be left alone. All the other arguments don't matter to them."

Ngo Dien has been Hanoi's Ambassador in Phnom Penh since 1979. "You must not
measure Cambodia with a Western ruler," he said. "That way are illusions. The
great problem for Cambodia is peace. But which peace? We must have the patience
to let the Cambodians decide, because finally peace is up to them."

But ordinary Cambodians are losing their traditional optimism. "Now more than
any time in the last 12 years," said a Cambodian in Phnom Penh, "people don't
see good fortune anywhere. No one now thinks the war will end soon, or the U.N.
will come, or the Government will change, or that life will soon get better."

In some ways, he said, "we think we deserve what happens, because we are
stupid." What did he mean? He laughed, then issued a quiet cry from the heart.

"All the intelligent Cambodians either fled the Khmer Rouge or were killed by
them," he said, lightly, as if joking. "We're the residue."

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Chel Chim, left, and Say Nom with their 3-month-old son at the
refugee camp in O Koki. They left their village when the Khmer Rouge returned
there in the wake of the Vietnamese withdrawal.; The lives of ordinary
Cambodians worsen as political factions vie for power and a years-old civil war
grinds on. Thatched huts in the O Koki refugee camp house some of the nearly
200,000 villagers who have abandoned their homes because of the heavy toll the
fighting takes on farmers. (Photographs by Steven Erlanger/The New York Times);
The war produces about 300 amputations a month as civilians trip mines scattered
throughout the countryside. A boy at the hospital near Siem Reap lost his leg
when he took his family's cattle to graze. (Sebastiao Salgado/Magnum) (pg. A18)

Map: Map of Cambodia showing location of Banteay Meanchey. (pg. A18)

TYPE: A special report.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 3, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

'Miss Saigon' Help

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 81 words


To the Editor:

An April 16 letter urged that some of the "Miss Saigon" box-office receipts be
used to help Vietnamese children fathered by Americans. Cameron Mackintosh,
producer of "Miss Saigon," has without publicity given St. Rita's Asian Center
$75,000 to sponsor 300 Amerasian children in vocational training for one year.
Sponsorship will be renewed to the center for the Broadway run of the show.

S. JEAN MARSHALL
Director, St. Rita's Asian Center
Bronx, April 23, 1991

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 3, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times
The Evolution of Power Over Nine Presidencies

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section C; Page 32; Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 908 words


Keepers of the Keys

A History of the National Security Council From Truman to Bush



By John Prados

Illustrated. 632 pages. William Morrow & Company. $24.95.

The National Security Council is one of those small Federal bodies that the
public knows little about, and for good reason. The council's work is highly
secret and its head, the national security adviser, is a Presidential appointee.
And yet the National Security Council's power grew from an advisory role under
President Harry S. Truman to nearly a policy-making role under President Ronald
Reagan. Its staff during the Reagan years ran the Iran-contra affair, which
later Senate hearings revealed to be part of an illegal war conducted without
Congressional approval.

In "Keepers of the Keys," John Prados, a military historian whose previous works
include "Presidents' Secret Wars," a book about covert operations of the Central
Intelligence Agency and the Pentagon, pulls aside the curtain that has hidden
the National Security Council's activities and personalities. The result is a
useful, informational book that tells the stories behind a number of diplomatic
alarms and military diversions of this country's armed might.

Right from the council's formal start in 1947, President Truman made it clear
that it was only advisory in nature and should not supplant the State Department
or Pentagon. At first, he refused to attend its meetings, signaling that he was
the Commander in Chief and didn't want his authority diminished. When he did
begin to attend, the council gained in stature. The author describes how it
worked: the staff prepared policy papers, the papers went up for discussion
before the full council, and then were accepted or rejected by the President.

Over the years, the power of the council depended on the strength or weakness of
the President in foreign affairs and the knowledge and ambitions of his national
security advisers. The enabling legislation that established the council
mattered less than the political rivalry between a President's national security
adviser and the members of the Cabinet.

The modern idea of a strong national security adviser was prefigured in a 1953
paper written by Townsend Hoopes, who later served as Secretary of the Air Force
in the Johnson Administration. Mr. Hoopes foretold the need for an executive
assistant who would be the national security adviser. In his influential paper,
he wrote that the council would be converted "from a coordinating body to what
would be tantamount to an executive, or directive, agency."

The author repeats the growing notion, at least among some historians, that
President Dwight D. Eisenhower was not as languid as he sometimes appeared and
that he exercised a "hidden hand" in policymaking. He writes, "Eisenhower used
the Council as a sort of corporate board of directors, but there was nothing in
the least passive about the President's own involvement."

The internal battles for position in the Kennedy Administration are described in
detail in a chapter that avails itself of David Halberstam's title "The Best and
the Brightest," but without that book's bite. The details make clear, however,
that the floundering by the Kennedy operatives in foreign and military affairs
had a strong element of amateurism and led the United States deeper into the
Vietnam quagmire. Mr. Prados generously adds that by 1963 President Kennedy was
learning and "secretly working for rapprochement with Fidel Castro and a
withdrawal from Vietnam," a theme that needs much greater documentation.

Henry A. Kissinger, the best-known of the national security advisers, is given
full treatment in a chapter called "King Richard and Prince Henry." Much of the
material about President Richard M. Nixon's security adviser, who later became
Secretary of State, is familiar because of his own books and books about him,
especially Seymour Hersh's "Price of Power" and William Shawcross's "Sideshow:
Kissinger, Nixon and the Destruction of Cambodia." The role of the council in
expanding the Vietnam War is emphasized in Mr.  Prados's book. By the time Jimmy
Carter ran for President, the author writes, "America had had too much of the
Kissinger style in foreign policy."

During the Reagan Presidency, the National Security Council resumed its activist
role. The names of Robert McFarlane, John M. Poindexter and Oliver L. North
appear again and again, as they did in the Iran-contra hearings, which
investigated illegal fund-raising and arms sales. The author writes that these
operatives"seized effective control of the policy, thinking they were carrying
out the will of the President, ignoring the little games the President played
with his political supporters." Everybody was supposedly in charge but the
President; a familiar phrase appears, "Ronald Reagan had no recollection of the
incident."

The book jacket of "Keepers of the Keys" describes Mr. Prados as "the creator of
many simulation games," which sounds like the right background for writing so
knowingly about the National Security Council. At times, the real-life
recommendations and actions of the national security advisers appear like a
series of games in a pinball parlor instead of in the White House. As the staff
throws out ideas on how to shake or overthrow some foreign government, the
reader keeps waiting for the "Tilt!" sign to light up and cancel the next war.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Prados (Jill Gay)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Shuttle Arm Dangles 'Star Wars' Satellite for Tests

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 480 words

DATELINE: CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla., May 3


The astronauts aboard the space shuttle Discovery dangled a "Star Wars" research
satellite on the end of the shuttle's outstretched mechanical arm today for 24
hours of tests.

As the Discovery whirled around the Earth at 17,500 miles an hour, the
satellitee's infrared sensors and television cameras focused on the planet and
atmospheric light, or aurora. A camera on the shuttle's 50-foot arm also
occasionally displayed scenes of Earth, 160 miles below the shuttle.

A canister of fuel propellant was hurled from the shuttle this morning.
Officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration delayed the
activity by almost half a day so that the shuttle could move into a slightly
higher orbit than two empty canisters used earlier to avoid the possibility of
collision.

The first two fuel observations were conducted Thursday while the $94 million
research satellite flew freely in space. During its 38 hours in orbit, it also
studied the shuttle's engine exhaust plumes.

Officials of the "Star Wars" anti-missile program ordered the observations to
help them develop sensors for tracking and destroying enemy missiles.

'Very Exciting' Results

Howard Stears, a program director. said the mission was already producing
results. "They are seeing phenomena they did not expect," he said. "It's very
exciting."

The mission, which is scheduled to end Monday, has had its share of
difficulties. The plume observations were delayed for nine hours because the
satellite moved into the wrong position. And the Discovery was only hours into
the flight when two recorders for collecting data for three scientific
instruments failed.

After four days of work, engineers today came up with what they hope is a way to
relay data from the three instruments to the ground and salvage the experiments.
It involves rerouting flight deck cables to bounce signals from the recorders
through an antenna directly to the ground, bypassing a computer monitor in the
cabin.

The astronauts were too busy with the satellite to perform the repairs today.
They plan to take on the problem Saturday.

Vietnamese Named to Mission

PASADENA, Calif., May 3 (AP) -- A physicist at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory
here will be the first native of Vietnam to fly on an American spaceship, NASA
said Thursday.

The space agency named the physicist, Dr. Eugene H. Trinh, and another
astronaut, Lawrence J. DeLucas of the University of Alabama at Birmingham, as
payload specialists on a mission scheduled for June 1992.

Dr. Trinh, who is 40 years old, was born in Saigon and reared in Paris. He has
worked at the lab for 12 years.

The first Asian to fly in space was Lieut. Col. Pham Tuan, a North Vietnamese
who joined a Soviet astronaut when a Soyuz spaceship was launched into orbit in
July 1980, then linked up with the Salyut 6 space station in a weeklong mission.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Astronauts aboard the space shuttle Discovery working yesterday
on rocket plume experiments with a $94 million research satellite. From left
were Guy Bluford, Greg Harbaugh and Don McMonagle. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 5, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Michael Haskins, 44, Interior Designer, Dies

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 46; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 199 words


Michael A. Haskins, an interior and product designer, died April 19 at St.
Vincent's Hospital. He was 44 years old and lived in Manhattan.

He died of complications from AIDS, a spokesman for the family said.

Interiors designed by Mr. Haskins include the Hay-Adams Hotel in Washington; E.
Braun, a linen shop in Manhattan; Bullocks Pavillion, a store in San Mateo,
Calif., and a store for Scarborough, a soap and perfume chain, in Los Angeles.

He also designed offices for Skidmore Owings & Merrill, architects, in San
Francisco, with Charles Pfister, and offices for Cannon Mills in Manhattan.

Mr. Haskins also designed products for GEAR, a home furnishings concern, and
Marimekko, the design firm.

He graduated from Bowling Green State University in 1973 and was a sergeant in
the Army in the Vietnam War.

Mr. Haskins began his career with Benjamin Thompson Associates, helping design
the Faneuil Hall Marketplace in Boston. He was also associated with the design
development for Design Research Stores.

He is survived by his parents, Fred and Dorothy Cass Haskins of Bowling Green,
Ohio; and two brothers, David L., of Bowling Green, and James F., of Belle Mead,
N.J.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 5, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Bangor Journal;
Maine Refines the Welcome Home

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 628 words

DATELINE: BANGOR, Me., May 2


Since long before dawn, about 50 men, women and children had waited in the
Bangor International Airport terminal for the next plane load of troops to
arrive from the Persian Gulf.

And like any other group of adoring fans, they came offering "Welcome Home"
posters, homemade cookies, beers and cheers.

"You're back, you're back!" called 42-year-old Valerie Bellomy to the 201
bleary-eyed members of the Army 62d and 223d transportation companies who
tramped into the terminal. "I don't know any of them," she said. "But we want
them to know how grateful we are for what they did for our country."

For most small towns across the country, such celebrations have happened once or
twice since the Persian Gulf war ended. But here in Bangor, which has the
closest American airport to Europe as well as low landing and refueling fees,
jetloads of soldiers have stopped daily on their way home. The homecoming scene
has taken on a life of its own.

Day after day, and often in the middle of the night, up to 1,500 Mainers have
crowded into the tiny terminal here to offer hugs and back slaps to the troops.

Like many others in the crowd, Mrs. Bellomy and her two daughters, Mary Jane and
Adrian, have greeted all but a few of the flights. That means crazy sleeping
schedules, missed classes and hours of waiting in the airport.

More than 50,000 troops have stopped here on their way home from the gulf,
making Bangor, a city of 35,000 people, the busiest port of entry in the country
for homecoming soldiers.

"This is beautiful," said Specialist Thomas Gay, who grabbed a rambunctious
handshake from a flannel-shirted man with long blond hair.

"Hey, man, welcome back, welcome back," said James P. Sargent, 43, of West
Sullivan, Me.

Not far away, Specialist Rene Ely, whose transportation company was on its way
to Fort Bliss, Tex., autographed a souvenir shirt.

"I'm just so happy to see these people here," said the 21-year-old soldier, who
was returning from six months in the desert. "I figured we'd be forgotten about
because you don't hear that much about us," she said, blinking back tears.

For Maine, a sparsely populated, rural state, the big welcome has seemed a bit
out of step. Maine bills itself as a hospitable place, a "vacationland," but one
sticker often seen on truck bumpers reads, "Welcome to Maine -- Now Go Home."

Still, in a state with a small-town state of mind, neighborliness is a way of
life, residents say. The airport celebrations, which began with a small group of
patriotic Bangor residents, offer the best of both worlds. The celebrations are
a way to experience the happiness over the gulf victory, and to show support for
the troops without long-term involvement. The troop layovers last an hour or so.

So far, enthusiasm for the homecomings has continued to mount. At a time when
most other news revolves around the depressed regional economy and rising
unemployment, the euphoria of the homecoming celebrations has been a welcome
relief, residents say.

Daily updates on arrivals are broadcast on local radio stations and printed in
The Bangor Daily News. A special telephone recording was set up to give
round-the-clock troop flight information.

Military officials say news of the greetings here has been passed on to other
troops soon to embark, prompting numerous requests from soldiers to return
through Bangor.

Americans from as far away as Connecticut and Prince Edward Island have come to
Bangor.

"I'm here because I just wanted to welcome them home," said Linda Graham, who
rode a bus five hours from Boston.

"I lost my job recently, and I heard about this and just wanted to come," she
said, as the troops reboarded their jet after an hour of celebrating. "This is
meat for the soul."

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Almost all of the more than 50,000 troops who have passed
through Bangor, Me., airport on return from the Persian Gulf have been welcomed
by cheering crowds. One Vietnam veteran greeted returning soldiers. (Brian
Swartz)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 5, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR;
Long Series of Military Decisions Led to Gulf War News Censorship

BYLINE: By JASON DePARLE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2681 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 4


The American military operation in the Persian Gulf was still in its frantic,
tentative youth on Aug. 14, 1990, when Capt. Ron Wildermuth of the Navy sat in
his office at United States Central Command headquarters in Tampa, Fla., and
sent a classified message flashing across military computers on three
continents.

As Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf's chief aide for public affairs, Captain
Wildermuth had spent days drafting the message, a 10-page document known as
Annex Foxtrot, which laid out a blueprint for the operation's public information
policy. The movement of troops, weapons and materiel was to become the largest
since the humiliating -- and televised -- Vietnam War defeat. And in the
officer's mind, one point bore repetition.

"News media representatives," he wrote, "will be escorted at all times. Repeat,
at all times."

The drafting of Annex Foxtrot was one step in a long march of decisions that, by
war's end, left the Government with a dramatically changed policy on press
coverage of military operations.

The gulf war marked this century's first major conflict where the policy was to
confine reporters to escorted pools that sharply curtailed when and how they
could talk to troops. And within months, Americans were receiving news
accompanied by words that had not been connected with combat accounts for nearly
50 years: "Reports reviewed by military censors."

The policy began with a decision by the Administration's most senior officials,
including President Bush, to manage the information flow in a way that supported
the operation's political goals and avoided the perceived mistakes of Vietnam.

But the elaboration of this approach took place incrementally, with the main
oversight responsibility delegated to Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, whose press
policy during the Panama invasion had been faulted by an official Pentagon
inquiry for its "excessive concern for secrecy."

And Mr. Cheney, in turn, left many decisions in the hands of field commanders,
many of whom had left Vietnam deeply suspicious of reporters, who were
relatively free to cover American forces in action.

While critics of the policy have argued that the restrictions on independent
reporting were intended to produce a sanitized view of the war, top officials
have said they were necessary to prevent security lapses in a new era of instant
communications.

"It isn't like World War II, when George Patton would sit around in his tent
with six or seven reporters and muse," with the results "transcribed and
reviewed" for eventual release, said Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff.

If a commander "in Desert Shield sat around in his tent and mused with a few CNN
guys and pool guys and other guys, it's in 105 capitals a minute later," General
Powell said.

Cheney's Central Role

Dozens of interviews with civilian and military officials and a review of major
planning documents disclose the following points:

*The White House, while delegating most decisions to Mr. Cheney, closely
monitored some details. Mr. Bush watched virtually every briefing, while his
aides urged that certain officers be swept from television screens and promoted
Lieut. Gen. Thomas W. Kelly as a briefer with star potential. The Pentagon, once
it realized the power of televised briefings, set up daily rehearsal sessions
for General Kelly, and happened onto a system for learning the questions that
reporters would throw at him.

*The military, assuming that correspondents from the small-town press would
write sympathetic articles, provided free transportation to Saudi Arabia and
special access to servicemen and women from their areas. Aides also analyzed
articles written by other reporters to determine their interests and to screen
out interview requests from those likely to focus on mistakes by the military.

*Pentagon officials decided early in the operation to radically change the
purpose of press pools, taking what had been set up as a temporary device to get
reporters to a combat zone and turning it into the sole means of combat
coverage. Despite that decision, Mr. Cheney's spokesman, Pete Williams, held a
series of autumn meetings with news executives that encouraged them to believe
that traditional independent reporting would follow.

*White House officials, in the face of criticism, wavered at one point but
dropped the idea of easing press restrictions after a "Saturday Night Live"
sketch lampooning the press convinced them and the President that the public was
on their side.

Striding into his press secretary's office during an interview about war
coverage last month, Mr. Bush stamped the policy with his own seal of approval.
"I think that the American people stand behind us," he said. "I think they felt
they got a lot of information about this war."

Public opinion polls have shown overwhelming majorities backing the military
over the press.

In separate interviews, Mr. Cheney and John H. Sununu, the White House chief of
staff, called the policy a model for the future. The only time information was
withheld, Mr. Sununu said, was when it would compromise military security.
"There was never an effort not to give information out," he said. "There was
never an effort not to focus on things."

And Mr. Cheney, the policy's chief architect, said, "there was better coverage,
more extensive coverage, more elaborate coverage, greater knowledge on the part
of the American people, about this war, as it unfolded, than any other war in
history." But few journalists agree.

"I'm not sure the public's interest is served by seeing what seems to have been
such a painless war, when 50,000 to 100,000 people may have died on the other
side," said Ted Koppel, host of the ABC News program "Nightline."

"Obviously this was done so they could maintain the closest possible control
over public opinion, to increase support for the war."

Guiding Principles
No Accidents In This Campaign

Early in the troop buildup, the President and the group of top advisers
discussed past military endeavors in which they felt press policy was handled
poorly, including Vietnam, Panama and the May 1975 seizure of the American
merchant ship Mayaguez off Cambodia. The group instructed Mr. Cheney, one of its
members, to take charge.

"Nobody dwelled on it," one official at the meeting said. "The sense was, 'Set
it up over there, pay attention to it -- don't have things happen by accident,
take control of it.' "

In an interview, Mr. Cheney said he was guided by two overarching principles.
One was that military needs had to take precedence over journalistic rights, and
so the "lore" of past practice needed to be disregarded.

Another was to guard Government credibility. "There was ample precedent that one
of the really great ways to screw up an operation -- certainly was one of the
lessons learned in Southeast Asia -- is don't get out there making claims you
can't back up," Mr. Cheney said.

Indeed, one of the reasons that the Government lost public support for the
conflict in Vietnam was the much-discussed credibility gap, attributed to the
Johnson Administration's failure to be candid with the public about its policy.

 Mistakes of Vietnam

President Lyndon B. Johnson for a time tried to hide the extent of the American
military buildup and repeatedly cast an optimistic gloss on the military effort
and on the ability of the South Vietnamese to govern in the face of on-the-scene
reporting showing the opposite.

The military had been thinking about the press long before the Iraqi invasion of
Kuwait. "One thing Vietnam did to us is nobody says, 'Oh, don't worry about
public affairs,' " said retired Maj. Gen. Winant Sidle, who served as the chief
military spokesman there.

While some commanders had simply left the press behind, as was the case in
Grenada and Panama, a more sophisticated approach had also been developing.
"Seek out the media and try to bring them in to write stories and produce
television shows or clips in support of the organization's goals," a War College
textbook suggests. Many Air Force generals receive a course in briefing style,
during which their presentations are videotaped and critiqued.

While Mr. Cheney and other leaders were explicit in saying they were shaped by
the lessons of Vietnam, General Powell said, "I never gave it the first
thought."

Calling Vietnam references "a cheap shot," General Powell said that whenever
reporters were unhappy, "you take out your little branding iron with the 'V' and
heat it up and burn it into our foreheads."

Emphasizing that he was just a captain in Vietnam, General Powell said that his
experiences as a top commander or national security adviser during the 1983
bombing of the United States Marines barracks in Beirut and in Grenada and
Panama taught him much more about "how we had to handle the information."

General Powell did say that one of his top priorities in training commanders has
been to make "them understand the proper role of media." While some have pointed
to such training to argue that the military has grown more skilled at
manipulating the press, General Powell said, "I spin it differently."

"Sure, you want to see if you can get the press to support the goals, but that's
not why you work with the press," he said. "You work with the press because it
is your obligation."

Correspondents' Imperative

When he arrived in Saudi Arabia, Captain Wildermuth, the Schwarzkopf aide,
compiled a list of ground rules that journalists were required to sign in
exchange for credentials. From the correspondents' standpoint, the trouble began
with these words: "You MUST remain with your military escort at all times."

Captain Wildermuth said he added that provision on his own. "You needed an
escort to provide a liaison with the units," he said. "That military guy speaks
military. It's just smart." For that reason, he said, escorts were a standard
part of press pools.

But critics say this decision fundamentally changed coverage of military
operations, by transforming escorts into a permanent part of the news-gathering
process.

Fred S. Hoffman, a former Pentagon spokesman who helped design the pool system
in the mid-1980's, said the new rule was "far more restrictive than anything
we'd ever tried to do."

Captain Wildermuth said he did not directly consult General Schwarzkopf about
the rules. But, he added, he was careful to make them reflect the commander's
general philosophy.

Rules at Work
Better Treatment for Local Press

Without the independent movement they had in Vietnam, reporters covering the
buildup last fall said they were rarely able to talk to the troops. The escorted
visits were conducted infrequently and typically lasted one night.

Public affairs officials said the presence of reporters would distract units
from their war preparations.

But under the military's Hometown News Program, about 960 journalists from
generally small papers and television stations near units' home bases, along
with a handful from larger organizations including The New York Times, flew to
Saudi Arabia free on military aircraft. They spent up to four nights in the
field with their hometown units.

Why didn't those reporters pose a problem?

"There was just a safer feeling," said Lieut. Col Michael Cox of the Air Force,
who ran the program. "If they know that they're getting a free ride and they
can't afford the $2,000 ticket, there's probably going to be a tendency to say,
'We'll do good stuff here.' "

On the one occasion the Pentagon suggested giving the major news organizations
more time in the field, General Schwarzkopf vetoed the suggestion. That was in
October, after planners sent to Saudi Arabia by Mr. Williams, Mr. Cheney's
spokesman, recommended sending four six-member pools to the front lines and
treating reporters as "de facto members of the units." The first pools were not
in place until Jan. 14, three days before the start of the air war.

While lack of access to troops brought one set of reporters' complaints, the
conduct of escorts brought another. The escorts helped choose whom reporters
could talk to. Some hovered over interviews and others stepped in front of
cameras to interrupt ones they did not like.

Mr. Williams has described such incidents as isolated, involving inexperienced
officers. "That's not the way it's supposed to work," he told a Congressional
committee in February.

But others argue that leaders set a restrictive tone by design. After this
newspaper quoted a private criticizing President Bush, General Schwarzkopf
called the enlisted man's commanding general, asking for an explanation.

Aides to General Schwarzkopf said they screened requests for interviews by
researching the reporter's past articles "to be aware of what the person's
interests were," as one said, adding that such research is standard peacetime
procedure.

Stories about angry commanders traveled quickly, and Mr. Hoffman, the former
Pentagon spokesman whom Mr. Williams consulted during the run-up to the war,
said escorts understood that they risked being called to task for negative
stories.

"If it's not what they intended," Mr. Hoffman said "there was ample time to
straighten out the situation."

Pool Coverage
Some Assumptions and the Deception

The autumn skirmishes between reporters and escorts were followed by perhaps the
most important information-policy decision of the war: the order to limit battle
coverage to officially sanctioned pools.

"There's a huge gaggle of reporters out there, and the press has absolutely no
capacity to police itself," Mr. Cheney said in the interview. "There was no way
we were ever going to put 100 percent of the reporters who wanted to go cover
the war out with the troops."

But the decision to confine reporting to official pools represented a departure
not only from Vietnam, but also from World War II, where reporters had generally
been given wide access to combat action and to commanders, with their dispatches
reviewed by military censors for security violations.

It was also a departure from the pool system conceived after the 1983 invasion
of Grenada, which led to reporters' protests at being left behind. Pool members
were to accompany troops into combat on a moment's notice, sharing their
reports, then quickly dissolving as soon as other reporters could arrive. Then,
independent, or "unilateral" coverage would follow.

But Mr. Cheney scrapped the system in Panama by delaying the pool's departure
when United States forces invaded in 1989. He later said he feared security
breaches; the inquiry commissioned by the Pentagon found that fear "excessive."

'Don't Worry,' Spokesman Says



A group of news executives that met with Mr. Williams in the fall to discuss
visas say he reassured them that any pool coverage of actual combat would be
short-lived.

"It was, 'Don't worry about it, boys, we understand your concerns -- we're going
to have unilateral coverage,' " said George Watson, Washington bureau chief of
ABC News.

But by his own account, Mr. Williams left the last of those meetings, on Nov.
28, and briefed Mr. Cheney and General Powell on precisely the opposite approach
-- a plan to make pools the sole means of combat coverage, which they accepted.
On Dec. 14, Mr. Williams made that plan public.

"Obviously we didn't make it as clear as we should have," Mr. Williams said of
the news executives' angry reaction. "But fully a month before the war started,
we submitted a draft to them."

After making only minor modifications, he issued a final order imposing pools on
Jan. 15, less than 48 hours before the start of the air war.

The journalists involved in the meetings have been accused by colleagues -- and
some have accused themselves -- of failing to exercise sufficient vigilance.

But Mr. Williams says that while the journalists may have felt they were in a
negotiation, he never considered them equal partners.

"This was not a decision made by a committee," he said. "They bear no
responsibility for the decision."

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Covering the War/First of two articles.

GRAPHIC: Photo: The policy to limit battle coverage to officially sanctioned
pools grew from an effort by the Defense Department to manage wartime
information flow. The chief architect of the policy, Defense Secretary Dick
Cheney, center, left many decisions, including restrictions on coverage, up to
his top officers, Gen. Colin L. Powell, left, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, and General H. Norman Schwarzkopf. (Associated Press) (pg. 20)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 5, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 838 words



International 3-27

Military restrictions on the press during American operations in the Persian
Gulf, the most extensive in the last 50 years, were informed by memories of the
press coverage in Vietnam, as well as the fear of television's instant presence.
Page 1

American aid to Iraqis in Iran, thought to improve relations with Iran's
anti-Western Government, has instead angered that Government. Iranian officials
are said to be offended by shipments of second-hand clothes and old blankets. 18

Iraqi prisoners of war include many people who do not fit into clear catagories.
After fighting for Iraq, some latched on to American units for help, and now
find that no country will take them in. 18

Kurds postpone second round of talks with Hussein 19

Iraq says priceless art was looted by rebels 18

Saudi general says "Norm and I are alike" 20

Israel's pull on fleeing Soviet Jews has weakened because the country is unable
to provide them jobs. Many Soviet Jews are canceling or postponing their moves
to Israel, to the country's great embarrassment. 1

Jews in Moscow expect emigration to Israel to pick up 26

Palestinians face tribunal in Lebanon 27

The threat to Bangladeshis remains, five days after a ferocious cyclone killed
tens of thousands of people there. The Government's slow response leaves as many
as 2 million people at risk, relief officials say. 1

Money woes aside, India hopes to give aid to Bangladesh 22

The peace agreement in El Salvador, though a long time in coming, may only be a
first step toward returning the country to normal. Leaders from the army and the
rebels wonder how a new government can work. 9

Island-hopping the Caribbean -- against drugs 11

A Kenyan political prisoner is in perilous health 13

Visitors to North Korea denounce rights abuses 14

Thousands battle riot forces in Seoul 15

A celebrated Hungarian Cardinal, whose opposition to communism brought him
imprisonment and exile during his life, was reburied in the country's main Roman
Catholic church and hailed as an example of faith overcoming accomodation. 3

One more dead as clashes continue in Yugoslavia 6

Armenians mourn dozens slain in Azerbaijan 7

France evaluates Mitterrand years 23

Austrians wait to see if Waldheim will run 25

 National 28-38

President Bush was sent to a hospital because he suffered shortness of breath
while jogging yesterday. A spokesman said the President had experienced a
fluttering of the heart, which is not a heart attack and usually is not
life-threatening. 1

Campus free speech is under attack, President Bush said in an address at the
University of Michigan earlier in the day. He said opponents of free speech are
allowing "a notion of political correctness" to make certain topics and
expressions off-limits. 1

Segregated proms at one high school, after a dispute between black and white
students over what music should be played, raises questions about whether having
students of different races under the same roof really insures integration. 1

Political Memo: John Sununu is a victim of ashington's tribal ways. The
investigation of his use of military aircraft for personal trips was fueled by
mid-level officials offended by Mr. Sununu's high-handedness.  34

The Democratic Party's direction is being debated. Some are trying to find a
Presidential candidate who is solicitous of the middle class and consumed with
education, but, of course, is also fiscally responsible.  28

A test of the French abortion pill is gaining unlikely support in New Hampshire.
While the legislation expected to pass there will not have the force of law, it
may show growing support for testing the pill in the United States.  28

Virginia law is the focus of U.S. gun debate 29

Study says mothers may pass on eating disorders 37

 Regional 39-48

Mayor Dinkins presented a dire plan to end the city's fiscal slide by cutting
services and the work force -- deeper cuts than the Mayor has said might be
needed. The plan is meant to show the importance of increased state aid and
union concessions. 1

New York's housing-market decline may be showing signs of reversing, executives
and lenders say. Although the market remains subdued compared with the
mid-1980's, demand has picked up since last year. 39

Budget-conscious Connecticut towns are encouraging their police officers and
firefighters to live healthy. The towns hope to reduce the burden of paying
lifetime benefits for employees with heart-related illnesses. 43

Tiny victory for figure in $10 million theft 48

The Fresh Air Fund, at 115, seeks families and donations 42

Coming out of hiding: childhoods as non-Jews 45

New Jersey court rules on mental handicap in sex cases 44

Jail officials offer new rules, and a critic offers warning 43

Obituaries 46

George T. Delacorte, a philanthropist

Arts/Reviews 72

Campus Life 51-58

Fashion 64-65

Life Style 59

Pastimes 73-74

Weddings 66-71

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 5, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Gen. Powell's Lament

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 725 words


Gen. Colin Powell favored strangulating Iraq by economic and defensive military
means and opposed President Bush's emerging war strategy, as late as October.
That's what the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs and/or his aides told Bob Woodward
for his new book.

Does the revelation of this brief apostasy vindicate the war critics? Why did
the general tell such an explosive story? What does the Woodward account suggest
about the workings of the Bush Presidency?

The answers are: 1. No vindication, but the Powell position shows the critics
had strong arguments shared by many in the Bush Administration. 2. The leaking
of the story points to the general's concern for his posterity and the deepest
worries of the military establishment. 3. Bushville, like most recent
Administrations, is not a good place for open and honest discussions in which
"the players" take long, hard looks at the facts and options.

A jovial, ill-disciplined lot. Too bad for us.

War critics will certainly welcome the company of General Powell. They made a
legitimate case for giving economic sanctions a longer run before going to war,
and they deserve the respectability imparted by the general's shadow.

Mr. Bush, however, chose the right course. Neither General Powell's early qualms
nor the bloody mess of postwar Iraq derogates from this central point: President
Bush correctly set out to destroy Iraq as a military threat to its neighbors and
to the West's oil lifeline -- and he did it. It's doubtful that the world would
have been able to sustain long-term military presence and sanctions. But even
had that proved possible, Saddam Hussein's military superiority over his
neighbors would have remained intact, and he still would have been able to
murder his own people.

As for the general telling tales out of school, he can be forgiven. He looked at
the size of Iraqi forces and the messiness of war, and trembled at the potential
costs -- like any sane person. If the war went sour, he wanted his marker of
dissent on record. He is, after all, an outstanding man, a black man and a
leader of men who could and would be President.

But the general also reflected the scars inflicted on the military by the
Vietnam war and wanted to protect his cherished institution. Vietnam destroyed
public faith in the military, and the Pentagon struggled for years to
re-establish public trust. Rightly, General Powell was not eager to throw all
away again, perhaps irrevocably, in an impetuous Persian Gulf war of highly
uncertain popularity.

Mr. Woodward, an editor at The Washington Post, makes much of General Powell's
bureaucratic somersaults. He recounts how the general feared to tell the
President of his preference for continued sanctions, how he meekly had to
package the sanctions option alongside the Bush war option and pretend that both
were equally plausible.

But, alas, that's what it's like talking to the boss in the capital city, or
almost anywhere else. Presidents unfortunately take dissent for disloyalty. Most
of them have got to be surrounded and cajoled -- as Clark Clifford, the ultimate
master of counseling presidents, relates in his forthcoming memoir, which
includes hair-raising stories about trying to walk Lyndon Johnson out of
Vietnam.

General Powell was also described by Mr. Woodward as unhappy about sloppy White
House meetings where alternatives "were not completely discussed" and where
"clear decisions rarely emerged." It is hard to believe, however, that the
amorphousness of government meetings deranged such an experienced warrior. He
served as N.S.C. adviser to President Reagan and knows that the real meetings
usually take place later in the Oval Office, among the innermost intimates.

Perhaps the most striking feature of the Woodward book is that many of these
Bush intimates are now beginning to nibble away at each other with nasty little
stories. Until a couple of weeks ago, Bushville had been the very model of a
discreet and self-satisfied bunch of moderate-conservatives who seemed to be
getting along quite well.

Their civility was a pleasant change for Washington. But apart from the bold
stroke against Iraq, it was purchased at the price of doing nothing. Maybe if
the Bush team enjoyed a little less conviviality, they might look outside their
windows and do something for the rest of us.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 5, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Eight Years of Living Languorously

BYLINE: By Herbert S. Parmet;  Herbert S. Parmet's most recent book is "Richard
Nixon and His America." He is Distinguished Professor of History at the City
University of New York.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 878 words



PRESIDENT REAGAN
The Role of a Lifetime.
By Lou Cannon.
Illustrated. 948 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $24.95.

Lou Cannon's latest portrait of Ronald Reagan, his third, is the best study of
that enigmatic Presidency yet available. The tone is judicious, the hyperbole
limited and the coverage compre hensive.

In "President Reagan: The Role of a Lifetime," Mr. Cannon of The Washington Post
-- one of the few reporters who have covered Mr. Reagan's entire political
career from the Governor's house in Sacramento to Washington -- describes a
mostly stage-managed Administration. Ronald Reagan, as virtually every report
illustrates, was the most inattentive and indifferent of Presidents, largely
following the "scripts" that led him through his eight years in the White House.
Ultimately, however, his greatest strength was his ability to sell, to utilize
his considerable gifts for mass leadership. Less an ideologue than an idealist,
even a dreamer, Mr. Reagan believed "that he was not really a politician at
all," Mr. Cannon says, "but simply an actor on loan from Hollywood who had
entered politics because he wanted to restrain the power of an increasingly
intrusive government." He acted upon inspiration and inspired in return.

Handlers usually protected Mr. Reagan from himself and from the press. Their man
was at once intellectually lazy and intuitively shrewd. The scripts were
followed as long as they were convenient as he went through "the role of a
lifetime." Mr. Reagan, Mr. Cannon writes, "may have been the one president in
the history of the republic who saw his election as a chance to get some rest."

Mr. Cannon depicts Mr. Reagan's fantasy world, one that "had been created in
Hollywood, out of material he brought with him from the Middle West." His
unshakable optimism forever seemed to deny the realities of a boyhood blighted
by his alcoholic and frequently unemployed father. He was also a self-serving
visionary with faith in a mythic America, one who, at the end, "succeeded in
reviving national confidence at a time when there was a great need for
inspiration."

Above all, Ronald Reagan was also a natural politician. Virtually every new
account demonstrates that the stage and not the Statehouse or Capitol Hill may
be the most effective launching pad for power in a picture culture. The
Iran-contra travesty was a perfect example of how a politically astute actor
finessed what Mr. Cannon does not doubt was his personal involvement. A
President with poorer survival talents could well have been impeached.

Foreign leaders, even his ideological kin, were astounded, as Mr. Cannon puts
it, by "how a man of his background could become president of the world's most
powerful democracy." Whatever it was, they wanted to touch it, "bottle it and
take it home and use it themselves." To Mr. Reagan himself, neither that nor
much else seemed mysterious. As Mr. Cannon stresses at every chance, he believed
in what he wanted to believe. "There's nothing wrong with that," the President
said to a columnist at a dinner party. "I do it all the time." Following White
House disasters dating back some two decades, Mr. Reagan, ironically,
revitalized faith in Government itself. The office, he demonstrated, could
function after all. Under him, the "impossible Presidency" seemed easy. He set
the pace and the national agenda.

He made the American left appear hapless. He gave power and respectability to
the modern conservative movement, which had been smoldering ever since the early
post-World War II years. It was Mr. Reagan and not his staff, albeit he was the
most managed President in history, who, according to Mr. Cannon, "established
the priorities for the major accomplishments and debacles of his presidency."

The President who had called the Soviet Union an "evil empire" finally supped
with the villains themselves. The unrelenting Cold Warrior, the alleged
anti-Soviet ideologue, dipped pens with Mikhail Gorbachev. Rapprochement with
the "evil empire," writes Mr. Cannon, may have been Mr. Reagan's major
achievement. "But," Mr. Cannon later adds, "his greatest service was in
restoring the respect of Americans for themselves and their own government after
the traumas of Vietnam and Watergate, the frustration of the Iran hostage crisis
and a succession of seemingly failed presidencies."

Mr. Cannon's portrait is paradoxical. Not for a long time, perhaps never, will
the contradictions be fully understood. Ronald Reagan's characteristic
detachment frustrated those who tried to gain his attention and verged on a
dereliction of duty. On the day of the 1983 economic summit, James A. Baker 3d,
then chief of staff, realized Mr. Reagan had not read his briefing book. When
Mr. Baker asked why, Mr. Reagan responded, "Well, Jim, The Sound of Music was on
last night."

He nevertheless took what happened at Chernobyl as a warning about the potential
of nuclear disaster, and responded. Not once, when implementing his Reaganomics,
did he consider the obvious inability of the "rising tide" to "lift all the
boats." He remained the idealistic nationalist, and that was where he functioned
best. Mr. Cannon covers all this and much more. His Gipper often seems like
Knute Rockne himself.

NAME: Ronald Reagan

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR;
Keeping the News in Step: Are the Pentagon's Gulf War Rules Here to Stay?

BYLINE: By JASON DePARLE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2851 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 5


Midway through the air war against Iraq, two words began to reappear in the
press, spooking White House aides with ghosts from conflicts past: "credibility
gap."

Reporters who had spent months complaining about strict new press restrictions
were taking their concerns public, asking what the Government was trying to
hide. The aides, determined to quell comparisons with the Vietnam war, began to
talk of easing the restraints on what reporters could see or say.

Then reassurance for the Administration came from an unlikely quarter --
"Saturday Night Live." The NBC show, known for lampooning President Bush, began
its Feb. 9 broadcast with a skit depicting reporters in a briefing room as
comically self-absorbed, with little understanding of national security and even
less concern.

After coming in Monday morning, John H. Sununu, the White House chief of staff,
picked up on the talk of the office and quickly ordered a tape. By the
afternoon, aides had hurried a copy to President Bush, offering it as evidence
that the public was on their side.

Sole Moment of Doubt

"It was not a trivial component," said a senior White House official, referring
to the skit. He said the program "gave us an indication that things weren't
being handled too badly."

That closed the book on what Government officials have called their only moment
of doubt in placing dramatic new restrictions on the way the nation's press
covers military operations.

According to interviews and documents examined by The New York Times in a
six-week review of the press policy, President Bush and his inner circle had
vowed from the start of the deployment to the Persian Gulf in mid-August to
manage the information flow in a way that supported their political goals. They
punctuated that determination on the war's eve with a Pentagon rule limiting all
press coverage of combat to officially escorted pools.

When the air bombardment began on Jan. 17, officials turned their attention from
formulating the restrictions to putting them into effect, surprising even
themselves with the control the system provided.

A Divisive Argument

The details of how that system worked during the six weeks of actual combat, and
how officials moved to capitalize on it, have formed the starting point of a
divisive argument between the Pentagon and the press over the policy's merits.

"I look at it as a model of how the Department ought to function," said Defense
Secretary Dick Cheney, the primary architect of the policy, who has said the
system provided "better coverage" than "any other war in history."

But representatives of 15 major news organizations complained in a letter to Mr.
Cheney last week that "the flow of information to the public was blocked,
impeded, or diminished" by the policy.

The signers of the letter, who included representatives of The New York Times,
The Washington Post, The Associated Press and the four major television
networks, requested a meeting and told Mr. Cheney, "We are intent on not
experiencing again the Desert Storm kind of pool system."

Changes and Delays

As the war began, reporters found that censors changed and delayed their
dispatches, while escorts kept them far from the action and the military police
arrested those trying to operate independently. Access to real action was so
limited that even when public affairs officials tried to get reporters airborne
in B-52's, to curry favorable publicity for the fearsome machines, they were
thwarted by suspicious commanders.

With few opportunities to gain firsthand reports, the press responded by giving
increased prominence to the official statements and Government-issued videotapes
being promulgated in briefing rooms in Riyadh and Washington.

Administration officials said that even they had failed to anticipate the power
the briefings would take on in shaping public opinion. But they were quick to
capitalize on that power, staging elaborate rehearsals for key Pentagon
briefers, like Lieut. Gen. Thomas W. Kelly. General Kelly recalls that one day's
preparation was so complete that he turned to an aide and asked in jest "if
they'd passed out the questions in advance" to the journalists, who seemed to be
dutifully reading them back to him.

The choreographing of public opinion was in mind even when commanders chose
names for the operation's two phases, as Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the
mission's commander, and Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, huddled with aides and swapped suggestions by telephone. "Desert Sword,"
"Desert Thunder" and "Desert Strike" all hit the discard list before the
commanders settled on "Desert Storm."

" 'Storm' was appropriate to the type of operation we were planning," said
General Powell. "And it kind of had a cute angle to it with 'Stormin Norman,' "
General Schwarzkopf's nickname.

The Rules

Control Exercised Through Pools

The decision to restrict all combat coverage to official pools brought a
fundamental tilt in the balance of power, taking the most basic journalistic
decisions out of the hands of correspondents and giving them to commanders.

One set of complaints focused on the review of news dispatches for security
violations -- a reversal of the Vietnam practice of trusting journalists to
comply and expelling those who broke the rules. While Pentagon guidelines stated
that escorts would not suppress material "for its potential to express criticism
or cause embarrassment," reporters sometimes found otherwise. When The
Associated Press reported that Navy pilots were watching pornographic films
before leaving on missions, an escort deleted it.

A second problem, acknowledged by the military, concerns delays in the
military's transmission of reporters' copy. Some dispatches did not arrive until
after the war's end.

But the journalists say the most important power the military exercised was the
decision over where to send the pools. As Deborah Amos, a correspondent for
National Public Radio, put it, this turned officers into assignment editors,
determining story lines by dictating what reporters could see.

Circumventing the System

Six days into the air war, for instance, Judd Rose, a correspondent for ABC
News, was part of a pool pressing for interviews with pilots. Instead, the
reporters were shuttled to the military motor pool, whose commander complained
that his "unsung heroes" had not been receiving the publicity they deserved.

As the war progressed, an increasing number of reporters tried to circumvent the
pool system, despite some detentions by the military, and their efforts produced
some of the war's most memorable reporting. After linking up with the Saudis,
Forrest Sawyer, a correspondent for ABC News, became the only reporter of the
war to accompany a pilot on a bombing mission.

Mr. Sawyer faults reporters for not resisting the rules sooner and in greater
numbers. "I think we were too docile for too long -- all of us," he said.

The Briefings

Key to Success: Preparation

The military briefings spoofed by "Saturday Night Live" were so popular with the
public that some critics have wondered whether they were part of a preconceived
strategy. But Marlin Fitzwater, the White House press secretary, said, "We had
no idea how that was going to work."

The cameras seemed to spotlight the reporters' weaknesses, since many had little
previous experience with the military. At the same time, the sheer length and
frequency of the briefings made the military seem candid, even when the long
lists of innocuous statistics, like number of missions flown, added little real
knowledge. As one admiring White House official put it, the briefings made the
Pentagon seem to be making public "much more information than it was."

Among those staying tuned on a daily basis was the President himself. "There
weren't many where he didn't see at least a piece of it," said Mr. Fitzwater.
And when the Riyadh briefings got off to a shaky start, with junior officers who
seemed to lack confidence and candor, the White House was quick to complain to
Pete Williams, Mr. Cheney's chief aide for public affairs. "I did mention that
to Pete, and he got higher-ranking guys in there," Mr. Fitzwater said.

Praise for the Performance

In tapping General Kelly for the duty at the Pentagon, General Powell was
turning to an officer whose performance as a briefer during the American strike
against the Panamanian Government had already won White House praise.

By 8 each morning, General Kelly's staff would start to assemble lists of
questions that they expected journalists to ask. They were aided by the
journalists themselves, who were walking the Pentagon halls and asking such
questions all day. Public affairs aides began quietly appending the inquiries to
their lists, which they used at the 2 P.M. rehearsal. "I never let on to any of
them," said one aide.

With the briefing room's power now clear, other officials also prepared
carefully. While rehearsing his important Jan. 23 briefing, General Powell had a
nagging concern.

In a few hours he would step in front of television cameras and deliver one of
the most confident predictions in American military history. Of the Iraqi Army,
he promised, "First we're going to cut it off and then we're going to kill it."

But first he tested the line on an aide, asking, "What do you think?"

"He was concerned it would seem too harsh, too severe," the assistant said.

The War Images

The Bombs Never Missed

Perhaps the most enduring image of the war is the remarkable gun-camera footage
of precision bombs, produced not by journalists but by the military. While 90
percent of the bombs dropped on Iraq were the highly innaccurate "dumb bombs,"
only the precision weapons produced videos, and the American Government, unlike
the British, never showed one that missed.

"Those videos had an enormous impact on the American public," said David Gergen,
who as an aide in the Reagan White House helped pioneer the use of images to
form public opinion. Mr. Gergen, now editor at large of U.S. News and World
Report, said the military set a benchmark for disseminating "a kind of video
press release."

Mr. Cheney said he did not think of the tapes as a press release, but added, "I
will admit we did clean it up," by removing the audio portions that disclosed
the raw sounds of "guys in combat."

Faced with requests for footage of errant bombs, American spokesmen used the
same reasonable tone that worked to their advantage throughout the conflict,
avoiding a flat No. Mr. Williams, for instance, told journalists on Jan. 21, "I
will look into giving you some of that footage."

In recent interviews, officials adopted a tone of innocent forgetfulness.

Mr. Cheney said such tapes would have been "pretty dull, boring stuff."

Mr. Williams said, "That's one that fell through the cracks."

Capt. Ron Wildermuth of the Navy, General Schwarzkopf's chief public affairs
aide, said the item "was not high on my priorities."

Copter Video Barred

The military also refused to make public vivid videotape of Apache helicopter
attacks on Iraqi positions, although when several reporters arrived at a forward
unit without their escorts they got an unauthorized viewing from a commander
proud of the machines' performance.

John Balzar, of The Los Angeles Times, said the tape showed Iraqi soldiers "as
big as football players on the T.V. screen." He added: "A guy was hit and you
could see him drop and he struggled up. They fired again and the body next to
him exploded."

But after his article about the tape appeared, Mr. Balzar said, he was never
again allowed near an Apache unit. And top commanders refused repeated requests
by other reporters to see the tape.

Capt. Mike Sherman of the Navy, who ran the military's Joint Information Bureau
in Dharhan, Saudi Arabia, until December, said there was no deliberate attempt
to sanitize the war, but agreed that battle footage was scarce. "I didn't see
the images I thought I was going to see," he said. "I haven't seen a tank battle
yet, have you? Why there weren't any video teams there is beyond me."

Cheney's Rare Blunder

Beyond the briefing room, several official policies also helped keep disturbing
images from the television screens, including one that banned cameras from Dover
Air Force Base as military coffins arrived.

Another Pentagon policy forbade any spokesman from appearing on television
programs beside any of the 16 plaintiffs from a lawsuit challenging the pool
system.

One of the few blunders in briefing performances acknowledged by Administration
officials occurred on Feb. 23, the night the ground war began. With what struck
his colleagues as excessive zeal, Mr. Cheney sternly announced a 48-hour
information blackout.

Mr. Fitzwater said he immediately thought it was a mistake. "I watched him on
camera, and I said, 'My friends in the press are going to find that a little
eager.' "

So did General Schwarzkopf, who called the next day and said, "I've got to
brief."

By most accounts, Mr. Fitzwater weighed in heavily and got Mr. Cheney's decision
reversed. He declined to confirm that directly, but added, "If there are things
you can't say, you just go out and say you can't say them. But it's not proper
for Government to run and hide."

To some in the press corps and some senior officials, however, the memory of
that night lingered as a moment when Mr. Cheney's true attitude toward
journalists seemed to pop through his habitual Western reserve.

"I think it was uncharacteristic," Mr. Fitzwater said. "I'm glad it didn't last.
"

What Next?

Second Thoughts On Restrictions

Some analysts, like Bill Kovach, curator of the Nieman Foundation at Harvard,
have called the policy a watershed that will change the flow of official
information not only in the military but throughout the Government, increasing
officials' power to bend public opinion to their will.

Mr. Kovach argues that such power has been growing for a decade. He cites as
other examples Mr. Gergen's work in the Reagan White House, and the use by Mr.
Bush's media consultant, Roger Ailes, of negative campaigning during the 1988
presidential campaign.

The gulf war policy, Mr. Kovach said, "worked so clearly, so well, and the
public accepted it so fully, I think it has established a new standard in terms
of the amount of information the Government is willing to give its people."

But others see the Government's success as a product of particular circumstances
unlikely to be repeated. Reporters were unusually constricted in getting to the
action, they say, since most of the fighting being done in the air and most of
the dying occurred behind enemy lines. After just four days of ground fighting,
they say, the pool system was on the verge of collapse. Pool reporters, angered
by how long it took the military to review and transmit articles, started filing
them directly to their home offices, and reporters not in pools raced into
Kuwait and hooked up with American forces on their own.

News Executives Wary

"The way this war was made up made this policy possible," said Representative
Les Aspin, chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, who worked in the
Pentagon in the early days of the Vietnam War. "This thing would have blown up
in their face if the war had dragged out or you had a lot of casualties."

Since the war's end, the Administration's public relations professionals -- Mr.
Williams and Mr. Fitzwater -- have said that they now find some of the gulf
rules overly restrictive.

Mr. Fitzwater said he was uncomfortable with having officers review articles
before publication. "I blame myself" for allowing such provisions to take
effect, he said.

"There's something wrong with that," he said. "I don't like the idea of anybody
in the Government ever reading a piece of copy by a reporter."

Mr. Williams, who also now professes some discomfort about reporters' dispatches
being read by escorts, said, "I think the presumption in the future should be
against pools." He said they inevitably produced complaints from reporters and
headaches for the Government.

But some news executives, who are meeting to forge a counterproposal to the
Pentagon press policy, view such talk with suspicion.

"They believe that by saying some nice things about freedom of the press, the
whole thing will just sort of blow over," said George Watson, Washington bureau
chief of ABC News.

Appearing at a recent meeting of the American Society of Newspaper editors,
Brig. Gen. Richard Neal of the Marine Corps, a main briefer in Saudi Arabia,
said bluntly, "I can tell you: the pool system is here to stay."

And Mr. Cheney said, "If we had to do it tomorrow, I would start with what we've
just done," adding, "We'd be willing to listen to recommendations on how to
improve it."

But he went on: "Bottom line is you've got to accomplish your mission. You've
got to do it at the lowest possible cost in terms of American lives. And that
takes precedence over how you deal with the press."

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Covering the War: Second of two articles.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gen. H. Norman Schwazkopf is becoming a media and marketing
phenomenon. He and his wife, Brenda, acknowledge cheers from a crowd of over
28,000 people as they rode around Tampa Stadium yesterday in a tribute to
Persian Gulf service personnel (Associated Press); Capt. Ron Wildermuth, Gen. H.
Norman Schwarzkopf's chief public affairs aide.

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
A.R. Gurney's Expanded View Of Old Boys and Their Milieu

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words


The title of A. R. Gurney's entertaining new play at the Playwrights Horizons
Studio Theater, "The Old Boy," could also serve as the title of such past Gurney
comedies as "The Dining Room," "The Cocktail Hour" and "Love Letters." In this
prolific writer's accounts of the upper-middle-class precincts of Northeastern
WASP-dom, the men are almost always boys who have not grown up and do not really
have to. Fortified by privilege and gin, they sail through life via the old-boy
network that assures them entry to the right schools, the right clubs, the right
firms.

Like Philip Barry and John Cheever before him, Mr. Gurney knows that his old
boys pay a price for their eternal juvenility. A typical Gurney protagonist
reaches middle age to discover that he has alienated his children, married the
wrong woman and followed a pointless career. Sam (Stephen Collins), the sometime
Congressman and ambassador at the center of "The Old Boy," is no exception. When
this distinguished alumnus returns to his old prep school to give a fund-raising
speech, he finds himself feeling "a little hollow." Sam may be on his way to the
governorship of "a very important state," but his second marriage is faltering
and his political profile amounts to nothing more than the resume of Washington
jobs he has accumulated "mostly by luck and pull."

Were "The Old Boy" simply the story of its title character's mid-life crisis, it
would be hard to take. Sam is every bit as hollow as he says he is -- a
mechanical womanizer, a lockjawed glad-hander, an empty Brooks Brothers suit.
But Mr. Gurney has expanded his canvas, if not his social milieu, in this play.
He asks the audience to care less about aging old boys and more about those less
privileged souls who are denied admission to the fraternity. While Sam is the
evening's largest role and dramatic fulcrum, the most compelling scenes belong
to Perry (Matt McGrath), a homosexual who had been a schoolmate of Sam's, and
Alison (Lizbeth Mackay), a woman who had loved Sam back then but had been
manipulated by him into marrying the closeted, desperate-to-conform Perry.

Perry has died in mysterious circumstances when Mr. Gurney's play opens, and his
student friendship with Sam in the early 1960's is revisited in flashbacks that
sometimes recall "Tea and Sympathy." These scenes are unabashedly written from
the perspective of a guilt-ridden heterosexual: Perry stands for all that is
selfless, sensitive and artistic in civilization -- he acts Viola in a school
production of "Twelfth Night" and listens constantly to "La Forza del Destino"
-- while Sam is a selfish, vaguely bigoted jock incapable of love.

But if the distinctions Mr. Gurney draws between his hetero- and homosexual
post-adolescents are mainly well-meaning cliches, his portrayal of homophobia is
fresh and savage. The climactic battle between the boys is as powerful as
anything this playwright has written -- an explosion of truthful confession,
violent rage and repressed erotic longings that brings Sam and Perry to the
brink of a new understanding before they must retreat sadly back into the
oppressive status quo.

It is in the present that Sam must confront the widowed Alison, who, along with
Perry's aged mother (Nan Martin), is also visiting the school during the weekend
of his speech. In another affecting scene, acted with bristling conviction by
Ms. Mackay, Alison describes not only her love-hate relationship with her gay
husband but also her far more bitter resentment of Sam and his heterosexual
ruling elite, whom she indicts for pushing her and Perry into unhappiness and,
for thematic good measure, for forcing America into Vietnam.  Mr. Gurney, a
writer who has often emulated his psychologically blocked characters by
minimizing front-and-center confrontations in his plays, makes a welcome
breakthrough in the big blowouts of "The Old Boy." After "Love Letters," a play
designed to keep its crucial emotional encounters discreetly off stage, one was
beginning to fear that he was becoming an insufferably genteel old boy himself.

Even so, "The Old Boy" is not as deeply moving as it should be, because there
are other glib writing habits Mr. Gurney has not broken. Unwilling to make an
audience work even a little, he insists on having his characters announce every
present or future change of heart directly at all times. (Not once but twice is
it said that the truth shall set Sam free.) The mysteries of human nature that
give life its real drama are missing here, replaced instead by breathlessly
presented yet unbelievable plot twists involving the political ruin Sam
supposedly risks by speaking at a moneyed private school in the post-crash
1990's and by publicly championing the rights of gay AIDS victims. From the
opening scenes in which characters exchange information they already know to
spoon-feed it to the audience to a denouement that brings Sam's and Alison's
lives full circle, "The Old Boy" has the artificial shape of a boulevard play.

Much as one wishes that Mr. Gurney took more chances, there is no denying the
sharpness of his wit (which reaches its peak here in a theological discourse on
the difference between tennis and golf) and his increasing mastery of his craft.
The alternation between past and present in "The Old Boy" is graceful, and that
fluidity is matched by John Rubinstein's impeccable staging. With the assistance
of Jane Greenwood's precise costumes and Nancy Schertler's leafy, memory-shaded
lighting, the director keeps two distinct eras of prep school history in
constant dialogue.

Mr. Rubinstein has also elicited fine performances from his cast, including
Clark Gregg, as Sam's ambitious young aide de camp, and Richard Woods, as an
obsequious, conspicuously unmarried school elder who exemplifies the old order
even as he seems to have been a victim of its prejudices. Ms. Mackay and Mr.
McGrath scrupulously refuse to sentimentalize the ill-fated Alison and Perry
while Mr. Collins is just as rigorous in capturing Sam's cold, thoughtless
personality as both boy and adult. As Perry's domineering, fabulously wealthy
mother, a sort of Nancy Reagan with a pedigree, the superb Miss Martin is at
once a ruthless enforcer of what she calls "traditional values" and a pathetic,
helpless victim of their erosion. The sole old woman and the least predictable
character in "The Old Boy," she surely merits a chapter of her own in Mr.
Gurney's continuing saga of the WASP's decline and fall.

The Old Boy

By A. R. Gurney; directed by John Rubinstein; set design by Nancy Winters;
costume design by Jane Greenwood; lighting design by Nancy Schertler; sound
design by Bruce Ellman; production stage manager, Michael Pule. Presented by
Playwrights Horizons, Andre Bishop, artistic director; Paul S. Daniels,
executive director. At 416 West 42d Street.

Dexter . . . Richard Woods
Bud . . . Clark Gregg
Sam . . . Stephen Collins
Harriet . . . Nan Martin
Perry . . . Matt McGrath
Alison . . . Lizbeth Mackay

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Stephen Collins, left, and Matt McGrath in "The Old Boy." (Joan
Marcus/"The Old Man")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Early Assessment of How the Gulf War Was Won

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 14; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 987 words


The Commanders
By Bob Woodward
Illustrated. 398 pages. Simon & Schuster.
$24.95.

There really are no seismic revelations in "The Commanders," Bob Woodward's
report on military decision making under President Bush. Even the reported
dissent of Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to
the military offensive undertaken by the Bush Administration to expel Iraqi
troops from Kuwait seems like a nonstory in the full context of the book.

As Mr. Woodward reports it, General Powell's preference for a policy of
"containment" or "strangulation," as he liked to think of it, strikes the reader
more as a velleity than a hardened position in the general's mind. He gave way
to another view in the natural course of things. And lest one think that Mr.
Woodward's book endorses his thinking, there is plenty of evidence in the book
against the position that sanctions against Iraq might in the long run have
worked.

As Mr. Woodward reports in an introductory note, his book started out as a
broad-gauged study of military and civilian leadership in the modern American
defense establishment. With the end of the cold war approaching, it looked like
a good time to understand the Defense Department's "subtle intricacies." But:
"The December 1989 Panama invasion, and more importantly the 1990 Gulf crisis,
changed all that. The military was not going to play a smaller role in the new
world, as some had expected. It was moving to center stage. These two operations
allowed me to study post-Vietnam, post-Cold War military decision making in
action."

It is true that if one had to boil Mr. Woodward's findings down to a single
newsworthy point, one would conclude that in the elaborate process of deciding
how to handle the crises induced by Gen. Manuel AntonioNoriega of Panama and
Saddam Hussein of Iraq, President Bush underwent a subtle process of
personalizing the issues. Perhaps the most pointed evidence of this occurs in a
passage describing an interview given David Frost by President Bush on Dec. 16,
1990. Here Mr. Bush expressed horror and outrage at a report on human rights
violations carried out by the Iraqis in Kuwait since the August invasion, even
though, in Mr. Woodward's view, the description of torture "was standard
language for an Amnesty International report, even for those on some of the key
U.S. allies. . . ."

But this remains an extremely subtle point. It is hardly stressed, and it is
surrounded by hundreds of other examples of what went into an extensive series
of complex policy decisions, all of them reported by the author as either direct
quotes or paraphrases of what the members of a large cast of characters were
thinking. To the surprise of this reader, and in contrast to previous books of
Mr. Woodward's like "Veil," "Wired," "The Brethren" (written with Scott
Armstrong), "The Final Days" and "All the President's Men" (the latter two
written with Carl Bernstein), the cumulative effect of "The Commanders" is a
little on the dull and scholarly side.

There is a curious paradox in its being so. As usual with Mr. Woodward's books,
the sources are nowhere identified. While you can often guess who told him on
deep background what a particular person was thinking at a given time, you
basically have to take him at his word.

So the experience of reading "The Commanders" is like watching a golfer play
with a set of clubs that have no heads. Every so often, he hits a magnificent
drive, and you think, If the ball travels so far, does it really matter how he
hit it? For example, at one point Mr. Woodward explains that "key portions" of
the ground campaign in the Gulf were developed by half a dozen junior officers
in their second year at the Army Command and General Staff College at Fort
Leavenworth, Kan. These majors and lieutenant colonels, nicknamed the Jedi
Knights, were inspired to attack the Iraqi Republican Guard indirectly from the
west by concepts established in Grant's 1863 Civil War campaign at Vicksburg.

At another point, Mr. Woodward describes how Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf had to
be forced against his explosively short-tempered will to accept the deployment
of 1,000 of the latest modernized tanks with abilities superior to what he
intended to rely on. And at still another point, he reveals that like the rest
of us, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney followed the initial air attack on Iraq by
watching CNN. Who really cares how he learned about such tidbits? So long as the
ball flies all the way to the green.

But most of the time in "The Commanders," Mr. Woodward hits ordinary shots. He
tells us things either that we could easily have imagined on our own or that
scholars and memoirists are going to be writing 5 or 10 years from now. Pretty
routine stuff. So you have to wonder, Why not play with an ordinary set of
clubs?

The question remains, should one read Mr. Woodward's latest work?  Judging from
the number of quickie books lately published on General Schwarzkopf, Saddam
Hussein and the Persian Gulf campaign, there is still a very large appetite out
there for books on the war and this country's all too fleeting moment of moral
certainty. "The Commanders" is a very superior sort of quickie book. If you're
still hungry, then by all means eat.

But "The Commanders" is finally unsatisfying. In his introductory note, Mr.
Woodward writes: "This book falls somewhere between newspaper journalism and
history. The daily newspaper tells what happened, but rarely gives the full why
and how that are traditionally the specialty of historians. While the book seeks
to provide a fuller explanation than daily journalism can, it does not have
history's distance from events. It aspires to be a closely focused snapshot of
contemporary events."

A closely focused snapshot. A miracle drive that slices. There are
contradictions of terms here. So the reader gets lost in the woods.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bob Woodward (The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

'A Lot of Hoopla About Nothing'? No Way

BYLINE: By James Reston;  James Reston is former chief Washington correspondent
and former executive editor of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 766 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


According to Marlin Fitzwater, the White House press secretary, President Bush
thinks the reaction to his irregular heart beat "is a lot of hoopla about
nothing." But that's not what the rest of Washington thinks.

Washington gets a heart flutter of its own every time a President's heart skips
a beat, but especially this time since it may involve treatment during which
Vice President Quayle would assume, even for the briefest time, the
responsibilities of the Presidency. Washington is not worried about Mr. Bush's
physical condition, but is thinking psychologically in a different way.

It is reassured by his doctors' optimistic medical reports, but not by the
suggestions that he will soon be back on his regular routine. For that routine
is a frenzy of physical activity, even during vacation, and his closest friends
worry that his problem is not a "shortness of breath" but a shortness of rest --
and patience.

His daily calendar tells us more about his heart problem than his medical charts
do. He is physically in motion and mentally impulsive. Even Camp David is not a
refuge but an arena for sports and argument. He saw more Congressmen, held more
news conferences, flew more miles and saw more world leaders in his first eight
months in office than Ronald Reagan did in eight years. He is on the news more
than Dan Rather.

He promised a "gentler America" but went to war in Panama to get rid of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, and didn't know what to do with him when he caught him.
And he went to war again, to get rid of Saddam Hussein, who was, he said, "worse
that Hitler" -- an obvious impossibility.

One result of this activity was that he stood higher in the popularity polls at
this point in his first term than any President has since Franklin D. Roosevelt
-- so much so that most observers have assumed his re-election. But this heart
problem has revived the question of succession, particularly the doubts about
his choice of Dan Quayle as Vice President.

He has even awakened the Democrats from their long sleep -- an astonishing
development.

Unlike Ronald Reagan's mistakes, Mr. Bush's catch up with him. General Noriega
was on the C.I.A. payroll when Mr. Bush headed that agency. Mr. Bush was
involved in rearming Iraq before the Mideast war, and has refused to publish the
record of those arms deals or accept responsibility for encouraging Saddam
Hussein to believe that Washington did not intervene in Arab disputes.

And it was on his assurance that Mr. Quayle was chosen as the most qualified
Vice Presidential nominee available.

All these issues had been virtually forgotten until this sudden warning about
the President's health.

Just a few days ago, chief of staff Sununu was saying that there was no doubt
but that Mr. Quayle would be on the Bush ticket in 1992, but today other
Republican leaders are not so sure. Not that Mr. Quayle has been a surprise. He
has performed precisely as expected. He has been discreet, obedient, modest and
devoid of Presidential pretensions -- or evidence of ability to govern. In a
way, he has been badly treated -- chucked into a position for which he was not
prepared -- mainly for Mr. Bush's personal and political convenience.

Accordingly, recent events have restored two of the most pressing but neglected
problems in Washington: how our leaders are chosen; how decisions of great
importance are made.

George Bush was probably better prepared for the Presidency than any other
nominee since the Second World War. His career in politics, diplomacy, business
and intelligence was ideal training, but he has acted as his own Secretary of
State, without much attention to the world's best Foreign Service; concentrated
on foreign policy, using cold war tactics, and left the mounting domestic
problems of debt, education, race and health primarily to John Sununu's
political mind.

Meanwhile, he talks of a new world order in a new American century, which can be
directed only by the power of the U.S. But simpler and more urgent questions now
come to the fore.

As Dwight D. Eisenhower said when he got out of Korea and refused to plunge
deeper into Vietnam, nothing is more unpredictable than war and more uncertain
than human life. Ike benefited by his heart attack in 1955. It made him more
cautious than he was in the early days of his first term -- more suspicious of
what he called the military-industrial complex -- and more eager to assure
himself of the support of Congress and the allies before risking war on his own.
It could be that this minor accident will do the same for George Bush.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Our Towns

BYLINE: By Andrew H. Malcolm

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 782 words

DATELINE: RONKONKOMA, L.I.


When Robert Fishwick left his home here for work Jan. 10, he was a regular
county Parks Ranger. Today, he still is. And that's why he's become the focus of
an unusual legal dispute pitting New York and the Federal Government against
Suffolk County.

Ranger Fishwick works the midnight shift at the Smith Point County Park,
patrolling miles of oceanfront beaches on the eastern end of Fire Island. He's
patrolled various county parks for 19 years now with a good work record,
supervisors said.

According to military superiors, the 47-year-old Ranger Fishwick also has a good
record in the New York Army National Guard, where he has served 13 years and is
a first sergeant. Every month he drives about 50 miles into Manhattan for his
required weekend duty with the 10th Brigade of the 42d Infantry Division. Every
summer he goes to National Guard training camp.

A Navy veteran, Ranger Fishwick has always enjoyed the military, especially
recent supervisory duties. He wanted to earn similar responsibilities as a Parks
Department sergeant. So, with several colleagues he took the Civil Service test
and passed.

One week before the eligible list of potential sergeants expired, Chief Ranger
William Peters announced four new sergeants. From the eligible list ranked by
their test scores, Chief Peters promoted No. 1, No. 2, No. 3 and No. 5.

Ranger Fishwick was No. 4.

"I was shocked," he recalls. "I went into the chief's office. He said he was
happy with my work. I asked why I wasn't made sergeant. He said, 'You take too
much time off in the summer.' I said I only take one of my six weeks' vacation,
plus two weeks' National Guard duty. He said, 'That's the problem.' "

According to a sworn statement by William Welsh, another ranger present, Ranger
Fishwick asked, "So you mean to tell me that I was passed over for promotion
because I'm in the military?" And Chief Peters replied, "Yes, that's right."

Federal and state laws prohibit employer discrimination for service with the
National Guard, whose members can be activated any time. Twice, Ranger Fishwick
has been called from work -- once to guard state prisoners and once to patrol
after a hurricane. Neither was in summer, the parks' busiest time.

Thomas J. Principe, a lawyer with Kramer, Tessel, Duffy & Moore, finds Chief
Peters's remarks outrageous. "How can we keep people in the Guard to fight for
us if we don't fight to protect their rights in civilian life?" he said.
Discrimination is surprisingly common, added Mr. Principe, also a National
Guardsman, though it is usually corrected by letter.

He wrote such a letter to Suffolk County officials, who said the promotions
would stand as announced.

Dennis Milton, Suffolk's chief deputy county attorney, admitted the dispute is
"a very sensitive issue," given popular support for soldiers after the Persian
Gulf war. But Mr. Milton denied any county impropriety or connection with the
ranger's military obligations.

"Chief Peters's remarks were completely unauthorized," said Mr. Milton. "They
were really a personal comment, poorly timed and completely inaccurate. As a
result, the Parks Department has brought charges of misconduct and
insubordination against Chief Peters." Potential penalties for the chief range
from reprimand to dismissal or suspension without pay.

As for Ranger Fishwick, Mr. Milton said, "We are going to resist his claims."
Mr. Milton notes it is legally possible to appoint Ranger Fishwick as a
provisional sergeant pending the next exam, but he can't imagine that happening.

However, now there's a new problem for Suffolk. The United States Department of
Labor is investigating Ranger Fishwick's allegations. The case officer says it's
important after the Persian Gulf war to pursue such allegations "with hammer and
tongs." The case officer says it would be better to settle the matter without a
two-year legal fight. But he won't hesitate, if warranted, to recommend Federal
court action to secure Mr. Fishwick's promotion and back pay because there is
too much discrimination against military personnel.

The case officer has been told that the promoted No. 5 ranger does not have a
college degree while Ranger Fishwick does, that Ranger Fishwick has longer
service and that No. 5 also happens to have been administrative aide to the
chief ranger.

The case officer happens to know a little something about the military, too. His
name is Frank Maguire (Lieut. Col. retired). He spent 21 years in the Army. He
saw considerable combat in both Korea and Vietnam. He was also an adviser to the
National Guard.

Mr. Maguire has a long list of questions he wants answered. He has given Suffolk
County until Friday to reply.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

'Will Rogers' and 'Saigon' Top Tony Race

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words


"The Will Rogers Follies," the last show to open on Broadway this season, and
"Miss Saigon," the most publicized extravaganza of this or perhaps any season,
came in first in the Tony Award nominations derby yesterday with 11 each,
including nods for best musical.

Also chosen in the best-musical category were the Caribbean-based "Once on This
Island," which received eight nominations, and "The Secret Garden," the
adaptation of Frances Hodgson Burnett's popular children's novel, which got
seven.

"Our Country's Good," a play by Timberlake Wertenbaker about a group of British
convicts in 1788 who present the first theatrical performance in Australia, took
six nominations, including one for best play.

5 for 'Lost in Yonkers'

Neil Simon's "Lost in Yonkers," which is set in an apartment over a Yonkers
candy store in 1942 and which won this year's Pulitzer Prize for drama, received
five nominations. John Guare's fact-based "Six Degrees of Separation," which
concerns a young man who pretends to be Sidney Poitier's son and which many
theater people thought would win this year's Pulitzer, got four. William
Nicholson's "Shadowlands," which has closed, received two; it tells the story of
the philosopher C. S. Lewis's relationship with an American poet. All three were
nominated in the best-play category.

"La Bete," a play by David Hirson set in 17th-century France and told in rhymed
verse, got five nominations, although it had a fairly short run and was not
nominated as best play.

The nominees, chosen by a 12-member panel, were announced at a news conference
at Sardi's restaurant.

The Tonys, which honor Broadway productions, are presented by the American
Theater Wing and the League of American Theaters and Producers. The winners are
to be announced June 2 at the Minskoff Theater; the award ceremonies are to be
broadcast live on CBS at 9 P.M. with Julie Andrews and Jeremy Irons as co-hosts.


Pryce and Salonga Named

The Welsh actor Jonathan Pryce and the Filipino actress Lea Salonga, whom
Actors' Equity wanted to keep away from Broadway, were nominated for their
leading roles in "Miss Saigon." Mr. Pryce portrays the Engineer, a sleazy pimp
with a greedy American dream, and Ms. Salonga plays Kim, an innocent bar girl
who falls in love with an American marine, in the $10 million updating of the
"Madama Butterfly" story that begins in 1975 Vietnam.

Keith Carradine was nominated as best musical actor for his portrayal of the
title role in "The Will Rogers Follies," the lavish Tommy Tune-directed tribute
to both the life of the cowboy comedian and the pulchritude of Florenz
Ziegfeld's chorus girls.

The other best musical actor nominees were Paul Hipp, who plays the title role
in "Buddy: The Buddy Holly Story," and Topol, yet again Tevye in the current
revival of "Fiddler on the Roof."

Nominations for best actress in a musical also went to June Angela, the heroine
of "Shogun: The Musical"; Dee Hoty, Mr. Carradine's wife in "The Will Rogers
Follies," and Cathy Rigby, who went flying to Never-Never Land in "Peter Pan."

Best-Actress Nominees

The nominees for best actress in a play are Stockard Channing, who portrays
Ouisa, the highly social art-dealer's wife in "Six Degrees"; Julie Harris, who
played Isak Dinesen in a recently closed one-woman show, "Lucifer's Child";
Cherry Jones, a convict turned actress in "Our Country's Good," and Mercedes
Ruehl, who plays Bella, a 35-year-old woman with the mind and emotions of a
13-year-old in "Lost in Yonkers."

Ms. Ruehl's co-star, Irene Worth, who plays her distant and stern mother, was
nominated in the best featured actress category.

The four nominees for best actor in a play are Peter Frechette, the
play-directing lieutenant of "Our Country's Good"; Nigel Hawthorne, who
portrayed C. S. Lewis in "Shadowlands"; Tom McGowan, the buffoonish troublemaker
of "La Bete," and Courtney B. Vance, the pretend Poitier son in "Six Degrees of
Separation."

Mr. Tune, who won both the choreography and musical directing awards last year
for "Grand Hotel," was nominated again in both categories, for "The Will Rogers
Follies." Graciela Daniele of "Once on This Island" also scored a double in
those two categories.

2 More From 'Saigon'

Willy Falk and Hinton Battle of "Miss Saigon," who play the American marine and
his buddy, received nominations for best featured musical actor.

In the category of best director of a play, three of the four nominees came from
the best-play contenders: Mark Lamos of "Our Country's Good," Gene Saks of "Lost
in Yonkers" and Jerry Zaks of "Six Degrees." The other nominee is Richard Jones
of "La Bete," chosen over Elijah Moshinsky of "Shadowlands."

The same situation exists in the musical-director category, with nominations
going to Nicholas Hytner of "Miss Saigon," Ms. Daniele and Mr. Tune. Eleanor
Reissa of "Those Were the Days" was nominated, getting the nod over Susan H.
Schulman of "The Secret Garden."

Only three nominees were selected in the best-revival category, instead of the
usual four, because only three shows were eligible. They are "Fiddler on the
Roof," "The Miser" and "Peter Pan."

This year's special Tony Award for outstanding regional theater will be given to
the Yale Repertory Theater, whose artistic director, Lloyd Richards, is leaving
at the end of the season.

A Tony honor will be given posthumously to the Rev. George W. Moore, pastor of
St. Malachy's Roman Catholic Church, the Actor's Chapel. Father Moore died last
week.

These are the members of the Tony nominating committee:

Alvin Colt, costume designer

Jean Dalrymple, producer

Leonard Fleischer, manager of cultural contributions for the Exxon Corporation

Leonard Harris, former critic

Mary Henderson, theater historian and writer

Rosetta LeNoire, artistic director, AMAS Repertory Theater

Maurice Levine, musical director

Robert Marx, chief of the Performing Arts Research Center of the New York Public
Library at Lincoln Center

Eve Merriam, author

Carole Rothman, co-artistic director, Second Stage

Suzanne Sato, arts executive with the Rockefeller Foundation

Jeffrey Sweet, playwright

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: List: "The 1991 Tony Nominees"

BEST PLAY

Neil Simon, "Lost in Yonkers"
Timberlake Wertenbaker, "Our Country's Good"
William Nicholson, "Shadowlands"
John Guare, "Six Degrees of Separation"

BEST MUSICAL

"Miss Saigon"
"Once on This Island"
"The Secret Garden"
"The Will Rogers Follies"

BEST REVIVAL

"Fiddler on the Roof"
"The Miser"
"Peter Pan"

LEADING ACTOR IN A PLAY

Peter Frechette, "Our Country's Good"
Nigel Hawthorne, "Shadowlands"
Tom McGowan, "La Bete"
Courtney B. Vance, "Six Degrees of Separation"

LEADING ACTRESS IN A PLAY

Stockard Channing, "Six Degrees of Separation"
Julie Harris, "Lucifer's Child"
Cherry Jones, "Our Country's Good"
Mercedes Ruehl, "Lost in Yonkers"

LEADING ACTOR IN A MUSICAL

Keith Carradine, "The Will Rogers Follies"
Paul Hipp, "Buddy"
Jonathan Pryce, "Miss Saigon"
Topol, "Fiddler on the Roof"

LEADING ACTRESS IN A MUSICAL

June Angela, "Shogun: The Musical"
Dee Hoty, "The Will Rogers Follies"
Cathy Rigby, "Peter Pan"
Lea Salonga, "Miss Saigon"

FEATURED ACTOR IN A PLAY

Adam Arkin, "I Hate Hamlet"
Dylan Baker, "La Bete"
Stephen Lang, "The Speed of Darkness"
Kevin Spacey, "Lost in Yonkers"

FEATURED ACTRESS IN A PLAY

Amelia Campbell, "Our Country's Good"
Kathryn Erbe, "The Speed of Darkness"
J. Smith-Cameron, "Our Country's Good"
Irene Worth, "Lost in Yonkers"

FEATURED ACTOR IN A MUSICAL

Bruce Adler, "Those Were the Days"
Hinton Battle, "Miss Saigon"
Gregg Burge, "Oh, Kay!"
Willy Falk, "Miss Saigon"

FEATURED ACTRESS IN A MUSICAL

Daisy Eagan, "The Secret Garden"
Alison Fraser, "The Secret Garden"
Cady Huffman, "The Will Rogers Follies"
La Chanze, "Once on This Island"

DIRECTION OF A PLAY

Richard Jones, "La Bete"
Mark Lamos, "Our Country's Good"
Gene Saks, "Lost in Yonkers"
Jerry Zaks, "Six Degrees of Separation"


DIRECTION OF A MUSICAL

Graciela Daniele, "Once on This Island"
Nicholas Hytner, "Miss Saigon"
Eleanor Reissa, "Those Were the Days"
Tommy Tune, "The Will Rogers Follies"

BEST BOOK OF A MUSICAL

Alain Boubil and Claude-Michel Schonberg, "Miss Saigon"
Lynn Ahrens, "Once on This Island"
Marsha Norman, "The Secret Garden"
Peter Stone, "The Will Rogers Follies"

BEST ORIGINAL MUSICAL SCORE

Claude-Michel Schonberg, Richard Maltby Jr. and Alain Boublil, "Miss Saigon"
Stephen Flaherty and Lynn Ahrens, "Once on This Island"
Lucy Simon and Marsha Norman, "The Secret Garden"
Cy Coleman, Betty Comden and Adolph Green, "The Will Rogers Follies"

BEST SCENIC DESIGN

Richard Hudson, "La Bete"
Heidi Landesman, "The Secret Garden"
John Napier, "Miss Saigon"
Tony Walton, "The Will Rogers Follies"

BEST COSTUME DESIGN

Theoni V. Aldredge, "The Secret Garden"
Judy Dearing, "Once on This Island"
Willa Kim, "The Will Rogers Follies"
Patricia Zipprodt, "Shogun: The Musical"

BEST LIGHTING DESIGN

Jules Fisher, "The Will Rogers Follies"
David Hersey, "Miss Saigon"
Allen Lee Hughes, "Once on This Island"
Jennifer Tipton, "La Bete"

BEST CHOREOGRAPHY

Bob Avian, "Miss Saigon"
Graciela Daniele, "Once on This Island"
Dan Siretta, "Oh, Kay!"
Tommy Tune, "The Will Rogers Follies"

Photos: Keith Carradine, above, in "The Will Rogers Follies," which collected 11
Tony nominations, including 1 for Mr. Carradine as best actor in a musical.
"Miss Saigon" also garnered 11 nominations; Jonathan Pryce, near right, and Lea
Salonga, far right, were nominated for best actor and actress.
("The Will Rogers Follies"; Joan Marcus/"Miss Saigon")

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Standing Squarely for Dissent at The Nation

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 277 words


To the Editor:

Your history of The Nation magazine (news article, April 29) repeats the myth of
Freda Kirchwey's purported Stalinism and ignores Carey McWilliams's highly
regarded tenure as editor of the weekly.

Ms. Kirchwey supported cooperation with the Soviet Union in World War II, as did
Life, Reader's Digest and The Times, and urged continuance afterward. But she
opposed the Nazi-Soviet Pact (1939-41) and joined with the anti-Communist Morris
Ernst in calling for registration of publishers of Communist "propaganda" as
subject to foreign control. In 1948, The Nation declined to support Henry A.
Wallace's Presidential candidacy, which the Soviets applauded.

Under Mr. McWilliams's editorship (from the late 1940's to the early 70's), The
Nation engaged in a spirited defense of freedom of expression in the face of
domestic political repression, exemplified by McCarthyism. It also continued a
tradition of investigative journalism, publishing special issues on the politics
of New York City and on Senator Joseph R. McCarthy's abuse of the Bill of
Rights, as well covering the civil rights movement and the impact of the Vietnam
War on American life.

In the late 50's the magazine published an issue-length article questioning the
conviction of Alger Hiss and, subsequently, articles challenging aspects of the
Rosenberg prosecution. But at the time of the Hiss and Rosenberg convictions,
neither Mr. McWilliams nor Ms. Kirchwey editorially questioned the verdicts.

The role of The Nation in journalistic dissent is too valuable to be trivialized
by the repetition of crude anti-Communism.

JOHN J. SIMON
New York, April 30, 1991

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
'Marketing' the War

BYLINE: By TOM WICKER

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 707 words

DATELINE: PALO ALTO, Calif.


"No news was manufactured" by the Pentagon or the armed services during the
Persian Gulf war. "None, period."

There was no real dispute about this statement by Navy Capt. Michael T. Sherman
at a California Forum of the First Amendment Congress, meeting this week at
Stanford University. The former Congressman and former marine Pete McCloskey led
the session.

But was "manufactured" news the real question? Carl Nolte, a veteran reporter
for The San Francisco Chronicle, thought not. In his 10 weeks covering the gulf
war, he said, the Government succeeded instead in censorship by "access and
delay."

Mr. Nolte explained that the military ground rules that "really counted" during
Operation Desert Storm were those that organized reporters into supervised
pools, then provided access to operational areas only to the pools, and later
imposed military review on the pool reports. Under such a system, he made clear,
the military did not have to "manufacture" news to control information going out
to Americans at home.

A retired Army colonel, Darryl Henderson, a decorated Vietnam combat veteran and
a graduate of the National War College, argued against the necessity for such
censorship. He said the reason most often given for the strict military control
of gulf war information -- operational security, the need to protect military
secrets, was "false."

The actual reason, Colonel Henderson suggested, was a "Vietnam syndrome" within
the military that blamed the press for the erosion of public support for that
earlier war. As a result, he said, the military started years ago to study and
train personnel in the techniques of "marketing the military viewpoint,"
primarily by seeing to it that only "upbeat" reports went out to the public.
This planning, and the performance of public information officers trained in
marketing techniques, paid off for the military in the gulf war, he said.

Colonel Henderson, a former commander of the Army's Research Institute for the
Behavioral and Social Sciences, said he had himself undergone such training.

Judith Coburn, a reporter who covered wars in Central America and the Middle
East as well as the Vietnam war, and who now lectures on mass communications at
the University of California at Berkeley, disputed the validity of the military
attitude toward the press's responsibility for defeat in Vietnam.

She argued that press coverage of that war had been largely favorable until home
front support for it began to wane in the late 60's. Thus, she said, the public
did not follow the press into disillusionment with the war; it was the other way
around.

Ms. Coburn also addressed herself to the question of operational security. She
cited the fact that correspondents in Vietnam, including herself, were briefed
well in advance of the forthcoming U.S.-supported invasion of Laos by South
Vietnamese forces. Reporters in Vietnam, she said, did not expose this military
secret. Instead, officials in Washington leaked the information to the press
there.

Ms. Coburn drew a distinction between British and American press performance in
the gulf war. British correspondents, she said, "didn't enlist in the war
effort" -- as she said too many American reporters did. She pointed out that
Iraqi refugees were questioned by British journalists in Jordan, enabling them
to arrive at Iraqi casualty estimates -- more than 100,000 -- long before
official estimates were available.

Mr. Nolte also was critical of some American reporters in Saudi Arabia. Few
tried to stretch "pool rules" and most "took handouts and standard briefings"
from the military, he asserted. He reserved his strongest criticism, however,
for the American journalists who organized the press pools for the military --
mostly by "favoritism," as Mr. Nolte saw it.

Captain Sherman, who set up and directed the military's Joint Information Bureau
in Saudi Arabia, put much emphasis on what he called the "incredible technology"
he said the military provided for reporters trying to cover the war. He conceded
that in some respects the information system had "failed miserably."

But Ms. Coburn, to applause from the audience, said the military had in fact
done "a brilliant job" on its own behalf.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR;
Old Soldiers, Old Ovations

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 258 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 8


Gen. William C. Westmoreland, the last general to address both chambers of
Congress before Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf did so today, won a standing ovation
with this declaration, "Backed at home by resolve, confidence, patience,
determination and continued support, we will prevail in Vietnam over the
Communist aggressor."

But General Westmoreland, the commander of American forces in Vietnam, warned
that the enemy was "far from quitting" and would be defeated only by
"unrelenting but discriminating military, political and psychological pressure
on his whole structure and at all levels."

That speech, on April 28, 1967, marked the first time a general had addressed
Congress during hostilities that he was overseeing as battle commander. While
General Westmoreland received a rousing reception from the lawmakers, Congress
was not so united in backing the war effort as today, when all the members
seemed enthusiastic in their accolades for General Schwarzkopf.

On Capitol Hill, the Westmoreland speech was seen at the time as an effort by
President Lyndon B. Johnson to seize upon the general's military prestige to
maintain political support for an unpopular war.

Since World War I, an admiral and five other generals have addressed both houses
of Congress. They were Gen. John J. Pershing, on Sept. 8, 1919; Gen. George C.
Marshall, on May 21, 1945; Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower, on June 18, 1945; Adm.
Chester Nimitz, on Oct. 5, 1945; Gen. Douglas MacArthur, on April 19, 1951, and
Gen. Matthew B. Ridgway, on May 22, 1952.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section C; Page 22; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1242 words


Sports Star

He soars and floats, slams and jams. On video as on the basketball court,
Michael Jordan of the Chicago Bulls rolls up the score. Released in February by
CBS /Fox, "Michael Jordan's Playground" has sold 500,000 copies and remains near
the top of the best-seller lists.

"At the rate it's going, it could be the best-selling sports tape ever," said
John Gaffney, the director of sports and music for CBS/Fox.

But "Michael Jordan's Playground" is significant for another reason as well.
Whether it is in sports or music or some other category, producers are breaking
out of their usual genres and making videos in other areas. "What we see with
Michael Jordan is the ability of sports stars to cross over into the
entertainment world," Mr. Gaffney said.

As with most highlights tapes, this one keeps the star above the rim and
slam-dunking for much of its 44 minutes. At other times, though, the content is
more like a music video. There is even a bit of a plot in which Mr. Jordan is
dispatched to a playground to cheer up a youngster, played by Tyrin Turner, a
star of Janet Jackson's "Rhythm Nation" video, who has been turned down for his
high school team. Later, Mr. Jordan joins the group Full Force for some song and
dance.

Like its star, the audience for "Michael Jordan's Playground" has also crossed
over. "Most sports tapes are aimed at the 24-to-48 age group," Mr. Gaffney said.
"But this time they aren't the usual sports buyers. This is the kid who has to
see Michael Jordan every day." That could describe the typical music-video
buyers, who are 15 to 25 years old. "It's a little like a rock-star following,"
Mr. Gaffney said.

Choices for Children



Specialists in children's videos say that children who are 6 and younger, like
adults, have only a narrow choice in the video stores.

Like the adult trade, the children's market is hit-driven. Shelves are hogged by
Ninja turtles, moose, squirrels and mermaids from Disney-size distributors to
the exclusion of worthy creations from smaller companies.

"Titles need national recognition before dealers will buy them," said David
Pulda, the owner of Flicks Video in Newton, Mass., which he said stocked 1,700
children's titles. "Parents are looking for good stuff, but the stores aren't
going out on a limb and buying anything different."

One children's video maker that has found store space is Rabbit Ears of
Westport, Conn., which enlists such movie stars as Jack Nicholson and Holly
Hunter to read classic stories like "How the Rhinoceros Got Its Skin." On two
tapes released this week, Robin Williams reads "The Fool and the Flying Ship," a
Russian folk tale, and Sigourney Weaver reads "Peachboy," a Japanese tale. Each
tape runs about a half-hour and costs $9.95.

New Video Releases

Avalon
1990. RCA/Columbia. $91.95. Laser disk, $29.95. 2 hours, 6 minutes. Closed
captioned. PG.

Barry Levinson's film chronicles the lives and evolution of the Krichinskys, an
immigrant Jewish family in Baltimore, from the arrival of the patriarch, Sam, in
1914 through the marriages and parting of offspring in the 1950's. The director
works on an intimate scale, resulting in a "generous and touching film that is
essentially smaller than its own sweeping ambitions, a crowded and skillfully
drawn landscape" (Janet Maslin).

Three Men and a Little Lady
1990. Touchstone. $92.95. 1:43. CC. PG.

A sunny confection, and an enjoyably skillful one, Emile Ardolino's film picks
up five years after its predecessor about three men and a baby. Though the child
(Robin Weisman) has aged, her three caretakers, played by Tom Selleck, Steve
Guttenberg and Ted Danson, still live in a child's paradise of self-centered
obliviousness. A journey to England allows some entertaining antics and overall
the movie "has a gentler, more sweetly old-fashioned style than its predecessor"
(Maslin).

Havana
1990. MCA/Universal. $92.95. LD, $39.98. 2:25. CC. R.

There is romance in Sydney Pollack's sprawling, atmospheric film, but it has to
do not so much with the protagonists, Jack Weil (Robert Redford) and Bobby Duran
(Lena Olin), as it does with the city on the eve of revolution. Playing a
gambler involved with Bobby, Mr. Redford is "more magnetic in other parts of the
story than he is during the love scenes," and "the glittering decadence of a
culture on the verge of collapse is the film's most fascinating aspect"
(Maslin).

Quigley Down Under
1990. MGM/UA. $92.99. LD, $29.98. 2:01. CC. PG-13.

As an American cowpoke set down in Australia, Tom Selleck wears chaps and says
things like "I ain't rightly certain." Simon Wincer's film pays homage to the
stock western and occasionally manages lively action and workable humor. As for
Mr. Selleck, "he has such a friendly, easygoing manner that it's hard to know
why he fades into the woodwork whenever he appears on the big screen" (Maslin).

Mr. Destiny
1990. Touchstone. $92.95. 1:50. CC. PG-13.

James Belushi is a junior executive who believes his life would have turned out
better if he hadn't struck out at a critical juncture during a high school
baseball game. Presto, past and present are altered and the he finds himself
unhappily rich. In James Orr's film it's "hard to find a glimmer of originality,
much less wit or emotion" (Maslin).

And Keep in Mind

THE JUNGLE BOOK -- Emanating from a tiger, a bear and an ape, the voices of
George Sanders, Phil Harris and Louis Prima share billing with a smart-stepping
platoon of elephant recruits. The Disney classic, based loosely on Kipling's
Mowgli stories, is a "wise, subtle and often hilarious animation" said a review
in The New York Times. 1967. Disney . $24.99. 1:18. CC. G.

HEARTS AND MINDS -- Peter Davis's Academy Award-winning documentary offers an
unadorned accounting of both sides of the Vietnam propaganda war. On one side,
the United States Government tries to sell its case to the public any way it
can; on the other, the antiwar movement goes to its own extremes of hyperbole
and exaggeration. "It was tendentious, but it gave you something to think
about," Walter Goodman wrote in The Times. 1974. MPI . $19.98.

SYLVIA SCARLETT -- Sylvia (Katharine Hepburn) and her larcenous father (Edmund
Gwenn) are on the run accompanied by a raffish cockney (Cary Grant). As a
"tremulously frustrated heroine of the tale," said the review in The Times,
"Miss Hepburn is on her home grounds." As for Grant, "whose previous work too
often has been that of a charm merchant, he turns actor and is surprisingly good
at it." 1936. Turner . $19.98. 1:34. No rating.

THE SUMMER OF MISS FORBES -- The children take a back seat as their German
governess pursues her passion for a handsome Mexican. Gabriel Garcia Marquez's
story, influenced by his novel "Love in the Time of Cholera," displays an
"extravagance of clear bright colors and Mr. Garcia Marquez's glorious obsession
with love and death" (James) 1988. Fox Lorber $79.95. 1:27. Spanish with English
subtitles.

EARTH and AELITA, QUEEN OF MARS -- Two classic Russian silents from the early
Communist era are part of a series subtitled "Visions of a Workers' State." In
Aleksandr Dovzhenko's "Earth" (1923), a Ukrainian farming village unites to buy
a tractor. Employing huge futuristic sets, the comedy "Aelita" (1924) transports
a Moscow engineer to Mars, where he meets a woman and joins a proletarian
uprising. Kino . $29.95 each.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Michael Jordan's Playground," starring the Chicago Bulls star,
has sold 500,000 copies. (Associated Press); Lena Olin as Bobby Duran in
"Havana." (Jean Pagliuso/Universal Studios)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE WAR;
CONGRESS MEMBERS HAIL SCHWARZKOPF

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 8


In a triumphant homecoming address to the House and the Senate, Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf today thanked God, the President, Congress, the troops and the
American people for their willingness to "get the job done" and "kick the Iraqis
out of Kuwait.

"Who were we?" the commander of the American forces in the Persian Gulf war
asked. "We were 541,000 soldiers, sailors, airmen, marines and Coast Guardsmen.
We were the thunder and lightning of Desert Storm. We were the United States
military. And we are damn proud of it."

With that, the lawmakers leaped to their feet in the first of several thunderous
ovations that punctuated the general's speech to a packed House chamber. The
divided vote on using force in the gulf, which many members who cheered today
had opposed, seemed long forgotten as lawmakers lined up at a reception after
the speech to get the general's autograph and pose with him for photographers.

"We would like to thank the Congress and former Administrations for giving us
the finest tanks and aircraft and ships and military equipment in the world,"
declared General Schwarzkopf. "That is what gave us the confidence necessary to
attack into the teeth of our enemy with the sure knowledge that we would
prevail."

A Hero's Welcome

Saving his biggest thank-you for the American public, General Schwarzkopf said:
"The prophets of doom, the naysayers, the protesters and the flag-burners all
said that you would never stick by us. But we knew better. We knew you'd never
let us down. By golly, you didn't."

The address today was intended as a "special Congressional tribute," but not as
a joint meeting or session of Congress, which are bigger productions that would
have required attendance of the Cabinet, the diplomatic corps and other
dignitaries. But the four-star general, who was escorted into the chamber by
Congressional leaders as the Army Band played a fanfare, was accorded a hero's
welcome seldom seen on Capitol Hill.

The mood was much more somber the last time a general appeared before both
chambers. It was during the Vietnam War in April 1967, when Gen. William C.
Westmoreland, the American commander, pledged that American troops would
prevail.

Standing at the same rostrum where General Westmoreland spoke, General
Schwarzkopf, who served two tours in Vietnam, the last as a battalion commander,
paid tribute to Vietnam veterans.

"We feel a particular pride in joining ranks with that special group who served
their country in the mountains, jungles and deltas of Vietnam," he said. "They
served just as proudly as we served in the Middle East."

As his audience looked up at the general's wife, Brenda, his two daughters, a
son and a sister watching from the House gallery, he thanked the soldiers'
families.

"It is you who endure the separations and hardships simply because you choose to
love a soldier, a sailor, an airman, a marine or a Coast Guardsman," he said.
"But it is your love that gave us strength in our darkest hours. You are truly
the wind beneath our wings." The general also said God should grant "a special
love to all of our fallen comrades" who were killed.

Uncertainty on General's Future

The 56-year-old general, who has said he plans to retire from the Army in the
next few months, gave no clue about his plans, saying, "I do not know what the
future holds in store for me."

A group of Republicans in Tampa, Fla., where the general is based at MacDill Air
Force Base, have begun a campaign to draft him to run for the Senate against
Senator Bob Graham, a Democrat.

But Thomas S. Foley, the House Speaker, said, "I don't think anybody knows what
his political preferences are." And given the opportunity to weigh in on the big
vote of the week, a gun control bill in the House, General Schwarzkopf declined.

"My position is that I was very successful at disarming 42 Iraqi divisions," he
said. "I leave that decision to the Government of the United States."

NAME: H. Norman Schwarzkopf

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Congressional leaders congratulating Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf
yesterday on the House floor. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Black Revolution's 'Legal Arm' Weakens in 90's

BYLINE: By E. R. SHIPP

SECTION: Section B; Page 18; Column 3; National Desk; Law Page

LENGTH: 1086 words


Opposition to the war in Vietnam was mounting. Race riots were erupting in the
nation's cities. Militant young people were challenging the older civil rights
leaders. The Federal Bureau of Investigation was infiltrating movements for
social change. And the first wave of blacks was attending the nation's top law
schools.

Dissatisfied with the legal community's response to those turbulent times, 300
black lawyers and law students formed the National Conference of Black Lawyers
in May 1969 to serve as "the legal arm of the black revolution." They hoped to
become the predominant black lawyers group, displacing the National Bar
Association.

But 22 years later, the National Bar Association is flourishing with a
membership that has quadrupled to 12,000 in the last decade. And the Conference,
known for its aggressive, even militant, advocacy of frequently unpopular
causes, has fallen victim to a conservative political climate and dwindling
interest among lawyers.

It is closing its national office, situated for nearly 18 years in a brownstone
at 126 West 119th Street in Harlem. Although about a dozen chapters exist around
the country, the group's future is in doubt.

Outlasting Some Others

"We outlasted the organizations of the 60's," said W. Haywood Burns, the
conference's first director and now the dean of the City University of New York
Law School. "A lot of them that were born in response to the times have since
gone out of existence."

Dean Burns and about 20 other lawyers from as far away as Chicago came to the
brownstone last Saturday to sort through the tangible evidence of its history.
Legal briefs, letters, pamphlets and other memorabilia will go to Howard
University.

In addition to performing legal work, the organization holds conferences and
conducts tutorials for law students.

When the National Conference of Black Lawyers began, there were fewer than 3,000
black lawyers in the nation. Some of the top civil rights strategists helped
lead the organization, including Robert L. Carter, now a Federal district judge
in New York, and Derrick A. Bell Jr., a law professor at Harvard.

Many of the young lawyers eventually found careers in politics, academia or
large mainstream law firms,

But as some lawyers moved on, they were replaced by an eager group of recent law
graduates -- until almost a decade ago, when students, generally more
conservative than their predecessors and often staggered by debt, chose to earn
money rather than work for next to nothing on conference projects. At the same
time, many veteran lawyers and professors who had worked on cases and provided
money drifted away.

"It had less significance because as events evolved and careers evolved, other
organizations or other forums fit the needs," Gordon G. Davis, now a senior
partner in a New York firm, said in an interview on Wednesday.

The group's leftist politics played a role, too, Professor Bell said.

"It certainly went much more over into the militant representation," he said in
a telephone interview from his home. "That probably both made it harder to raise
funds, and also put off some practitioner types, particularly those in
Government agencies and with large law firms."

For more than five years the organization has been financially strapped, finding
it difficult to come up with even the $75,000 needed for rent and utilities
annually. The paid staff was eliminated two years ago. Membership declined to a
few hundred.

Finally, said Adjoa A. Aiyetoro, the current director, "We felt it was time to
end this continual drain while we tried to do projects."

So last weekend a steady stream of lawyers and former clients showed up to sort
through mounds of paper, and reminisce.

"We made history," Dean Burns said.

Within six months of its founding, lawyers from the conference were representing
the Black Panthers, Vietnam War resisters and Cornell University students who
had staged an armed occupation of the student union building. They had also
joined the fight against President Richard Nixon's nomination of Clement F.
Haynsworth and G. Harrold Carswell to the Supreme Court.

They later represented the black activist Angela Davis, inmates involved in
uprisings at Attica and other prisons, victims of police brutality and black
elected officials and community leaders they felt were being selectively
prosecuted.

They sued the F.B.I. and local police departments for surveillance of political
groups, and the United States over its invasion of Grenada. Through the years
they built alliances with liberation movements abroad, especially in southern
Africa.

Its leaders insist the organization will survive, mainly through its local
chapters. But others fear that in closing its national office, it is going the
way of 60's organizations like the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and
the Black Panther Party, which eventually disappeared.

Other Groups Expand

As the Conference revamps, the American Bar Association, which once excluded
blacks, and the National Bar Association are developing more programs to appeal
to a growing number of the nation's 26,000 black lawyers.

Twenty-two years ago, the National Bar Association's annual convention was "a
place to have a really good time and forget about the horrors of practicing in a
hostile society," Professor Bell said. But the organization "didn't seem to be
addressing the needs of either lawyers or the people they were representing," he
said.

It changed, and "the old organization that had been dogged was suddenly
attractive a lot of people," said John Crump, executive director of the National
Bar Association.

But the National Bar Association does not do what the conference has always
done: litigate cases on the cutting edge of the law.

"I happen to think there is still a need for an organization like N.C.B.L.,"
said A. J.Cooper, a partner in a Washington firm. "To the extent that closing
the national office also includes a demise of its activities, it's a tragedy
because, frankly, it's just going to have to be invented again."

Alton H. Maddox Jr., a New York City lawyer who headed the group's juvenile
rights project until in 1983, said lawyers especially need the support of the
conference when they take on the system in controversial cases, as he has often
done.

"Lawyers who are bent on activism are going to find themselves facing more
static without an N.C.B.L.," he said. "You can't play Lone Ranger and Tonto in a
legal revolution."

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The National Conference of Black Lawyers is closing its national
office in Harlem. Packing boxes were, from left, Jeffrey Edison, Sheril I.
Harris, Adjoa A. Aiyetoro, the director, and A. Annette Ensley. (John
Sotomayor/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At the Movies

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 8; Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 737 words


'Noises Off'

It may not be the Oakland A's or the New York Giants, but the lineup attracted
by Touchstone Pictures and Amblin Entertainment for a new film isn't exactly an
assemblage of marzipan wimps.

Alphabetically, it goes like this: Carol Burnett, Michael Caine, Denholm
Elliott, Julie Hagerty, Mark Linn-Baker, Annie Potts, Christopher Reeve, John
Ritter and Nicolette Sheridan.

What brings them together is "Noises Off," the Michael Frayn stage comedy about
the antics of a touring company of actors that started off as a hit in London
and moved to Broadway, where it repeated its success and captured a Tony Award
in the process.

With Ms. Burnett as Dotty Otley, the troupe's fading star, and Mr. Caine as
Lloyd Fellowes, the play's sarcastic director, and Mr. Ritter as Garry Lejeune,
Dotty's young lover, production plans call for filming to begin on May 20 under
the direction of Peter Bogdanovich, from a screenplay by Marty Kaplan. Mr. Reeve
is cast as Frederick Dallas, the slightly inept leading man; Ms. Sheridan as
Brooke Ashton, the lovely but somewhat confused ingenue, and Annie Potts as
Belinda Blair, the company's peacemaker.

Mr. Elliott plays the tippling character actor Selsdon Mowbray; Mr. Linn-Baker
portrays Tim Allgood, the long-suffering stage manager, and Ms. Hagerty, Poppy
Taylor, the hard-pressed assistant stage manager.

Suave Detective

Renny Harlin, who leaped into prominence last year with the success of the
action-packed "Die Hard 2," has chosen a new directing assignment: "The Saint."
The film, for Paramount Pictures , is based on the Leslie Charteris novels about
the suave detective Simon Templar that have provided Hollywood and television
with fodder from the 1940's, when the likes of George Sanders and Louis Hayward
played the role, to the 1960's, when Roger Moore apprenticed for his future as
James Bond by portraying the hero on the small screen.

Writing the screenplay is Terry Hayes, the producer and writer of "Dead Calm,"
co-producer and writer of "Mad Max: Beyond Thunderdome" and the writer of "The
Road Warrior." With Robert Evans as the producer, "The Saint" is to be filmed in
the fall.

Going Hollywood

"All my life I have dreamed of making a movie in the United States or Europe,"
said John Woo, the Hong Kong-based film maker.

And now, it seems that at the age of 45, after 22 films dating back to 1973, Mr.
Woo may be Hollywood-bound. What is giving his career wings to the West is "The
Killer." This tale of a hit man coerced into doing one last job has won praise,
as have many of Mr. Woo's other films, for its combination of mayhem and comedy.

Ever since he was very young, Mr. Woo said, watching French action films
starring Alain Delon or watching movies by Sam Peckinpah and Martin Scorsese and
just about all the musicals and westerns he could feast his eyes on, he has
wanted to make a romantic film about a killer.

And while he said negotiations were not yet final with any Hollywood companies,
he was looking forward to the realization of his dream.

Meanwhile, though, he is moving ahead. After "The Killer," he said, he made "A
Bullet in the Head," which was shown last year at the Toronto Film Festival. The
film deals with three young men, good friends from Hong Kong whose efforts to
make their fortune end up involving them in gang wars during the Vietnam War and
ultimately in betrayal.

This year, Mr. Woo said, he intends to produce two movies, including a sequel to
"The Killer." He chose to turn over the directing assignments to others,
because, he said, "I don't want to repeat myself." As a director, he plans to
make a new, as yet untitled, crime film, beginning in July in Hong Kong and
starring Chow Yun-Fat, the hero of "The Killer."

"There are a lot of things that interest me," Mr. Woo said. "Before 'The
Killer,' I made over 10 comedies, and when I was a child I was fascinated with
cartoons, westerns and musical movies. I'm a low-key person, but I'm still full
of humor, and I love to read comic books. That's why I make so many comic-action
movies."

Musicals like "Singin' in the Rain" and "West Side Story" and the films of Fred
Astaire, Mr. Woo said, "gave me a lot of rhythm and speed and the beauty of
action."

Discussing the secret of combining action and comedy, Mr. Woo laughed and
offered this advice: "Read more comic books and be happy all the time."

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 11, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Focusing on Welfare

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 938 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 10


President Bush has struck a partisan blow against critics who accuse him of
having no domestic policy: He has denounced Lyndon B. Johnson's Great Society.
By doing so he also invigorated a national debate about what type of social
welfare programs the nation needs, and how effective other Presidents have been
in combating poverty and racial bias.

The heart of the debate is political. Mr. Bush delivered his rebuff in a speech
at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor last Saturday, laying a foundation
for domestic policy debate in the 1992 Presidential campaign. He knows that many
voters share his opposition to racial quotas, and he knows there are few votes
to be had in defending welfare recipients.

Mr. Bush's comments on the Great Society came in an address in which he warned
that free speech rights were under assault on many college campuses. The
President defended both free speech and "freedom of spirit," saying the Great
Society had discouraged individuals from performing good works by
overemphasizing the role of Government in social policy.

Mr. Bush said Johnson's crusade against poverty had backfired, saying its civil
rights programs had "generated animosity" and its welfare programs had made poor
people dependent on Government.

Embedded in Social Fabric

In his remarks, Mr. Bush ignored the fact that much of the Great Society has
been accepted and embedded in the nation's social fabric: Federal aid for
elementary and secondary schools, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, the Fair
Housing Act of 1968, Medicare for the elderly, Medicaid for the poor, a
nationwide food stamp program, automobile safety and consumer protection laws.

The President's speech pointedly omitted any praise for Great Society programs
that Mr. Bush has lauded, like Head Start and a number of environmental laws.
Perhaps unintentionally, Mr. Bush's comments revived debate over the merit of
those programs. Supporters of the Great Society say it drastically reduced the
number of poor people. Critics insist that it fostered a culture of dependency.

The President's criticism of the Great Society was sweeping and unqualified. But
Mr. Bush's main speechwriter, Tony Snow, who drafted the address, acknowledged
in an interview that the Bush Administration's judgment of the Great Society was
actually more complex and nuanced than the speech suggested.

Mr. Snow, 35 years old, a former editor of the editorial page at The Washington
Times, said he had been troubled to hear radio reports that Mr. Bush had
attacked the Great Society. Mr. Bush conceded that "the ideals behind the Great
Society were noble," but he said the programs were not "up to the task," and he
concluded that "we need to rethink our approach" to poverty and discrimination.

Mr. Bush, in his speech, sought to lay the groundwork for the Republican
domestic agenda in the 1992 Presidential campaign, a campaign in which
Republicans will assail Democrats as members of the party of old ideas.

Mr. Bush's indictment of the Great Society surprised some experts. Joseph A.
Califano Jr., for instance, who worked for Johnson at the White House from 1965
through 1968, said, "Mr. Bush doesn't know his history."

'Redistribute Opportunity'

In a telephone interview from London, Mr. Califano said, "The goal of the Great
Society was to redistribute opportunity and wealth and to empower poor people."

Empowerment is a theme in vogue among Bush appointees like Housing Secretary
Jack F. Kemp and James P. Pinkerton, a White House policy planner. And Mr. Bush
has often alluded to the notion that poor people should have more control over
public housing and other Government benefits.

Mr. Bush delivered his speech at the site where Johnson articulated his vision
of the Great Society 27 years ago. Speaking in a time of prosperity and economic
growth, Johnson said, "We have the opportunity to move not only toward the rich
society and the powerful society, but upward to the Great Society," and he
declared his commitment to end poverty and racial injustice "in our time."

What Johnson did not envision was that the Vietnam War would eat up so much of
the nation's resources.

Nonetheless, by virtually all accounts, the Great Society helped improve the
lives and financial security of the elderly, in part through a big increase in
Social Security benefits. By most accounts, Medicare and Medicaid have succeeded
in providing health care for the elderly and the poor, though at far greater
cost than Johnson could ever have imagined.

A Question of Dependency

But there has been bitter debate over whether the Great Society's main cash
welfare program, Aid to Families With Dependent Children, tends to foster
dependency. Timothy M. Smeeding, a professor of economics at Syracuse
University, is among those who say it does.

But Greg J. Duncan, a professor of economics at the University of Michigan who
has followed the income of 7,500 families for two decades, said: "There is no
evidence from our data that dependency is any greater problem now than in the
early 1970's, when Great Society programs reached their peak. There is no
evidence of an increase in the proportion of children dependent on welfare."

In the speech, Mr. Bush proposed to replace the Great Society with a "good
society," in which individuals perform private acts of common decency, becoming
"points of light." Mr. Bush's speech and his domestic policy indicate that his
vision of Government's role in fighting poverty is much more modest than
Johnson's; it omits the idea of the Government as helper and savior that
inspired Johnson.

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 11, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Holiday for Civil Rights, Not Just Dr. King

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 197 words

DATELINE: CONCORD, N.H., May 10


The House of Representatives in New Hampshire, one of only two states that do
not have a paid holiday for state workers in honor of the Rev. Martin Luther
King Jr., has voted to create a paid holiday honoring civil rights but has left
King's name off the measure.

The compromise bill, approved Thursday by 243 to 105, would also end a paid
state holiday on Fast Day, which has its roots in an edict issued by New
Hampshire's colonial government and has been celebrated in the state for more
than 300 years.

The bill, which is expected to receive speedy approval in the State Senate and
Gov. Judd Gregg, would establish Civil Rights Day on the third Monday in
January, the same day on which the Federal Government and all other states
except Arizona honor King.

Supporters of a holiday in King's name tried for 12 years to have one
established here, and the Senate earlier this year passed such legislation. But
the bill lacked support in the House, where some members said no single person
should be honored for the civil rights struggle and where others objected to
King's stand against the Vietnam War and referred to allegations of marital
infidelity and plagiarism.

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 12, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WHERE DAY IS NIGHT

BYLINE: BY DONATELLA LORCH;  Donatella Lorch reported on the Persian Gulf war
for The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 33; Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3750 words


SULEIMAN AL-MUTAWA, THE MINISTER OF Planning, is one of the more unorthodox
members of the Kuwaiti Government. While his colleagues insist on the
traditional headdress and dishdasha (the floor-length robe), Mutawa, who is
Berkeley-educated, prefers impeccably tailored Western suits. Because of his
attire, he says, he understands the plight of the Palestinians in Kuwait better
than most of his colleagues. Kuwaiti soldiers think he is Palestinian and
regularly hassle him at military checkpoints. Even after he shows them his
ministry identity card, they have a hard time believing he is not only a Kuwaiti
but also a high-ranking official.

Mutawa recognizes that in a country where things are rarely what they seem, it
helps to approach problems in an unconventional manner. After almost three weeks
of a post-liberation darkness that was not confined to nighttime, the Kuwaiti
Ministry of Information put out a news bulletin that 13 neighborhoods in the
capital had electricity. Asked to confirm that electricity had been turned on in
certain neighborhoods, Mutawa bypassed the official route. He picked up one of
the few working phones in the city and called his Sri Lankan maid at home. She
confirmed it.

Two months after Kuwait's liberation, the basics of life -- water, electricity,
gasoline -- have been returned to a crippled capital, but the dichotomy between
appearance and reality still surfaces everywhere. Living in post-liberation
Kuwait, especially during the first month, is like looking through lenses that
turn the world upside down.

Smoke clouds from the hundreds of burning oil wells suddenly turn day into
night. When that happens, birds stop singing and the air, heavy and humid,
becomes deadly quiet. The Kuwaitis, a people not used to fending for themselves,
had surprised many by fighting ferociously against the Iraqi occupiers. But once
the land was theirs to govern again they lapsed into helpless inaction. An
avowedly Muslim people, with strict laws against drinking, they have brought
into Kuwait City enough alcohol to make it as wet as their neighbor Iraq. And
freed from a seven-month, vicious occupation, they are, in turn, denying life
and liberty to the "new enemy" among them: the Palestinians, Iraqis and
Jordanians, many of whom have lived in Kuwait for decades, some for several
generations.

A window opened for me on Kuwait's contradictory character one morning, about a
week after liberation, in the cool living room of a large villa, the home of the
country's most popular comedian, Abdul Hussein al-Ridha. I was interviewing his
24-year-old British-educated daughter, Mona. (Both had lived through the
occupation unharmed.) We sat in the penumbra of the vast living room, sipping
soda. Mona, a Shiite, began wearing a white head scarf three years ago, she
said, because she was very religious. She also believed in arranged marriages,
but not, she added quickly, for herself. Notwithstanding her demure head scarf,
she offered bristling opinions on every subject from democracy to women.

"The fabric of Kuwaiti society is so weak, it will go off the deep end," she
declared. She believed that her country's problems were tied to an underlying
hypocrisy created by oil wealth. "We in Kuwait are like an Oscar Wilde play. We
live two different identities. Look at the women. Some of them pretend to be
religious because their country is religious. Go to London and they will be
completely different. This double identity will destroy us. Most Arab societies
are ruined by this double life."

The Kuwaitis need foreign workers, she went on, yet they mistreat and persecute
them. They say they want democracy, but they do little to bring it about. "The
Kuwaitis cannot face themselves," she concluded as she walked me out into the
sunshine, past her family's Mercedes-Benz. "Look at democracy -- we will always
talk about it. But we will not push for it as long as Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Jordan
-- our neighbors -- do not want it for themselves."

The competing needs of what is and what ought to be have been taking bizarre
turns.

On Feb. 26, Kuwait City was officially liberated by the Kuwaiti Army and its
Arab allies. Although the United States Second Marine Division was the first to
arrive on the capital's outskirts, it had orders to stop and wait for the Saudi,
Kuwaiti and Egyptian armies to catch up. The Egyptians were the last to arrive,
having lost their maps.

The next day, I was part of a convoy of journalists entering the capital. On
Feb. 28, as eight colleagues and I scrounged for food behind the American
Embassy, we came across 12 American soldiers lounging in a dirt driveway. Some
were cleaning their M-16's; others were shaving from mirrors lying on the
dirt-spattered camouflage hoods of their humvees (the present-day equivalent of
old military jeeps). They were not there, an officer told us.

The group was a Marine Special Forces unit, an elite force that infiltrates
behind enemy lines and spearheads attacks. They had driven in on the night of
Feb. 25 and had met up with several carloads of the Kuwaiti resistance, who had
taken them immediately to the American Embassy. The Special Forces team had
swept it clean of booby traps. On Feb. 26, American liaison officers with the
Kuwaiti Army came to tell them to pull out. The city was being liberated by the
Arab members of the coalition, they were told. No American troops were
officially in Kuwait City.

American troops have stayed outside the capital, mostly based around the
airport. Two months after they helped liberate Kuwait, about 1,000 Marine
reservists were still camped on Hill 99, somewhere in the desert west of the
capital. They called themselves the Lost Battalion.

Kuwait City during the first few weeks was essentially run by the United States
Army. During the Iraqi occupation, members of the Kuwaiti Government-in-exile in
Taif, Saudi Arabia, had ostensibly prepared for the day when they would have
their country back, but after the Iraqis' hasty retreat Kuwaiti officials
appeared too stunned to act.

There were no rules or regulations. What control there was seemed to be confined
to checkpoints, some of which were little more than slalom courses of office
chairs, sofas, metal objects, even rearranged burned cars.

The United States Army Corps of Engineers cleaned the streets of tanks and cars,
removed roadblocks, helped restore electricity, swept and refurbished certain
buildings. In a surrealistic replay of one of the most extraordinary scenes of
the Vietnam War -- the evacuation from the American Embassy in Saigon -- hel
icopters flew in low from the sea on Feb. 28, kicking up clouds of dust and
sand. The choppers hovered over the American Embassy, only this time they were
coming in as part of the winning team. Gunners hung out of the gunships waving
at the cheering crowd, flashing victory signs, some throwing candy.

Several men dropped from the runners onto the embassy roof. They were sweeping
the grounds again before the arrival of the Ambassador the next day. In this
upside-down world, it didn't seem unusual that the American Ambassador should
arrive before the Emir, the country's ruler. And no one was particularly
surprised when, on March 20, less than two weeks after the Emir's return, the
Cabinet resigned.

It did so in large part because of its failure to restore electricity, water or
food to the country. There was no official announcement on Kuwaiti radio or
television. Instead, the news made its way to Kuwait City via the Kuwaiti
Mission to the United Nations in New York. And over the next few weeks, the
ministers functioned as acting ministers. Finally, on April 20, the Emir created
a new Cabinet, which was little more than a reshuffling of the previous one.

A "FREE" KUWAIT HAS meant liberation to Kuwaitis but imprisonment and even death
to those who have the misfortune to be identified with those groups or countries
that sided with the Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein.

Freedom celebrations lasted for weeks. In front of the American Embassy, between
the emerald sea and the palm-lined corniche not unlike the Promenade des Anglais
in Nice, exuberant Kuwaitis created a traffic jam that lasted at least 10 days.
The celebrators blasted radios, blared horns, fired automatic weapons into the
air.

Two miles away, however, in the Palestinian neighborhood of Hawali, liberation
was a nightmare of recrimination, as the Kuwaiti military searched for suspected
Iraqi collaborators. On March 1, tanks rolled through Hawali and checkpoints
were set up, blocking all entrances into the neighborhood. A Kuwaiti soldier
grabbed a Palestinian and dragged him down the street by the hair. The man
struggled and the soldier hit him in the head with the butt of his M-16 rifle.
At the corner of Beirut Street and Tunis Avenue, the man struggled again and was
thrown to the ground and kicked. The soldier cocked his M-16 and put it to the
man's head. A member of the American Special Forces intervened, pushing the
Kuwaiti soldier back and frisking the Palestinian before tying his hands behind
his back.

Most of the city's other checkpoints disappeared after three weeks. But two
months after liberation, there are still long lines at checkpoints into
Palestinian neighborhoods. Kuwaiti soldiers approach cars with their M-16's or
AK-47's at the ready. Men with Jordanian passports or Iraqi or Palestinian
identity cards, and even some Kuwaitis, are pulled out and roughly frisked. At
times, the men are put into cars and taken away. According to Middle East Watch,
a human rights organization, an estimated 6,000 were in detention by the end of
April.

In the month I spent in Kuwait, I met the country's outcasts hiding in
apartments in Hawali, in the refugee camp on the border and in Safwan in Iraq.

Several blocks from the Hawali food cooperative, a family of 15 lived behind
shuttered windows and locked doors. They were Iraqi Christians, part of a
community estimated to be as large as 10,000, mostly professionals, including
doctors, lawyers and engineers. Two brothers, Paul and Joseph (they refused to
give their last names), met with me one morning in their darkened home. Paul,
who used to work at a petrochemical plant, said his family had not ventured out
for fear of being arrested. Without a phone to contact the Red Cross or foreign
embassies, they were marooned.

"There are seven checkpoints to the British Embassy," Paul said. "Even if we get
through one, what are our chances for the next one? Everyone has hate. Hate will
keep on coming. It is nonstop. All that I ask is that they let me go -- free."

In mid-March, Ahmed Shaker, who holds an Iraqi passport, stood bewildered on the
deserted main street in Safwan, a town just across the border in Iraq. He and
about two dozen other men -- Palestinians, Iraqis and Jordanians -- had been
pushed out of a bus at gunpoint by Kuwaiti soldiers.

The men had no food, water or spare clothes. They had been arrested two weeks
before, had been beaten, then dumped in Iraq and told never to return to Kuwait.
None of them had passports or identity cards with them. Shaker's father sat on
the ground, his knees drawn up to his chest, trying to understand why his life
had taken such a wretched turn. He wept. "I have lived in Kuwait for 30 years.
My wife is still there. Why this?"

Shaker, a 23-year-old engineering student, was angry. "They forgot that I was
born with them, lived with them, studied with them." He grabbed one of the men
and ordered him to pull off his shirt. On his right arm were festering,
wedge-shaped burns that, the man said, had been made by an iron during 10 days
of beatings and torture. There were also burns on his neck and head.

For a while, the men stood wordlessly under the noon sun. Then they walked north
into Iraq.

In a camp several miles south of Safwan, hundreds of refugees have been living
in their cars or makeshift tents in the flat, windy desert. Although the camp is
within Kuwait, a checkpoint forbids them from going farther into the country.

In March, Hani al-Jalil, a 30-year-old policeman, sat in the sand by the
roadside, unable to return to his home in Kuwait City. With him were his wife
and sister and their eight children, including two newborns. A Filipino maid
offered whatever assistance she could.

Jalil is the great-grandson of a Kuwaiti Bedouin, but he isn't a Kuwaiti
citizen. He is a bedoun (the word means "without"), a stateless person. Before
the Iraqi occupation, the Kuwaiti Government had begun to evict bedouns by not
reissuing them civil identity cards. In post-liberation Kuwait, those cards
allow free access to food and gas.

Without a passport, Jalil could not get past the checkpoint, even though he had
his police identification. He had gone to Iraq in January because both his wife
and sister had complicated pregnancies and needed medical care unavailable in
Kuwait, since much of the hospital equipment had been removed by the Iraqis.

Unfortunately for the residents of Kuwait whose rights have been so summarily
abridged, the mechanics of justice have been turned inside out as well. After
pressure from Western allies, the Government promised that detainees would be
given fair trials, but as this article goes to press, no trials have taken
place.

Two days in a row, in late March, I tried to contact judges or members of the
Ministry of Justice. Finally, the Kuwaiti Information Office sent me to the
central courthouse. Three jeeps and a bright red Mercedes were parked in the
curving driveway. Saudi soldiers, camped in the hallways, said they had not seen
a judge or anyone who resembled one since they moved in two weeks before. They
offered me a tour of the premises. The offices had been ransacked, desks
overturned, the contents of drawers emptied onto the floor. The hallways were
dark and dank and smelled of urine and rot. In one of the rooms, a life-size
fuzzy pink panther lay on a bed, its arms folded over its eyes.

KUWAIT, LIKE ITS neighbor Saudi Arabia, is officially a dry country. But Kuwait
City is awash in alcohol that Kuwaitis have brought in from their nondry
neighbor, Iraq. One night, as I sat with a CNN crew in a parking lot off the
seaside corniche, two Kuwaiti Army majors brought us gifts of a case of
Heineken, a bottle of champagne and a bottle of Johnnie Walker Red Label.

"It is the only good thing that came of the occupation," said one of the
mustachioed majors, in jeans and a T-shirt, and clearly drunk. "The Iraqis
stopped me at the border and told me I could not bring it in because it was not
allowed in Kuwait." He smiled. "I told the guard: Isn't Kuwait Iraq's 19th
province?"

In a city without water or electricity or a single open store for the first
several weeks, it was one of the persecuted Palestinians, not a Kuwaiti, who
kept a lone restaurant going. The owner, Abu Ghazi Saleh Saleem Khass, said he
was not afraid of the Iraqis. After liberation, he, too, he said with a shrug,
had been beaten by Kuwaiti military.

The 44-year-old Palestinian boasted that his restaurant and grocery store, the
Al-Sultan Saleem, on Hawali's main street, didn't close for more than one day
during the chaotic conditions of the Iraqi occupation. And he was not going to
be deterred by the general chaos in the capital after the Iraqis pulled out. A
week after liberation, the main room of his store was packed with plastic
garbage cans overflowing with flour, sugar, cumin, curry and cinnamon. Burlap
bags of Indian lentils and chick peas were stacked in one corner.

"I did not put my eggs all in one basket -- as you say in English," said Khass
as he interrupted himself to give orders to his staff of 20 young men. "When the
Iraqis came, they started to steal my food. So I hid it -- a bit at my sister's,
at my house, at my friends'."

Khass was born in Jerusalem but has spent 32 years in Kuwait. He once owned
seven restaurants in Kuwait but has sold most of them. Al-Sultan's has a pastry
shop, seating for 90 guests, marble counters, chandeliers, hand-carved wooden
banisters and Khass's great pride and joy: huge refrigerators he bought in
upstate New York.

In early March, the restaurant served only takeout food. It was the only place
in Kuwait City where people could buy the traditional Ramadan sweets eaten after
breaking the fast in the evening. Even though the city was without water and
electricity, Khass transformed his asphalt backyard into a kitchen. There, amid
a flurry of black flies, his employees stirred massive steaming caldrons of
sweetened milk, frying as many as 300 pancakes a day.

MORE THAN ANYTHING ELSE, IT is the burning oil wells that cast a pall of
unreality over Kuwait City. The pitch-black sky at noon burns hot orange at
night. On a smoke-filled day, the visibility from the upper floors of the Kuwait
International Hotel is near zero. But at night the dark horizon lights up with
spectacular plumes from the fires, like a devil's giant birthday cake.

When the wind blows in a northerly direction, the capital is coated with yet
another layer of soot wafted in from the oil wells burning to the south and
southwest of the capital. The skies rain black -- little brown particles that
harden on car windshields and blacken hair and exposed skin. When it actually
rains, cars only become filthier.

By the end of March, the United States Government issued a health hazard warning
for Kuwait and the Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia. The health effects of the
burning oil wells also became an "unconfirmable fact." The Arab News, a Saudi
newspaper, published a report in late March that seven sheep -- which had been
grazing in the Kuwaiti oil fields and which had been slaughtered -- had lungs
that were dark red and severely irritated from smoke inhalation.

Shortly before reading the report, I had heard the story from the American
military, who had told me British medical teams had done the dissections. But
the British military denied their involvement and said they had heard that
dissections had been made by Saudi military medical teams. The Saudis shrugged
and said that in all probability it could have happened. The story, apart from
its appearance in one newspaper, remained unconfirmed, although late last month
Kuwaiti scientists reported that in autopsies black spots had been found in
sheep's lungs.

Even the Kuwaiti resistance became part of the never-never land that is Kuwait
these days. On March 4, the Kuwaiti Information Office posted the notice that
the resistance was holding its first press conference. As it turned out, it was
held in an opulent villa that had somehow escaped the occupation unscathed. The
room where members of the press gathered had crystal chandeliers and red velvet
sofas. The rest of the city might be short of food and water, but a profusion of
sweets and refrigerated fruit juices were laid out in another room.

Seven men with red kaffiyehs covering much of their faces came and sat at a
lace-covered table. They did not volunteer their names. On the table were small
signs: "Co-op Societies"; "Health Sector"; "P.O.W. Welfare." One by one they
spoke. "Our steadfastness is because of the goodness of our people," one man
said in English. "They are very close to God Almighty. In the mosques we even
tackled the problem: Is it Islamic or not Islamic to kill an Iraqi?"

The press conference lasted more than two hours. No real information was
offered. One man said that the resistance had uncovered papers showing that
Iraqis had received orders to "rape all Kuwaiti virgins," but he didn't share
those papers with members of the press. No one in the room seemed to know who
the masked strangers were. Later, I asked a prominent member of the resistance
about the press conference. He had not heard of the meeting or of the men in red
kaffiyehs.

IN MANY WAYS, the attempts by the Kuwait International Hotel to go from looted
building to chic hostelry are a reflection of an often absurdist approach to
restoring normalcy.

Across the street from the American Embassy, the hotel for a month after
liberation was home to journalists, American and British military information
bureaus, several Kuwaiti ministries and the Rendon Group, the American public
relations firm representing the Kuwaiti Government. It was one of the few places
in the city where Kuwaitis could come for newspapers. The Iraqis had looted the
shops in the hotel and stolen the televisions and locks, but the rooms were left
intact. The chandeliers and escalators were in place. In early March, rooms
without water, electricity, locks or phones cost $110 a night.

On Feb. 28, the 19-floor hotel was empty of employees. The next day, a generator
lighted the damp-smelling lobby. Cold water came unannounced for a few hours
once every other day or twice in one day and then not for another two. Before
generator-powered electricity made it to the rooms, piped-in music serenaded the
lobby: first supermarket music, then country and western and finally Beethoven's
Fifth Symphony.

By the end of the week there was still no water, food, phone or working
elevator, but the hotel used its generator to light up the huge neon sign on its
tower. On March 22, the hotel opened the La Palma Restaurant; $25, cash, for a
buffet meal of beef stew, chicken, pasta, assorted vegetables, desserts and
bottled water. There was no running water to wash your hands before dinner. But
in the lobby, in front of the neon backlit pictures of the Crown Prince and the
Emir, a Filipino swirled pink cotton candy every night.

By the third week in March, basic services were returning to the capital. Many
gasoline stations were open and still free. Electricity was on throughout the
city, and there was even one working traffic light. The mountains of garbage
were being collected by an American company. The French military demining team
had cleared 10,000 mines from five miles of beach. At the Kuwait International
Hotel, water was on 24 hours a day. The hotel had doubled the room prices.

After a month when almost everything in Kuwait had been handed out free,
including the T-shirts with the words "Free Kuwait" emblazoned on them, the most
telling symbol of the country's return to normalcy was the opening of the Chanel
store in the lobby of the Kuwait International Hotel. I asked if the Lacoste
shirts were giveaways. The salesman was shocked. "Madam," he said, "nothing in
Kuwait is free."

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A panorama of murk. Smoke clouds engulf the Kuwait Towers,
obscuring the midday sun. (Wesley Boxce/Sipa)(pg. 32); In a Palestinian
neighborhood of Kuwait City, Abu Ghazi Khass prepares meals from the backyard of
his restaurant, the only one open for weeks after the Iraqis were expelled.
(Donatella Lorch/The New York Times)(pg. 33); The liberation of Kuwait has meant
torture and expulsion for many of its longtime residents. This man claims his
wounds were inflicted by the Kuwaiti military. (Donatella Lorch/The New York
Times); United States marines pose near a car in which two Iraqi soldiers were
killed. The sand has been blackened by oil-well fires at the Greater Burgan oil
field. (Bruno Barbey/Magnum); A Kuwaiti soldier beats back a crowd of
Palestinians who, after waiting all day in a bread line, broke into a riot.
(Steve Lehman/Saba)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 12, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MONUMENT MAKER

SECTION: Section 6; Page 10; Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 87 words


Since moving to Baltimore from Chicago and Hawaii, we have received many
visitors ("Monument Maker," by Peter Tauber, Feb. 24). We take them to see
Washington and, invariably, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. No matter what
holiday mood may prevail, I've noticed all those in its vicinity turn quiet,
contemplative and respectful.

I, too, noticed all the uproar before the memorial's completion and the silence
afterward. Tauber's article recalled what all the fuss was about.

BETTY JANE LAU
Baltimore


LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of an oriental girl. (Adam Stol Tman)

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 12, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MONUMENT MAKER

SECTION: Section 6; Page 10; Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 99 words


Tauber is entitled to prefer Lin's design for the Vietnam Veterans Memorial to
Frederick F. Hart's. However, he is unfair in suggesting that Hart was overpaid
for his work ("Hart's commission . . . was . . . ten times Maya Lin's").
Included in Hart's fee was compensation for the time and effort involved in
modeling his figures.

Since Lin finds it difficult to categorize herself as either a sculptor or an
architect, may I suggest a rule-of-thumb definition? An architect designs his
work but has someone else execute it, while a sculptor does both.

GEORGE CARR
Washington

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 12, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MONUMENT MAKER

SECTION: Section 6; Page 10; Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 90 words


Lin's Civil Rights Memorial in Montgomery, Ala., is clearly one of her triumphs
as a sculptor and architect. However, Martin Luther King Jr. would be astonished
to be credited with the inscription: ". . . until justice rolls down like water,
and righteousness like a mighty stream."

The words are from the prophet Amos (5:24). As one who attended the Boston
University School of Theology with King, I can't imagine his countenancing the
misleading finality of the stone inscription.

THE REV. GILBERT Y. TAVERNER
Concord, Mass.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 12, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

No Light at End of the Dandelion Tunnel

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 160 words


To the Editor:

On a recent trip to Washington, my family and I visited the Vietnam Memorial. As
we walked along searching for the name of a cousin on the black tablets, I was
overwhelmed by the unmistakable odor of the herbicide 2,4-D. Sure enough, the
yellow dandelions growing along the top of the monument were all contorted and
dying. They had been sprayed.

The herbicide 2,4-D, a principal ingredient of the notorious Agent Orange used
in the Vietnam War, is a likely cause of cancer in humans. As in Vietnam,
someone had to spray it, and many other people, mostly unaware of the danger,
have breathed the vapors. Like the Vietnam War, the war against dandelions is an
expensive, stupid, self-destructive attempt at domination, which we are bound to
lose. A war memorial is supposed to help us remember and learn. In this case, we
have done neither.

DAVID EHRENFELD
Professor of Biology, Rutgers U.
New Brunswick, N.J., April 30, 1991

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 12, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Streaming Into Hong Kong

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 671 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, May 11


Ignoring constant warnings carried by Vietnamese radio and television about the
bleak reception awaiting them here, Vietnamese boat people are once again
sailing to Hong Kong in large numbers.

More than 800 arrived in the first week of May alone, 378 of them in eight boats
on Tuesday -- the highest one-day total in nearly two years. Hong Kong
Government officials say more than 4,500 Vietnamese have arrived so far this
year, compared with only 6,400 who came in all of 1990, prompting fears that
this British colony may face a crisis like the one in in 1989, when 34,000
Vietnamese fled here.

Officials Are Concerned

Clinton Leeks, the Government's refugee coordinator, said that even though
spring and summer are traditionally the most popular times for the Vietnamese to
come, the big jump in arrivals compared with last season is "what is troubling
us most."

Mr. Leeks said the Government once believed the high numbers of boat people who
arrived in 1989 were "an aberration, but now we believe that the low numbers of
1990 were the aberration. We think the whole thing may start up once again."

He attributed the low number of arrivals last year to the forced repatriation of
51 Vietnamese in December 1989. The forced return of the boat people was
condemned by countries around the world, including the United States, and an
embarrassed Vietnam, desperately seeking foreign aid and investment, has refused
to accept any more such returns.

Talks With U.S. Officials

Mr. Leeks said Hong Kong and Britain this month hoped to discuss the Vietnamese
problem here with American officials, who have opposed forced repatriation of
boat people.

Vietnamese have been locked in detention camps here since 1988, when the Hong
Kong Government said it would no longer treat all boat people as refugees, who
are accorded special protection under international law, but instead as illegal
immigrants.

Since then all new arrivals have been taken to closed camps, where they must
wait to be screened by immigration officers who decide whether they are refugees
eligible for resettlement, or illegal immigrants who will eventually be sent
home.

Government officials here say that most of the Vietnamese have left for economic
reasons, an assertion disputed by many humanitarian groups.

Relief workers say conditions in the colony's 10 detention camps, which already
house 47,300 Vietnamese -- the largest population of boat people in Southeast
Asia -- are tense.

'Violence and Unrest'

"You have thousands of men and women locked up, facing uncertain, almost
hopeless futures, and that breeds violence and unrest," said a relief worker.

On Thursday, fighting broke out between rival factions of Vietnamese at the Hei
Ling Chau camp, leaving 42 people injured, 2 of them seriously, camp officials
said.

About 350 additional correction officers were called in to conduct a weapons
search, which yielded 419 homemade weapons. On Friday, the colony's legislative
leaders said no matter how large the influx, they would refuse to vote money for
any new camps.

One legislator said that Hong Kong's "humanitarian" treatment of the Vietnamese
"attracts them to come here." But Suzy Comerford, chairman of Hong Kong Refugee
Concern, an umbrella group of relief agencies, said: "Hong Kong has had a harsh
system of detention that was supposed to deter the boat people and it hasn't. It
ought to be clear by now that deterrence as a policy doesn't work."

"We've been interviewing these arrivals to find out what has triggered this new
stream of migrants, and really the reasons they are leaving Vietnam now are no
different from the reasons they left in the past," said Mr. Leeks. "They are
poor, and they hope to find a better life."

Of the 47,300 in the camps, a government official said, 30,509 are still
awaiting screening, while almost 17,000 have already been screened out. An
additional 6,700 Vietnamese are classified as refugees and live in open camps
while they await resettlement.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 12, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
The Search For a New Security Umbrella

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 4; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 958 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


AFTER watching the Soviet Union's slide into civil strife and the quick American
military victory in the Persian Gulf, the countries of Southeast Asia are a bit
puzzled about who their enemy is supposed to be, but they are clear about what:
anything that gets in the way of trade and the easy shipment of goods, the basis
of the Asia-Pacific region's extraordinary prosperity.

One result seems to be a lot of stumbling around, with the floating of various
ideas, none quite right for everyone, about new regional groupings to respond to
the European Community and a North American free-trade zone.

In this gavotte, various powers are trying to find new roles. The Soviet Union,
with desperate financial and industrial needs that could be met by the
Asian-Pacific nations, is playing the bear in babushka's clothing, everyone's
warm-hearted friend.

Japan, a wallet in search of a role, is gingerly, and not very smoothly, pushing
its own diplomacy on Cambodia and sending a few minesweepers to the Persian
Gulf, while apologizing again to everybody in the neighborhood about that past
unpleasantness called the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, sometimes
known as World War II.

China, having politically mismanaged its effort at Western-oriented,
export-driven growth, is still patching up friendships with the West. But
Beijing has normalized relations with Indonesia, is tempting Vietnam with a
rapprochment and is talking more sweetly to its three successful spinoffs --
Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan.

The United States is trying to hold on to its bases in the Philippines while
insuring that in any new regional grouping, Moscow is out but Washington is in.
Combined with the problems of civil war in Cambodia, Japanese trade issues and a
limited military budget, these tasks are hard enough without letting any big
ideas get in the way.

That does not stop security planners from coming up with new names for the
inevitable, however. Defense Department officials in Washington are now talking
of a new regional security strategy called "cooperative vigilance," which
appears to be simply a new name for a more austere future. Rather than pay to
keep up huge and increasingly outmoded fixed bases like the ones in the
Philippines, the United States will concentrate on ready access for American
forces to equipment or bases owned by regional friends and allies.

Singapore is a model. As of last November, the United States has the right to a
bit more ship maintenance and repair than before, some short-term rotation by
American planes and an increase in American military personnel stationed there
to 95, from 20. That will hardly be enough to forestall another world war. But
it does provide a way to think about the future, a process that may go further
in Manila next month, when the Philippines is host to a regional security
conference. The meeting was originally intended to get Manila's neighbors to
come out publicly in favor of a new bases agreement, which is still unsigned. No
one except the Malaysians, who have a third-world orientation intensely
skeptical of Washington, can quite believe the Filipinos will kick out the
American bases and lose a considerable amount of money and jobs.

U.S. as Counterweight

Still, for the rest of the region, a continued and significant United States
military presence is regarded as crucial for the maintenance of unrestricted
trade routes by air and especially by sea. The United States, while not regarded
as altruistic, is cherished as a counterweight to Moscow, Beijing and especially
Tokyo, keeping the military and territorial ambitions of others in check.

Singapore's new Prime Minister, Goh Chok Tong, caused a minor fuss recently when
he stated the obvious: that with Moscow turning inward and Washington reducing
its military presence in Asia, Japan, China and India were showing signs of
"wanting to play a more assertive role."

Such ambitions were quickly denied by all three countries, but there is no
question that Japan is stirring. Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu just made a 10-day
visit to the countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in which he
tossed around some money, felt out reactions to Japanese participation in
Cambodian peacekeeping and met with the leaders of all the warring Cambodian
factions.

Japan has a few ideas to help along the negotiating process in Cambodia,
Japanese officials said, but since they were intended to ease the concerns of
only one faction, the Government in Phnom Penh, other Cambodians were
understandably cool. In the meantime, Japanese officials were at pains to say,
regional reaction to the four Japanese minesweepers in the gulf was "generally
positive," except in Beijing, which growled. "Obviously," said a senior Japanese
official, "it's one way to begin to think about peacekeeping forces in
Cambodia."

In fact, Asean leaders are generally polite to the Japanese, who provide 58
percent of all aid to Thailand and 48 percent of all aid to Indonesia and whose
businesses have three times the amount of investment in Asean countries that
American companies do. Still, few trust them.

So it was left to Singapore's Lee Kuan Yew, Asean's elder statesman, to grumble
loudly that Asians have no desire to see the Japanese engaged in armed
peacekeeping anywhere. "You may be giving liqueur chocolates to an alcoholic,"
Mr. Lee said. "Whatever they do, they go to its limits."

That's why, he said, it's vital that the security partnership between Washington
and Tokyo remain strong. "This relationship is key to the continuance of
stability which we have enjoyed since 1945 and which has transformed the whole
region," he said. "No other arrangements can be better than this."

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 12, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER REVIEW;
The Morals of Insider Stock Trading

BYLINE: By LEAH FRANK

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 11; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 648 words


"THE ARRANGEMENT," a new play by Eric Eisenberg at the Arena Players Repertory
Theater, explores insider trading, how it happens and who is involved.

Like the subject of corrupt politicians, which has been examined in plays like
"The Deal," recently at Long Island Stage, and "The Last Deal," presented last
year at the Arena, the subject is the betrayal of trust.

The plot covers a few weeks in which two public-relations executives not only
trade the stock of a client based on privileged information but also manipulate
the price of the stock.

In the process they ruin the client and the president of their agency, and incur
the wrath of the Securities and Exchange Commission. The men end up with
shattered lives, but Mr. Eisenberg has not supplied any reason why we should
understand or sympathize with them.

At its core, "The Arrangement" is nothing more than a slice of sleazy life. The
instigator of the deal is Bill Flynn, a crude, ignorant man who understands that
life and success are whizzing past him and that there is nothing he can do about
that.

His office partner is Tom Marigold, who, like the flower, is attractive and
sensitive. He is also a talented public-relations man who has been successfully
handling the account of a firm teetering on the brink of supplying the world
with a medical breakthrough. Tom understands the new technology, while the
scheming Bill understands short selling and stock manipulation. Together they
form the perfect team.

That these stock characters have lifelike qualities comes from the superb
performances turned in by Steve Ayle as Tom and Jack Green as Bill. Tom is
laughably stupid. He is not an innocent who has to learn about the wicked ways
of Wall Street as much as he is one of life's perpetual victims. To his credit,
Mr. Ayle eschews hysterics and manages to look progressively more confused as
the plot wears on.

Mr. Green gives a first-rate performance as a man whose idea of survival stems
from his Vietnam War experience in which he killed a troop of South Vietnam
soldiers by mistake. Bill's fantasies of past life are skewed, so whether he
longs again for Vietnam is not clear.

He certainly wishes to find sexually submissive women to whom he does not have
to speak, women, he says, "the way women used to be."

Mr. Green's look of pain and confusion when he remembers life the way he
imagines it used to be is touching.

Amy Reynolds, the S.E.C. investigator, comes across like a female Columbo. She
speaks with a sugar-sweet Southern drawl, she can never quite put her hands on
the right papers when she needs them, and she never misses a clue.

Christine Miller is an Amy who is as cold on the inside as she is beautiful on
the outside. Mr. Eisenberg has written the character to be the female
counterpart of the sexist, manipulative Bill. But although Amy is on the side of
justice, she is a stereotypical male fantasy female character out to destroy
men. Joseph S. King does his utmost to make the client a believable human being,
as opposed to the saintly, almost saccharine character Mr. Eisenberg has
written.

At the end of the play it is no surprise that Marigold comes out smelling like a
rose, Bill is looking at a long prison term, Amy has gotten her man from several
different positions, and Isaac, the client, is the ultimate loser.

Frederick De Feis has directed "The Arrangement" as a modern melodrama and has
underscored the villainy and the moral. But even Mr. De Feis's experienced hand
cannot avoid the syrupy squish at the last righteous line, "Look to your heart,
young man, look to your heart."

"The Arrangement" holds out the promise that there is a developing playwright at
work. Here, on the other hand, is a banal evening of theater sparked only by
outstanding performances. It is playing on the Main Stage Theater in East
Farmingdale, and it closes this evening.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Steve Ayle with Christine Miller in "The Arrangement."

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 13, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Dr. Michael L. Lewin, A Plastic Surgeon, 81

SECTION: Section B; Page 12; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 203 words


Dr. Michael L. Lewin, a pioneer, innovator and educator in reconstructive
surgery, died on Saturday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx. He was 81 years old
and lived in Cliffside Park, N.J.

He died of brain cancer, a family spokeswoman said.

Dr. Lewin, who sought especially to correct deformities in children, was the
founding chief of plastic surgery at the Montefiore Medical Center for 18 years
and then the director of plastic surgery at the hospital of the Albert Einstein
College of Medicine for more than a decade.

He was a native of Warsaw, studied medicine at the University of Zurich and
interned in Switzerland and New York. During and after World War II, as an Army
major, he performed surgery in many medical centers around the country.

Dr. Lewin was a leader of many professional societies and the author of scores
of articles. Overseas, he aided Israel, South Vietnam and Indonesia and, in
recent years, the Soviet Union, Hungary and Czechoslovakia.

He is survived by his wife, Berta; a son, Robert, a psychiatric social worker,
of Brooklyn; a daughter, Dr. Barbara Lewin-Tankel, a clinical psychologist, of
Philadelphia; a brother, Stephan Lewar of Toronto, and two grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 13, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Fund-Raising on Target for Whopping Victory Parade

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1448 words


With a month to go, New York's salute to the veterans of the Persian Gulf war --
a huge, triumphant ticker-tape parade up lower Broadway's Canyon of Heroes -- is
on schedule, planners say, and very likely to meet its twin goals of total
private financing and a spectacle rivaling those for Lindbergh or V-J Day.

In an outpouring of support for the hard-pressed city and troops of the
American-led coalition, the organizers say, scores of corporations, hundreds of
businesses and thousands of individuals have pledged $4.1 million in cash, goods
and services, bringing Operation Welcome Home within reach of its $5 million
goal for the June 10 extravaganza.

If continuing appeals meet expectations, organizers say they will be able to
spare the city up to $2.5 million in police, sanitation and other costs; defray
all other parade expenses; sponsor an interfaith service and a fireworks
display, and have enough left to aid some returning veterans and families of
those killed or wounded in the war.

And if all goes as planned, they say, two million people in lower Manhattan and
millions more watching television around the world will see 30,000 marchers --
troops and dignitaries from every state, every gulf regiment and all 40 allied
nations -- march up Broadway with floats, veterans of other wars, Medal of Honor
recipients and a legion of thundering bands under cascades of cheering and a
blizzard of confetti and ticker tape.

Biggest Parade Planned

"It's going to be larger than any ticker-tape parade in history," said Joseph H.
Flom, co-chairman of Operation Welcome Home, a 30-member private commission
named by Mayor David N. Dinkins in March to organize a heroes' welcome that has
traditionally been planned and paid for by the city itself.

"It will be wonderful -- a unique experience," said Peter Kohlmann, executive
director of the commission. "Imagine yourself in the middle of a big snowstorm
with millions of people cheering all around you, people dumping confetti out
windows and off the rooftops. It's a form of New York respect and love."

Some 3,000 dignitaries -- ambassadors, cabinet officers, governors, members of
Congress, labor and civic leaders -- will join the Mayor in the reviewing stands
at City Hall Park, while Secretary of De fense Dick Cheney, Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf, the gulf commander, and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, Gen.
Colin L. Powell, and other military and civilian leaders will ride or march in
the parade.

Along the one-mile parade route from the Battery to Worth Street, scores of
five-foot yellow-ribbon bows will be painted on the pavement, symbols of the
void left on the block by a soldier gone to war.

Although parades on St. Patrick's Day, Puerto Rican Day and other occasions have
often mustered larger gatherings or longer marches along Fifth Avenue,
ticker-tape parades have usually been short lavish bursts of adoration on lower
Broadway for lone heroes or a few world-class athletes, political or military
victors, astronauts or foreign leaders.

Those honored have included Charles A. Lindbergh in 1928, Gen. Dwight D.
Eisenhower in 1945, John Glenn in 1962, the world champion New York Mets in 1969
and 1986, the New York Yankees in 1978, Pope John Paul II in 1979, the American
hostages returned from Iran in 1981 and, last year, Nelson Mandela, the African
National Congress leader.

Foreign Troops, Too

Next month's parade will more closely resemble those that followed the Armistice
of World War I and victories in Europe and the Pacific in World War II, when
returning American troops marched up the Canyon of Heroes at shoulder arms and
were engulfed in ticker-tape and patriotism.

Outlining plans for the parade, Eric Andrus, a spokesman for the organizers,
said, "We're going to have 30,000 marchers, troops from all 50 states, a heavy
contingent of New York City-area Desert Storm troops and veterans from World War
II, the Korean War and the Vietnam War."

Besides American Army, Navy and Marine contingents, he said, troops or other
representatives from most of the 40 nations in the coalition that defeated Iraq,
and from Israel, which was bombed but did not respond militarily, are expected
to take part. Bands, floats, fife and drum corps and many civilian
organizations, including labor groups, will also participate, he said.

Among the marchers will be a contingent of at least 87 of the 210 living
recipients of the Congressional Medal of Honor, the nation's highest award for
valor. The eldest are four 80-year-old veterans of World War II. Those honored
are to be flown to New York by American Express, their hosts and a principal
contributor to the parade.

1,000 Tons of Paper

The marchers will step off at 11:30 A.M. from Battery Park and move up Broadway
in the shadows between the skyscrapers. More than 1,000 tons of ticker tape,
shredded paper and confetti, much of it distributed by parade organizers, will
flutter down from windows and rooftops.

"It's a blizzard of paper and color and sparkle," Mr. Kohlmann said, conjuring
up scenes from ancient newsreels with streamers raining down through the
sunlight upon a roaring tumult of humanity.

Most ticker-tape parades end at City Hall, where the Mayor and other officials
greet and praise the heroes. But next month's parade will pass the reviewing
stand in City Hall Park and continue north to Worth Street, where the marchers
will disperse. The parade is expected to end at midafternoon.

The throngs lining Broadway that Monday are expected to be swelled by lunchtime
crowds of workers from Manhattan's government-financial complex, and by people
in town for the Puerto Rican Day Parade and the Welcome Back to Brooklyn
Festival, both scheduled for June 9, and Fleet Week, the annual gathering of
American warships in the harbor.

Although many details of news coverage remain to be worked out, the parade
organizers say they expect the event to be telecast live by most local stations
and by some of the American networks and broadcast in Europe, the Middle East,
the Far East and Australia as well.

Fireworks at Night

As part of the welcoming festivities, the organizers are planning to send out
5,000 invitations to an inter-faith service to be held at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 112th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, at 4 P.M. on Sunday, June 9.

After Monday's parade, at about 9 or 9:30 P.M., the organizers are planning a
half-hour fireworks display to be set off from barges in the East River at the
South Street Seaport. Mr. Andrus said that Coca-Cola had agreed to sponsor part
of the display but that a co-sponsor was still being sought.

Some 450 people, mostly volunteers, have worked on the parade for two months.
The Mayor's 30-member commission has set the goals and raised most of the money;
Mr. Kohlmann, the executive director, with a small paid staff and 400
volunteers, has coordinated planning, publicity and invitations; Eventures, a
company that produces special events, has taken on the huge logistics of the
parade without charge.

Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch and other mayoral staff members have met often with the
parade organizers. The city, facing a budget crisis, will provide 3,000 police
officers, 550 sanitation workers, a battalion of cleanup trucks and hundreds of
other municipal employees, but will be reimbursed for all its expenses.

Aid for Veterans Planned

Despite the recession, organizers say, more than 3,000 individuals and 40
corporations have donated $2.5 million in cash and $1.6 million in goods and
services. About $300,000 is expected to be raised from the sale of T-shirts and
tote bags, but the campaign will continue to provide funds for veterans and
their families as well as the parade.

Noncash contributions, the organizers said, have included hotel rooms and
airline tickets for visiting dignitaries; meals and gifts for service personnel;
office supplies; donations of accounting, legal and advertising services, even
tons of used ticker tape from a Connecticut company that still makes
old-fashioned ticker-tape machines.

Has support for the troops waned since the war? "People are getting back to
their day-to-day lives," Mr. Andrus said. "But there's still enthusiasm for
this. I see it in the yellow ribbons people wear, in the calls we receive from
people willing to help."

Among the hundreds of letters bearing contributions, he said, was one from
Alison Bankes's fourth-grade class at the Todd School in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
The children had raised $800 selling hot dogs.

"We hope this money will make a better parade for the troops of Desert Storm,"
the children wrote. "They deserve it!"

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 13, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Behind the Hate, With Bill Moyers

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 14; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 801 words


Bill Moyers, television's Captain Ahab, sails forth again tonight on his chase
after the big idea. "Moyers: Beyond Hate," the 90-minute program at 9 on Channel
13, is his effort to harpoon the common elements in all manner of violence-prone
groups and individuals: Los Angeles gangs; Ku Kluxers, skinheads and other white
supremacists; religious fanatics; wife batterers; homosexual bashers and soccer
rowdies; the rulers of South Africa and China; soldiers in Vietnam and the
Persian Gulf; Palestinians and Israelis; feuding neighbors around the United
States. Also monkeys and people who don't like Donald Trump and Leona Helmsley.
It's reductivism rampant.

There are interesting passages, especially the interviews with two gang members,
one of whom says, "The most courageous acts of violence gets you a reputation,"
and the spoutings of Tom Metzger of San Diego, head of the White Aryan
Resistance. But lumped in here along with so much else, they lose their
particular quality. It seems not to have occurred to Mr. Moyers that if you
apply the word hate to feuding families, then you may need a different one for
the Holocaust.

Interspersed among the examples of violence are capsule elucidations, mainly
from the psychiatrist Robert Jay Lifton of the City University of New York. Most
of what he and others say about haters dehumanizing their victims and feeling
alive only when hating is plausible and entirely in accord with the liberal
canon. But the sound bite, even when intelligent, is a stick in the eye of
intellectual endeavor. It's like trying to catch a whale with a hook.

The technique does particular violence to Mr. Moyers's most estimable guests,
who were interviewed at a mouthful of a conference in Oslo, entitled "The
Anatomy of Hate: Resolving Conflict Through Dialogue and Democracy." Urged on by
Mr. Moyers, his eyes narrowed the better to hear with, these personages deliver
pretty much what is expected of them. Elie Wiesel seems to be playing Elie
Wiesel as he sighs heavily and speaks portentously: "Ultimately, whoever hates
hates his brother, and whoever hates his brother always hates himself." Nelson
Mandela gives a little homily on class solidarity. President Vaclav Havel of
Czechoslovakia comes off like Goody Two Shoes: "I'm not capable of really
hating."

The most affecting statements come from Myrlie Evers, who tells of the hatred
she felt after the 1963 assassination of her husband, Medgar Evers, the civil
rights leader, and from Mairead Corrigan Maguire, who won a Nobel Peace Prize in
1976 for her efforts to stop the bloodshed in Northern Ireland.

Listening to Mrs. Maguire's declaration of faith in nonviolence, viewers may
wonder why Mr. Mandela's organization, the African National Congress, does not
share it, but Mr. Moyers does not bring that up. He seems uninterested in the
political aspect of violence, yet it keeps slipping in. Recalling the Camp David
meeting that led to a peace agreement between Egypt and Israel, former President
Jimmy Carter notes that the leaders of the two countries refused to speak to
each other for most of the time. Mr. Moyers lets that pass; the possibility that
the agreement owed less to personal mediation than to exigencies of state does
not fit tonight's script.

The sort of idea Mr. Moyers takes to is that hate is a learned addiction that
can be combated by education, "one step at a time, one person to another."
Despite the air of being a worshiper in the temple of ideas, he seems more
comfortable as a processor of pieties. The sensibility is sounded here by a full
rendition of "You've Got to Be Carefully Taught," Broadway's contribution to the
cause of racial tolerance. (Yes, it is accompanied by pictures of children.)

Mr. Moyers finds promising approaches in the fight against intolerance in a
class at New Utrecht High School in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn, where
students are encouraged to talk about their own feelings, and at an
international meeting where a Palestinian and an Israeli become friends despite
everything.

The young people are appealing, and there is a lovely moment when the Arab youth
reaches forward to flick away an insect that is buzzing around his Jewish friend
while he is affirming that he would do his duty in the Israeli army. But by now
Mr. Moyers has left the hard road of ideas for the gentler paths of
interpersonal relations. Be grateful tonight's sermon does not end with a chorus
of "Getting to Know You."

Moyers
Beyond Hate

Produced and directed by Catherine Tatge and Dominique Lasseur for Public
Affairs Television and International Cultural Programming; written by Kenneth
Cavander and Bill Moyers; Amy Schatz, coordinating producer; Judith Davidson
Moyers, executive producer. At 9 tonight on
Channel 13.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 13, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BASKETBALL;
Knight to Join Mentors And the Game's Greats

BYLINE: By MALCOLM MORAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 6; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1161 words

DATELINE: SPRINGFIELD, Mass., May 12


The sounds coming from the sidelines at West Point, N.Y., and Bloomington, Ind.,
have lasted long enough to be measured in decades as well as decibels, two and
counting. The letters Bob Knight has received from former players, describing
the value of their basketball experience, have come from a jungle in Vietnam and
a storm in the desert in the Middle East.

Knight will be enshrined in the Naismith Basketball Hall of Fame Monday night, a
part of, and a contributor to, a remarkable class that has shaped the history of
the game on the court and in the conference room.

His likeness, cast in bronze, will appear in the building named for James
Naismith, the inventor of the game that Knight has sought to perfect in six
seasons at the United States Military Academy and 20 at Indiana University. At
the age of 50, he will be placed alongside people he has publicly revered: Red
Auerbach, Pete Newell, Henry Iba, Clair Bee -- the greatest figures in the
history of the sport.

Different Vantage Point

Except that like a number of other things, Knight looks at this issue with a
different perspective.

"If you've been around the people I've been around, and you couldn't coach,
you're dumb," he said. "That's just it in a nutshell. If I couldn't coach with
the people that have helped me, I might as well go out and fish the rest of my
life."

"The best minds that this game has ever known have been very close to me," he
said. "So my feeling with them is" -- he chuckled -- "no matter what trials and
tribulations I may have caused any one of them at any particular moment, that
they can think, well, he listened after all."

Since Knight's career is far from over, the judgments remain after the bronze is
cast. How to weigh the attacks on cheating, in an age of the overnight package
spilling cash intended for a recruit, with the controversies? How to compare the
ends with the means?

"What people don't really understand about me," he said, choosing the words
carefully, "is that somebody's image, is it an image based on observation, on
conversation, on association? Or is it an image based on pulling out a file of
clippings?"

Rejected 3 Years Ago

His enshrinement provides one more illustration of behavior that observers can
assert is contradictory, but Knight would maintain is consistent. Less than
three years ago, after his nomination had been rejected by a committee's secret
vote, Knight asked that his name be withdrawn in protest.

Larry O'Brien, the former commissioner of the National Basketball Association,
made a similar request, but Knight's attracted more attention. Yet soon after,
Knight agreed to bring his Indiana team here for the Basketball Hall of Fame
Tipoff Classic. He supported the institution, but he challenged its evaluation
process.

How to judge? "A player coming into the Hall of Fame, or the baseball Hall of
Fame, is a totally different proposition than a manager or a coach," Knight
said. "Totally different. He's representative of. He's symbolic of. It's not his
accomplishments. It's the fact that a lot of people have come together and put a
team on the floor, or on the field, in such a way that the coach may have some
thoughts reflected through the way the team plays."

Then there are the methods with which Knight's thoughts have been reflected.
"I've never had a player come back that thinks I'm as demanding with this team
as I was with his team," he said. "With these players, no one could have
mellowed more than I have. I would be beyond the point where you could mellow
anymore. Because they would all like to think that, 'Boy, it was a lot tougher
when I was playing than it is now.' "

Could we be talking about a kinder, gentler mentor?

"Coach, how have you changed over the years?"

"Heavier. Grayer and heavier."

"If there was one change that has taken place with me over the years, things
today that might have irritated me years ago amuse me," he said. "All kinds of
things. Something that another coach might do, something that fans might do. For
me, these little things become just what they ought to be, a source of
amusement."

That would be a solution to a problem that has lasted throughout his career, the
rabbits that have taken his attention away from the elephants. He has
acknowledged paying too much attention, for too many years, to too many rabbits.

Knight pointed to a recent recruiting conflict, and his response to a family's
report that another school had criticized Indiana's academic programs. He felt
that his sense of amusement, presumably unexpected, helped win over the player's
family and eventually gain the recruit.

He could have stopped concerning himself with such things 10 years ago, after
the second of his three national championships, when Knight seriously considered
becoming a television analyst.

"Is there anything left for Bobby Knight?" he was asked this weekend.

"I'm going fishing on Tuesday," he replied. "Probably going fishing again on
Wednesday. There's a hell of a lot left for me. What, you want me to die today?"


Set for 21st Season

Fans back home look forward to a return trip in mid-November for the Tipoff game
-- Indiana versus U.C.L.A. -- and the start of his 21st season as coach of the
Hoosiers.

Rabbits, from Purdue to Illinois to Kentucky and points beyond, await further
evidence of an armistice.

Elephants, everywhere, may assume the rules have not been changed.

And admirers have come east this weekend in anticipation of a defining moment at
the 24th annual enshrinement dinner.

That is when the friends and families of Larry Fleisher and O'Brien will
celebrate the achievements of men who have passed away; when Bee, the creator of
Chip Hilton; Ed Steitz, the father of the 3-point shot, and other absent friends
will be remembered; when Ted Williams, Knight's idol, is expected to appear to
see Knight placed alongside Iba, Bee, Newell and the others who helped create a
path.

If there was a hint of an inner feeling of that moment, it appeared when Knight
was asked about the influence of Red Auerbach, a friend and the architect of the
Boston Celtic dynasty.

"To my everlasting appreciation, for whatever the reason, Red liked the way my
teams played," Knight began to explain, when his voice began to waver, the words
no longer came so precisely and easily, and his eyes suddenly appeared to shine
in the television lights.

"And I think that," he paused for just a moment, "if you were to ask, uh, if you
were to ask him, I would imagine that Red probably saw some of him in me" --
there was one more wobble, just for a syllable or two -- "when he was about my
age. He was just great to me."

A celebration dinner, and a bronze likeness, cannot obscure the games that
remain to be played and the work that is left to be done. Soon enough, the sun
will set earlier each day, and the time will come for the fishing trips to be
interrupted by another season.

NAME: Bobby Knight

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: 'Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame 1991 Inductees' lists
Hall of Fame inductees for 1991

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 13, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Memoirs of a (Maybe the) Washington Insider

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1010 words



Counsel to the President
A Memoir
By Clark Clifford, with Richard Holbrooke
Illustrated. 709 pages. Random House. $25.

As Clark Clifford reminds us early in his highly absorbing memoir, "Counsel to
the President," it was Dean Acheson who first applied the phrase "present at the
creation" to people like himself who helped to forge the internationalist
policies that were to challenge Communism in the era following World War II.

Well, Mr. Clifford was also present at the creation, as a young special counsel
to President Harry S. Truman. But unlike most other people who were there, he
has stayed around long enough to be present at the destruction too, having
witnessed the recent collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe.

And he appears in the interval to have been a firsthand witness of every other
event of any significance, from Winston Churchill's speech at Fulton, Mo.,
announcing the descent of the Iron Curtain, to Truman's miraculous upset in the
Presidential election of 1948, to the Cuban missile crisis under President John
F. Kennedy, and so on all the way down to the ordeal of Speaker of the House Jim
Wright of Texas, who called for Mr. Clifford's help when the House Ethics
Committee began to investigate the Congressman's conduct in 1989.

Mr. Clifford was even involved in less world-shaking events like the so-called
Blauvelt Affair. When the Kennedy family asked him in 1962 to put to rest a
rumor based on an incorrect entry in the genealogy of a family named Blauvelt
saying that the President had once been married to a woman named Durie Malcolm,
Mr. Clifford was more than happy to help out. After all, he just happened to
know Durie Malcolm from his native St. Louis. So he called her up, exchanged a
few pleasantries and got her to sign an affidavit stating that she had never
been married to the President. No problem for Clark Clifford.

What is astonishing is the way he seems to jump into the middle of American
history. Here he is, a St. Louis lawyer until the outbreak of World War II, and
suddenly he moves to Washington and everyone is asking him for advice. A minor
flaw of the book is that he never explains his intellectual background or how he
developed such unerring judgment.  It's up to the reader to guess that he's
smarter than anybody else, or quicker, or better connected, or maybe just
taller. All he says is that he was always right, except maybe on Vietnam and
about that tragic misjudgment, as he characterizes it, he suggests that he was
less wrong than almost everyone else. (He does express "anger and outrage" over
one area of his business life. In a single, though very long, footnote, he
mounts a defense of his involvement with a bank holding company, First American
Bankshares, that is now under Federal and New York State investigation. In
essence, he says he may have been duped.)

Mr. Clifford's huge self-esteem is sufferable because he expresses it so
compellingly. Not all of the book is up to the dramatic opening episode in which
the author is called upon by President Truman to face down Secretary of State
George C. Marshall in his strong opposition to the United States recognizing the
new state of Israel, an assignment Mr. Clifford completes with graceful
dispatch.

Nor does the book even sustain the level of the amusing stories that follow
about the author's experiences organizing and playing in President Truman's
regular poker games on the Williamsburg, the Presidential yacht: "There was none
of the public sanctimoniousness that exists today about such matters as a little
gambling with the boys. When journalists asked what we were doing on the river,
instead of presenting a false picture of a President hard at work, complete with
rigged photo opportunities showing him behind a stack of briefing books,
President Truman simply would say, 'Some of the boys and I were playing a little
poker.' If asked what we drank, the President would tell the truth: 'Kentucky
bourbon.' "

Eventually the narrative even bogs down a little in the quagmire of Vietnam,
"quagmire" being the word, incidentally, that Mr. Clifford apparently was the
first to apply to the American involvement in Southeast Asia. He saw the
conflict up close as Secretary of Defense during 1968, the final year of the
Johnson Administration. But not even his narrative skills can make anything
better than frustratingly tedious the endless groping and miscalculating that
characterized his Administration's struggle to extricate itself from the
unpopular war. Still, as accounts of Vietnam go, this one is at least more
focused and coherent than what such memoirists as Lyndon B. Johnson or Richard
M. Nixon or Henry A. Kissinger achieved in their respective volumes.

Or perhaps the narrative skills belong to Richard Holbrooke, a former Foreign
Service officer and author of one volume of the Pentagon Papers who collaborated
with Mr. Clifford on these memoirs. It isn't clear who contributed what to the
project, though the voice that comes through is clearly Mr. Clifford's.

One other quality that makes "Counsel to the President" irresistible is that Mr.
Clifford may be right about his crediting himself with being right. Summing up
at the end he weighs the relative virtues of Innovation and Conservatism, as
Ralph Waldo Emerson called them when he wrote in "The Future of the Republic":
"Innovation is the salient energy; Conservatism the pause of the last movement."

In describing how he found a middle way between extreme innovation and
conservatism over the course of five decades, Mr. Clifford inspires the thought
that he is probably the last of the dying breed that has been variously known as
the Old Washington Hands and the Wise Men. But if the thought of their end is a
poignant one, Mr. Clifford also offers hope that with the end of the cycle that
produced such people, a new cycle must begin, and with it the birth of a new
breed of similar giants. Or at least one hopes they will be people who can write
about themselves with similarly dazzling self-confidence.

NAME: Clark M. Clifford

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 14, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Dr. Michael L. Lewin, A Plastic Surgeon, 81

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 200 words


Dr. Michael L. Lewin, an innovator and educator in reconstructive surgery, died
on Saturday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx. He was 81 years old and lived in
Cliffside Park, N.J.

He died of brain cancer, a family spokeswoman said.

Dr. Lewin, who sought especially to correct deformities in children, was the
chief of plastic surgery at the Montefiore Medical Center for 18 years and then
the director of plastic surgery at the hospital of the Albert Einstein College
of Medicine for more than a decade.

He was a native of Warsaw, studied medicine at the University of Zurich and
interned in Switzerland and New York. During and after World War II, as an Army
major, he performed surgery in many medical centers around the country.

Dr. Lewin was a leader of many professional societies and the author of scores
of articles. Overseas, he aided Israel, South Vietnam and Indonesia and, in
recent years, the Soviet Union, Hungary and Czechoslovakia.

He is survived by his wife, Berta; a son, Robert, of Brooklyn, a psychiatric
social worker; a daughter, Dr. Barbara Lewin-Tankel of Philadelphia, a clinical
psychologist; a brother, Stephan Lewar of Toronto, and two grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 14, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Communists Take Early Lead in Nepal Vote

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 489 words

DATELINE: KATMANDU, Nepal, May 13


As early returns began to arrive from the first openly contested election in
Nepal in 30 years, Communist candidates took strong leads in many areas today,
threatening to upset the country's oldest party, the Nepali Congress.

A victory for the left would make this country the first on the Indian
subcontinent with Communists heading a national government or playing a major
role in a coalition administration.

Among the Nepali Congress candidates to go down to defeat in Katmandu was the
interim Prime Minister, Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, who is now out of the race to
head the next government. In a sweeping setback, the Nepali Congress lost four
of five seats in the capital city.

"The Congress was too confident," an official said tonight as votes were
tallied.

Nepalese voted on Sunday for a 205-member House of Representatives, from which a
Prime Minister will be drawn.

Although it is too early to predict an outright Communist victory -- results are
expected to take days to filter in from remote polling stations in this
Himalayan kingdom -- it is apparent that the political left is in a very strong
position, backed by millions of young voters who say they want a radical change
in the world's sole Hindu kingdom.

A victory by the Communists would lead almost inevitably to fundamental changes
in government in Nepal, which remains a constitutional monarchy despite
concessions forced on King Birendra last year by a democracy movement. At least
45 people died in street demonstrations in April 1990.

With a Different Momentum

The Nepali Congress considered itself the leader of that movement, although it
was evident from the inception of the protests that left-wing organizations were
emerging after decades in the political underground with considerable
organizational skills.

For a year, a group of leftist parties, often squabbling among themselves, have
been steadily building support among people with little knowledge of Communism's
political reverses in other parts of the world. Communists in Asia -- from the
Philippines and Vietnam to India -- say they believe that they have their own
momentum, different from European parties. Many Nepalese Communists, believing
they have a revolutionary role to play in one of the world's poorest nations,
are critical of the Soviet Union for diluting Marxist ideology.

The party that has fielded the strongest candidates against the Nepali Congress
is the Communist Party of Nepal (United Marxists and Leninists). That party has
been sharing power in a coalition interim government led by the Nepali Congress.

First results tonight show that the Communists humiliated not only Prime
Minister Bhattarai, but also the wife and son of Ganesh Man Singh, the patriarch
of the Nepali Congress. Mr. Singh, who has health problems, was not a candidate.
His two family members were contesting seats in Katmandu, which was swept by the
Communists.

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Wiggled, Over Jell-O

SECTION: Section C; Page 8; Column 3; Living Desk

LENGTH: 231 words


To The Living Section:

Barbara Gamarekian's fascinating article on the Smithsonian Conference on Jell-O
history ["Capital Findings on Jell-O: Loved, Hated, Hard to Nail Down," April 3]
reports a lecture by the curator, Jeff Brodie, on vodka Jell-O cubes, in which
he traced their origin to Northern California in the early 1980's. I can do
better than that.

At a party in Cambridge, Mass., in the fall of 1967, I met the well-known
songwriter Tom Lehrer, then a professor of mathematics. We discussed the war in
Vietnam, of course, and that got him reminiscing over his experiences in the
Army from 1954 to 1956, during which he said his greatest accomplishment was to
find a way around the Army regulation that forbids alcoholic beverages at the
noncommissioned officers' annual Christmas party.

This he did by perfecting alcoholic Jell-O. He tried various flavors and liquors
and settled on orange Jell-O and vodka. You mix the package with one cup of hot
water, as you would to make ordinary Jell-O; stir in one cup of cold vodka, and
refrigerate. I have tried this several times and it never fails. On Christmas
Mr. Lehrer and his comrades carried 17 trays of it past the guards.

As it is not a beverage, you cannot properly be said to get drunk on it. But as
it is 40- or even 50-proof Jell-O, you can quickly get quite wiggled.

MICHAEL FERBER
Strafford, N.H.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Theater in Review

BYLINE: By D.J.R. BRUCKNER

SECTION: Section C; Page 12; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 497 words



The True Story of a Woman Born in Iran and Raised to Heaven in Manhattan
One Dream Theater
232 West Broadway,
at North Moore Street
Through May 25

Written and directed by Assurbanipal Babilla; assistant director, Donal Egan;
set design, Sonia Balassanian; light design, Kristabelle Munson. Presented by
Purgatorio Ink and One Dream.
WITH: Mr. Babilla; Leyla Ebtehadj, Donna Linderman, Jessie Marquez and Tom
Pearl.

In a singular Persian version of the struggle for sainthood depicted in "The
True Story of a Woman Born in Iran and Raised to Heaven in Manhattan," by
Assurbanipal Babilla, achieving salvation seems no more difficult than coming
apart at the seams. And the play, which Mr. Babilla calls "an autobiographical
comedy," may leave viewers with an oddly exhilarating feeling of disintegration.

In about an hour and a half this wild work sweeps over Iran, the Soviet Union,
the Gobi Desert, the Bermuda Triangle, Vietnam, the Vatican and two oceans
before its heroine is raised to glory not, as the title says, in Manhattan, but
in Brooklyn, "the land of separations." And its five actors seem to float in a
kind of graceful dance through a story that encompasses a vast web of intrigues,
a murder, a cult of golden idol worshipers, helicopter assaults, orchestral
concerts and global prostitution rings.

At the center of all this is Mr. Babilla, who says he had to flee his native
Iran in 1979 because the new Government in Teheran would have found his
theatrical work offensive.  He is the founder of Purgatorio Ink, the company
producing "True Story" at the One Dream theater in TriBeCa; he wrote the piece;
he directs it; he stars in it, and his recorded voice intones the chaotic saga
while he and the supporting cast perform a series of comic scenes that once in a
while illustrate his story.

Narrative cohesion is not his strength, and may not be his aim. If he has a
theme, it derives from a remark by Kierkegaard quoted in the program, that
theater and religion do the same thing but theater does it more honestly. Mr.
Babilla, who says he once studied theology at a Methodist institute in Beirut,
Lebanon, takes aim not at Methodism or at the ayatollahs now ruling his
homeland, but at Roman Catholicism.

Old church, old jokes. Fortunately, there are not many. Mr. Babilla turns to
other targets at every turn, from militarism to macho conduct to scholarly fads
to whatever strikes him. But these are all minor distractions. When he sticks
with the adventures of his hapless heroine, he has a surprisingly engaging tale,
absurd and touching.

In fact, "True Story" would be memorable if there were no story. For Mr. Babilla
and the members of this cast have strong theatrical imaginations. On a minimal
set without stage machinery or elaborate lighting they create tableaux that
linger in the mind like glittering animated paintings full of humor, pity and
wonder and that make this otherwise neo-Dada work emotionally seductive.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 17, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Market Place;
DeSoto Is Facing Proxy Showdown

BYLINE: By Kurt Eichenwald

SECTION: Section D; Page 6; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 880 words


THROUGHOUT the 1980's, any number of novel takeover defenses were created by
corporations to ward off unwanted suitors. But DeSoto Inc., once one of the
largest suppliers of paint to Sears, Roebuck & Company, found what may well be
one of the most unusual: liquidate about 80 percent of itself while paying top
management millions of dollars in "golden parachutes" -- even as they retain
control of the company.

DeSoto's defense against a hostile $50-a-share bid by the Sutton Holding
Corporation, a New York investment group, is one of the longest -- and perhaps
most error-ridden -- in years. On Monday, the two-and-a-half-year battle between
DeSoto and Sutton may draw to a close, as a final proxy fight for control of the
board of the Des Plaines, Ill., company will be resolved at the annual
shareholders meeting.

For DeSoto, which once made Easyliving and Weatherbeater paints, the meeting is
the first time since 1989 that directors have allowed shareholders to vote on
whether they wanted Sutton to run the company -- even after 70 percent of
shareholders tendered to Sutton.

In that time, DeSoto directors have been sharply criticized by a Delaware judge
for failing to "face up to their fiduciary duties" to shareholders, have rushed
into asset sales that cost the company millions of dollars once problems with
the deals were found, and even failed to file a form at an appropriate time to
avoid a new tax, costing shareholders as much as $2.50 a share, according to
analysts.

The battle has left Sutton, run by William Spier, still trying to take over a
company that is much smaller than the one it originally wanted to buy. As asset
sales increased, the offer was reduced, with Sutton now bidding $5.75 a share. A
competing $6.25-a-share offer was made earlier this month by the First Allied
Corporation. Meanwhile, DeSoto's stock closed yesterday at $9.375, off 12.5
cents.

Sutton's current bid reflects a coming planned distribution to shareholders from
the company's pension fund that is expected to reduce the stock price by as much
as $5. Previously, the company distributed two special cash dividends totaling
$35.50 a share following its asset sales.

The continued battle surprises some analysts. "I have never seen this approach,
where you have someone go after a company, the company is cut back to one-fifth
its size, and the battle for control goes on," said Michael Deal, an analyst at
of Institutional Shareholder Services Inc.

Mr. Spier of Sutton said he was still attempting to buy the company because
"with a new management DeSoto can be turned around." But he also strongly
indicated that part of the reason he was continuing his pursuit was his anger at
the current management.

The asset sales have stripped the company of its largest businesses, including
its profitable paint business with Sears, leaving the company with only its
detergent business, selling Plus and Premier laundry detergents and other
products.

But the most controversial aspect of the defense was the company's payments of
millions of dollars in golden parachutes and advance pay to senior executives.
After shedding 80 percent of DeSoto's assets, DeSoto's directors said the sales
constituted a change of control of the company, pulling the ripcord on the
parachute payments. But few executives jumped from the company. In addition,
other executives were paid "retention bonuses" of two years' salary.

Management's actions "showed me that they weren't really acting on the
shareholders' behalf," said Susan Hoag, an analyst for Institutional Voting
Research Service, an independent research group for institutional investors. "It
seems that the company is going to be sold this year, regardless of who buys it,
and it just seems to me that they are trying to get as much money out of it as
they can before it goes."

Wesley L. Anderson, who became chairman and chief executive of DeSoto in
January, defended the payments, saying they were either contractual obligations
or necessary for DeSoto's operations.

"That was a very difficult time for us, and many of our managers were receiving
offers from other companies," he said. "We were advised by an outside consultant
that under these conditions, where we needed to maintain management continuity,
it was not untypical to give retention bonuses."

But analysts also question why the company decided to dismantle itself instead
of putting the buyout offer before shareholders.

"I started to think along the lines of the general in Vietnam who said the
village had to be destroyed in order to save it," said Mr. Deal, the analyst.
"Who were they protecting?"

By his estimate, shareholders would have been better off had DeSoto accepted the
first offer two years ago, if the bid was everything it claimed to be.
"Shareholders were probably better off with $50 a share than with a company
racked with legal bills, assets cut by 80 percent, and a battle for control," he
wrote in a report.

But Mr. Anderson said the sales were necessary to "maximize shareholder value,"
based on the advice from the company's investment banker, Goldman, Sachs &
Company. "The feeling was that selling the company as a whole would not maximize
its value," he said. "The value of the various segments was the way to go."

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 17, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
Manville's Fund to Get More Cash

BYLINE: By BARNABY J. FEDER

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1139 words


Federal Judge Jack B. Weinstein in Brooklyn yesterday approved a bitterly
disputed plan to revise the trust fund set up by the Manville Corporation two
years ago to compensate asbestos victims. In doing so, Judge Weinstein, who has
tried aggressively to streamline the handling of the nation's asbestos
litigation, issued an opinion that proposed radical changes to this end.

Ranging far beyond his ruling on the Manville plan to add cash to the trust fund
and change its operating procedures, Judge Weinstein said "most if not all" of
the scores of companies that are defendents in asbestos litigation would be
bankrupt if forced to satisfy current and projected claims.

Expressing doubts that all the companies' potential liability could be handled
in a single proceeding, he suggested that the best alternative would be for each
to set up a trust fund similar to Manville's. Then all the trust funds would be
combined into a single body that would compensate asbestos victims more quickly
and even-handedly.

Threat to Industry and Courts

"A total national consolidation and integrated solution to the asbestos problem
is needed if we are to adequately compensate the injured without destroying the
effectiveness of much of our industry and some of our courts," Judge Weinstein
said in the concluding portion of his 500-page opinion.

Lawyers said the strong plea for change in Judge Weinstein's ruling had been
expected. The former Columbia Law School professor is among the foremost
judicial innovators on the Federal bench, having developed a reputation for
pushing the boundaries of the law in the search for solutions to a number of
civil rights and product liability conflicts, including the litigation stemming
from the use of Agent Orange herbicide in Vietnam.

Several lawyers said, however, that much of Judge Weinstein's commentary would
have little effect on the efforts to streamline management of the tens of
thousands of asbestos cases clogging the nation's courts and belonged in a law
review article rather than in yesterday's ruling.

Judge Burton R. Lifland Jr., chief bankruptcy judge of the Southern District of
New York, concurred with Judge Weinstein. Judge Lifland presided over the
six-year-long bankruptcy procedings of Manville, which was formerly the nation's
largest asbestos producer. The trust fund was established as part of the plan to
reorganize the company and allow it to emerge from bankruptcy in late 1988. The
ruling yesterday approved a settlement to revise the plan. The settlement was
reached in November after lengthy negotiations among lawyers appointed by Judge
Weinstein to represent current and future asbestos victims, Manville and other
companies that are defendants in asbestos litigation.

The fund relies on cash payments, dividends and profit-sharing from Manville. It
owns 80 percent of the Denver-based building products company's stock. The fund
has received 147,000 claims to date, far more than originally expected. It all
but ran out of cash last summer. As previously announced, the settlement is
intended to provide an additional $520 million over seven years: $100 million in
each of the first two years, $40 million in the third and fourth years and $240
million thereafter.

The additional money will come in the form of special dividends, meaning that
the public investors who hold the remainder of the company's shares will also
receive $130 million in special dividends over the seven years. After the first
year, however, Manville will not have to pay the dividends unless it can obtain
financing for them. The company is not expected to be able to pay the dividends
from operations.

Bonds Are to Be Swapped

Manville will also replace $1.8 billion in bonds that the trust holds with
equally valued securities that have fewer restrictions and might be more easily
sold to raise cash. The trust will continue to be entitled to 20 percent of
Manville's net profits, starting in 1992, for as long as is needed to satisfy
all claims.

The settlement does away with the trust's current policy of handling most claims
in the order in which they were made. Instead, the trust will divide claims into
two categories: those on behalf of people who have died or have cancer or
serious asbestosis and those for people with less serious injuries. The more
serious cases will receive all of the fund's cash in the first two years and
preferential treatment thereafter until they receive 45 percent of the value of
their claims. Some plaintiffs' lawyers who opposed the settlement said those
provisions would result in giving the less seriously injured nothing, which,
they argue, is illegal.

One change the judge made in the original terms of the settlement allows other
asbestos defendants to rely on state laws to limit their liability. In some
states, other defendants would not be responsible for picking up the difference
between what the Manville trust pays a victim and what Manville's obligation
would have been had it not been bankrupt. Judge Weinstein said the settlement's
original proposal to override such laws amounted to an unconstitutional
extension of Federal common law into areas left to the states.

Lawyers' Fees Limited

The settlement limits fees for plaintiffs' lawyers to 25 percent of the funds
recovered for claimants. Judge Weinstein said the fees and those already
received by plaintiffs' lawyers were "grossly excessive." But, he said, "There
are too many urgent reasons to conclude this litigation to allow the settlement
to flounder on this point."

For Manville, the main benefit of the settlement is its explicit reaffirmation
that asbestos victims are permanently barred from suing the company rather than
the trust. Reports about the trust's financing problems had led to rumors among
investors, customers and employees that the company might once again find itself
exposed to such claims. The company's shares rose $1, to $6.625, in trading on
the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.

Claims Are Multiplying

Judge Weinstein's opinion contained estimates that some 136,000 pending claims
against asbestos defendants could result in liabilities ranging from $9.7
billion to $17.3 billion. Given that tens of thousands of new claims are
expected annually for years to come, total exposure could soar as high as $51.4
billion, Judge Weinstein said. The figures were based on studies by the Rand
Corporation.

Using $30 billion as a fair value of the cost to defend and pay for current and
projected claims, Judge Weinstein argued that $20 billion of that would be
wasted in transaction costs if the litigation were handled in the court system
as it has been to date. Consolidation of the claims into a system like that
established for the Manville trust could save $10 billion, he argued.


LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Judge Jack B. Weinstein, who issued an opinion approving
Manville trust revisions. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times) (Pg. D3)


                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 17, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
Sam Shepard Returns, On War and Machismo

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1034 words


SAM SHEPARD has been away from the New York theater for only six years -- since
the epic "Lie of the Mind" -- but "States of Shock," his new play at the
American Place, could lead you to believe he has been hibernating since his East
Village emergence in the Vietnam era. "States of Shock" is in its own elliptical
way an antiwar play, written with the earnest -- one might even say quaint --
conviction that the stage is still an effective platform for political dissent
and mobilizing public opinion. Whether or not one agrees with Mr. Shepard's
contrary views about recent history, his ingenuous faith in the theater is
uplifting. "States of Shock" is less so.

The evening begins with a literal bang, a hallucinatory sound, shadow and light
display that vaguely evokes torture sequences in Costa Gavras films or perhaps
CNN's fuzzier nocturnal Persian Gulf war coverage. Just when the audience might
expect a helicopter to land, an even greater whirligig arrives -- a demented
John Malkovich, cast in a role known only as Colonel and hilariously costumed
(by Gabriel Berry) in military rags drawn from several centuries and at least as
many nationalities. But the setting is an American coffee shop -- "a family
restaurant," it is repeatedly said -- of the present day. Mr. Malkovich's
companion, a Christ-like young man called Stubbs (Michael Wincott) in a
flag-bedecked wheelchair, was severely wounded by artillery fire while trying
unsuccessfully to save the life of Colonel's son in a victorious battle against
a barbarous, unidentified enemy.

When the indispensable Mr. Malkovich horses around in the early going, "States
of Shock" is much funnier than its ideological concern suggests. The actor came
to prominence, after all, in the 1982 Steppenwolf revival of "True West," and he
is a born Shepard outlaw: sardonic, seedy, stoned in demeanor, a Belushian slob
when juggling food jokes. In "States of Shock," he has such straight foils as a
timid waitress (Erica Gimpel) and a couple of middle-aged, middle-American
vulgarians (Steve Nelson and Isa Thomas) who are waiting with growing impatience
at a neighboring table for a long-delayed order of clam chowder. Wielding props
that include a retractable military-briefing pointer, a ferocious saber and a
particularly runny banana split, Mr. Malkovich disrupts a coffee shop with more
malicious glee than anyone since Jack Nicholson in "Five Easy Pieces."

Yet the explosive humor soon gives way to narrow preaching. While Mr. Shepard is
much too poetic (and cagey) a writer to lecture, he does pile on repetitive
incantations and images that define the play's territory with didactic rigidity.
Colonel, a cheerleader for aggression, is forever expressing gratitude to the
enemy whose evil united a country in revenge. For counterpoint, Stubbs is
forever displaying his grapefruit-size chest wound, which may have resulted from
friendly fire and which in any event belies his constant self-description as
"the lucky one."


"How can we be so victorious and still suffer this terrible loss?" is the
question that hangs over "States of Shock." With manifest sincerity and some
courage, Mr. Shepard wishes to examine the casualties, corporal and spiritual
alike, of even a fast, victorious, morally right-minded war, and he also wishes
to question the values of a society that leaps so readily into the fray. For all
Colonel's encomiums for America's legendary achievements (from the Great
Northern Railway to Little Richard), common sense and pioneer stock, there may
be something tragically amiss in the familial nation that has devolved into the
play's family restaurant.

Fair enough, but the issues under debate are far too complex to be illuminated
by the plain dramatic elements of this 75-minute work. "States of Shock" does
not really go anywhere intellectually or theatrically once it has established
its basic thematic attack. Instead it mechanically imposes its ideas on some
typical Shepard conceits: The play's fratricidal men trade aspects of their
identities, mythos-laden American songs (notably "Goodnight Irene") swamp the
action, a buried child will not rest in peace. Gradually Mr. Malkovich resorts
to ranting and raving in his "Burn This" manner to counteract the inertia. At
the same time, the special effects, punctuated by offstage percussionists, reach
the apocalyptic proportions of Mr. Shepard's collaboration with Michelangelo
Antonioni on "Zabriskie Point." Something of a nadir is reached when the sight
of a male diner masturbating is accompanied by images of familial and
battlefield brutality. Surely Mae West made the analogy between machismo and
weaponry with rather more wit.


Bill Hart's energetic, tightly focused production is blameless for the lulls.
Bill Stabile's austere set (in the style of the diner artist John Baeder), the
busy lighting of Pat Dignan and Anne Militello and the acting of the entire cast
are in perfect sync with the author's intentions. As the play's two martyrs, the
wounded Mr. Wincott and the subservient Ms. Gimpel (a black woman all too
pointedly left to clean up the mess of white men), bring off the considerable
feat of carrying their heavy symbolic burdens lightly. Indeed, it may be because
of their poignant simplicity that some of Mr. Shepard's message lodges in the
mind despite the blustery dialogue.

"Ideas emerge from plays, not the other way around," the playwright once wrote
in an essay, and he was right. In his haste to rush back to the theater before
the shelf life expires on his particular polemical mission, Mr. Shepard seems to
have shifted his customary creative process into reverse.

States of Shock

By Sam Shepard; directed by Bill Hart; sets by Bill Stabile; costumes, Gabriel
Berry; lighting, Pat Dignan and Anne Militello; composer, J. A. Deane;
production stage manager, Lloyd Davis Jr. Presented by American Place Theater,
Wynn Handman, director; Dara Hershman, general manager. At 111 West 46th Street.


Colonel . . . John Malkovich
Glory Bee . . . Erica Gimpel
White Woman . . . Isa Thomas
White Man . . . Steve Nelson
Stubbs . . . Michael Wincott
Percussionists . . . Richard Dworkin and Joseph Sabella

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Malkovich in Sam Shepard's new play, "States of Shock."
(Martha Holmes/States of Shock)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 18, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

J.C. Hartney Jr., 44; Founded a Charity to Help Fight AIDS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 272 words


Joseph C. Hartney Jr., a photographers' representative and former director of
development for the San Francisco and Joffrey Ballets, died Thursday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan. He was 44 years old.

He died of AIDS, his mother, Adelaide Lammers, said.

In 1988, Mr. Hartney founded Photographers and Friends United Against AIDS, an
organization that has raised $1.4 million for AIDS research and service
organizations.

With works contributed by photographers, it organized "The Indomitable Spirit,"
a show that opened in New York last year and then moved to Los Angeles and
Chicago. The show raised money by issuing limited edition portfolios of some the
works and by auctioning off other works.

Mr. Hartney was born in Philadelphia. After serving four years in the Navy
during the Vietnam War, he received a B.A. degree from Williams College in 1973
and a master's degree in business administration from the Wharton School at the
University of Pennsylvania in 1976.

He worked as a stockbroker in New York for two years, then became director of
development of the San Francisco Ballet and then of the Joffrey. For the last
seven years, he represented photographers and was affiliated principally with
the John Bean Studio in New York.

Surviving besides his mother, of Folsom, Pa., are three sisters, Jean of Drexel
Hill, Pa., Adelaide Bracalenti of Thornton, Pa., and Maureen of Media, Pa., and
a brother, Michael, of Drexel Hill.

Services will be held today at noon at Our Lady of Peace Church in Milmont Park,
Pa., and at a date to be determined at the Church of the Ascension in Greenwich
Village.


LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 18, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

In Bad Company: Censorship in the Gulf War;
An Unwelcome Critic

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 313 words


To the Editor:

I was surprised to see Anthony Lewis cite Lewis Lapham at great length as a
reference point for his own criticism of the American press's performance during
the gulf war ("To See Oursels . . .," column, May 6). Certainly there was much
and there remains much in that coverage to criticize, but Mr. Lapham is hardly
the person to do it, since the last time I saw him in action was in the early
70's at the Naval War College in Newport, R.I., where he appeared at one of
several seminars on the military and the press and delighted the assembled
officers by baiting his journalistic colleagues for their performance in
Vietnam.

Stansfield Turner had set up these seminars when he headed that college, and
these sessions were powerful, deeply emotional and occasionally quite bitter.
The reporters faced a large audience of several hundred bright young military
officers, already angry about the Vietnam War, who saw the press as a convenient
target; the reporters for their part, people like Seymour Hersh, Gloria Emerson
and myself, among others, had equally powerful ideas about what had gone wrong
and why.

The collision of these views was strong and valuable stuff, and the one
exception to it was a performance by Mr. Lapham, who mocked his journalistic
colleagues for their work in Vietnam, ridiculed their intellectual ability and
attention span, and demeaned the quality and integrity of their work. As he made
fun of the other journalists, the assembled officers were amused, and as they
laughed and cheered, he seemed to play to the audience even more and become even
more arch in his tone. He was particularly hard on Mr. Hersh, whose coverage of
My Lai seems to be exactly the kind of American journalism Mr. Lapham now seems
to be calling for. Some people would call this having it both ways.

DAVID HALBERSTAM
New York, May 7, 1991

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 19, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

How to Be the World's Policeman

BYLINE: By COL. HARRY G. SUMMERS JR.;  Col. Harry G. Summers Jr., U.S.A.,
retired, is a distinguished fellow of the Army War College and the author of "On
Strategy II: A Critical Analysis of the Gulf War," to be published next
February.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 40; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3218 words


ON AUG. 2, 1990, the very day that Iraqi forces swept into Kuwait, Congressional
negotiators and the Pentagon agreed to a "peace dividend" budget that would,
among other things, slash troop levels by 25 percent over the next five years,
do away with six active Army divisions, cut back the Navy to 451 warships from
545, and transfer nine active-duty Air Force tactical fighter wings to reserve
status.

The cutbacks continued even as units of the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine
Corps were ordered into battle positions in the Persian Gulf, complicating what
was already a difficult deployment and compromising battle readiness. Although
two of its three armored brigades went to the gulf, for example, the Second
Armored Division itself was being disbanded; one brigade of the First Infantry
Division was being deactivated even as the rest of the division moved into
combat.

If the war had turned into a slugging match, the United States would have been
hard pressed to relieve or reinforce its units in combat. Only Iraq's unexpected
collapse saved the budget-cutters from the consequences of their wild gamble
with the lives of American men and women in the gulf.

Now, in the war's aftermath, the cuts proceed apace. Will the United States, in
its moment of triumph, continue to dismantle the very military machine that made
its historic victory possible? That's not unthinkable. We did precisely that
after both World Wars. And in the months immediately before the Persian Gulf
crisis, the conventional wisdom was that our victory in the cold war had
rendered obsolete the large standing military that we had maintained for four
decades to contain and deter the spread of Communism.

Saddam Hussein should have knocked all that into a cocked hat last August. While
it would be wasteful and probably futile to try to maintain the military we
built to stand off the Soviet Union in the cold war, we still need to maintain
strong, standing forces capable of projecting our power around the globe. But
the weapons and strategies needed to fight and win a war have changed enormously
since Vietnam, when we were still constrained by nuclear weapons. Fortunately,
if we react intelligently, the changes will allow us to cut the size and cost of
the armed forces without sacrificing anything in the battlefield.

AS JAMES MADISON SAID MORE THAN 200 YEARS ago, "The means of security can only
be regulated by the means and the dangers of attack." Saddam Hussein failed to
understand that "the means and the dangers of attack" had changed dramatically
when the Iron Curtain crumbled in November 1989, and his mistake proved fatal.
The United States was no longer constrained by fear of a nuclear confrontation
with the Soviet Union and could wield its military power in a way not possible
since World War II. President Bush wasn't kidding when he said the United States
wouldn't fight this war with one hand tied behind its back.

Although changes in the strategic environment worked to American advantage in
the gulf, these same changes complicate the planning of future United States
military strategy. For more than a generation, the Soviet "enemy" defined "the
means and the dangers of attack," and thus provided the rationale for the United
States military's organization, armament and training. More important, the
Soviet threat provided an intellectual rationale for spending hundreds of
billions of dollars to support large standing forces and an arms race. The
upshot was that air, land and sea forces sufficient to defend against Soviet
attack also provided more than sufficient military power to handle lesser
threats -- Grenada, Libya, Panama and Iraq. But with the end of the cold war, we
have lost that defining military threat.

"The means and the dangers of attack" did not disappear with the cold war's end,
as Saddam Hussein's aggression made clear. But they are much more diffuse. Like
it or not, a New World Order is at hand in which much of the world seems to be
teetering on the edge of anarchy and the United States, as the world's only
surviving great power, find itself liable to be forced into the role of the
world's policeman.

What sort of military will we need to defend the American homeland and to
protect and defend vital American interests? Several basic considerations will
be shaping those forces: the destructive potential of nuclear weapons, the
effect of geographic location, the battlefield influence of high-technology and,
most important, the need for flexibility in thought and action.

NUCLEAR FORCES

Nuclear weapons pose the only credible threat to the American homeland, and
deterrence of such an attack must remain one of our highest priorities. That
said, however, the nuclear era is over, and thus the idea of a "strategic"
nuclear triad of land- and sea-based ICBM's and penetration bombers is obsolete.

Even before the end of the cold war, it was becoming increasingly obvious that
the civilian nuclear "strategists," with their phantasmagoric notions of nuclear
war, had sold us a bill of goods. Their arguments that the "atomic age" had
rendered obsolete all previous military theories, doctrines, strategies and
battlefield experience sent professional military thought into an eclipse that
lasted through the Vietnam War.

But an awareness slowly took hold that the specter of a nuclear battlefield was
just that -- a specter with no substance. Among Saddam Hussein's many concerns
as he faced off against allied forces in February, the threat of nuclear attack
must have ranked near the bottom. No longer weapons of war, nuclear weapons
today are useful only as a deterrent against their use by others. That's not
unimportant. After all, nine countries -- the United States, Soviet Union,
China, Britain, France, India, Israel, Pakistan and South Africa -- now have
nuclear weapons, and more nations may soon join their ranks.

But deterrence does not require the thousands upon thousands of warheads now
stockpiled by the superpowers. The former Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara
has argued that deterrence could be achieved with as few as 500 warheads. At
present, we have about 20,000. The 1987 Treaty on Intermediate-Range Nuclear
Forces, which eliminated 867 United States and 1,836 Soviet intermediate-range
nuclear warheads, was a good beginning. An additional 8,000 tactical,
short-range nuclear weapons are virtually certain to be eliminated either
unilaterally or when arms talks resume.

While the end of the nuclear era may be at hand, however, old ideas die hard.
This is true particularly when, as with the $65 billion "strategic" B-2 bomber,
they are backed by powerful constituencies. At about $863 million each, these
radar-evading bombers' value was dubious even during the cold war, when their
designed capacity to deliver nuclear bombs deep inside Soviet territory served
at least an ostensible military purpose. The Air Force is now searching for
non-nuclear missions for the B-2, but there's nothing it could do that can't be
done now by existing B-52's or F-117 fighter-bombers, which, at $42.6 million
apiece, are less than one-twentieth the cost of a B-2 bomber.

Still, some people just don't seem to have gotten the message. With painful
choices overdue between obsolete nuclear systems and conventional forces, the
Bush Administration proposed in its fiscal 1992 budget to maintain funds not
only for the B-2 bomber but also for the MX "Peacekeeper" missile and the
Trident II and Midgetman ballistic missiles. A total of $9.4 billion, or nearly
one-sixth of the Pentagon's entire procurement budget for 1992, is scheduled to
be spent on the B-2 and the Strategic Defense Initiative. All this while
continuing to scale back personnel and conventional weapons in all the armed
forces.

It was a dumb mistake, for these so-called strategic forces fail a primary test:
they are not strategic. While of some value as a deterrent, they cannot be used
to fight and win a war. As the Persian Gulf war again made clear, America's true
strategic forces are its conventional forces.

STRATEGIC AIR AND SEA LIFT

Increasingly, however, what makes conventional forces strategic is the ability,
as the Confederate General Nathan Bedford Forrest supposedly put it, to "git
thar fustest with the mostest." That depends on air and sea lift, for in
geostrategic terms, the United States is an island. If we are to protect vital
interests abroad -- the most likely reason for the commitment of United States
military forces to combat -- we must first deploy our military overseas to the
scene of the action.

That geographical imperative is not always obvious. Working in the Army's War
Plans Department in the Pentagon during the 1973 Arab-Israeli war, one of my
colleagues was bragging about the enormous advantage the United States enjoyed
over the Soviet Union in the ability to resupply its allies. With our sea lift
and air lift, he said, a capability that the Soviets did not have, we could
readily provide military supplies to Israel.

Only when he was led to a nearby map did he appreciate that, as a continental
power, the Soviet Union didn't need all that air and sea lift. They could march
to the Middle East if they chose to do so. And they could march to Western
Europe, South Asia and East Asia as well.

Thus, in the post-cold war, post-nuclear world, the real strategic military
headquarters is not the Strategic Air Command at Offutt Air Force Base in
Nebraska but the United States Transportation Command (Trans com) at Scott Air
Force Base in Illinois.

Transcom, a unified command that incorporates the Air Force's Military Airlift
Command and the Navy's Military Sealift Command, became fully operational only
in October 1988. But it proved its worth during the Persian Gulf war. Using C-5
and C-141 jet transports, propeller-driven C-130's and units from the Air Force,
Air National Guard and Air Reserve, as well as the commercial aircraft of the
Civil Reserve Air Fleet, which moved 62 percent of the troops and 27 percent of
the airlifted cargo, Transcom flew more than 15,800 missions, hauling more than
half a million passengers and nearly half a million tons of supplies.

As in past wars, 90 percent of the tonnage moved by sea. By the war's end, eight
Navy fast sealift ships and a total of 164 other ships were moving arms,
equipment, ammunition and supplies to the war zone.

However, this very success masks a serious strategic vulnerability. The United
States now has more Navy warships than it has cargo ships in its merchant
marine. Among the 225 cargo ships in the Maritime Administration's National
Defense Reserve Fleet are dozens of World War II Liberty ships in an advanced
state of disrepair. As Representative William S. Broomfield, Republican of
Michigan, has complained, "Calling a 45-year-old ship which has not run in 25
years a national defense asset makes as much military sense as reintroducing the
horse to the cavalry."

We were lucky in the Persian Gulf to have six months to move our war-winning
armored forces and their tanks, guns, ammunition and supplies into position. But
we can't count on luck. Money needs to be diverted from the ersatz "strategic"
nuclear forces into real strategic forces, like C-17 transports to replace the
aging C-141 cargo fleet and more and faster cargo ships. Beyond that, what we
really need is a revitalized merchant marine. In 1950, American-flagged vessels
carried half of the nation's exports and imports. Today, they carry less than 4
percent.


HIGH TECHNOLOGY

Once dismissed as "gold plating," high-technology weaponry proved its worth in
the Persian Gulf war. Yet the terrible casualties suffered by the Iraqis serve
as a grim reminder of the consequences of failing to maintain the technological
edge. And our edge may not be so great as it appeared against the demoralized
and disaffected troops of Saddam Hussein.

The lightning allied victory in the gulf obscured the fact that Iraq's South
African-supplied G-5 and Austrian-supplied GHN-45 155-millimeter gun-howitzers
with their 45-kilometer range far outreached any cannon artillery in the allied
inventory. Their T-72 Soviet-supplied main battle tanks and their fighter
planes, French-supplied Mirage and Soviet-supplied MIG-29's, were first-rate as
well. Although the Iraqi weapons proved no match for our top-of-the-line
systems, like the M1-A1 Abrams tank, they posed a deadly threat to less
sophisticated systems like the 82d Airborne's M-551 Sheridan tanks, the Marines'
M-60 tanks and the armored personnel carriers and Bradley fighting vehicles.

When the gulf war began, moreover, 30 nations had more than 1,000 tanks and 28
had at least 1,000 artillery pieces. At least 14 third world nations now have
ballistic missiles like the Scud, and more are trying to acquire such weapons.
With the collapse of the Soviet threat, deployment of the Reagan-era Strategic
Defense Initiative is no longer called for. But anti-tactical ballistic missile
systems that outperform the Patriot surface-to-air missile are essential to our
future defenses.

The problem is that developing new high-tech weapons is expensive, and already
the Congressional Budget Office is warning that current defense budget
projections are inadequate for the task. A prime example is the F-22, the Air
Force's new Advanced Tactical Fighter. Assuming that Congress is willing to back
the program, the Air Force plans to buy 650 F-22's at a cost that could reach
$95 billion. But even before the contract was awarded last month, the
Congressional Budget Office reported that, with shrinking military budgets, the
Air Force could equip only 18 of the 26 fighter wings it plans to maintain after
1995.

Military planners will face thousands of similar predicaments in coming years,
as they struggle with falling budgets. What they have to avoid is trying to
sustain the current military on a tighter budget. A smaller, better-armed
military is one thing. A larger but underfinanced military is a recipe for
disaster.


CONVENTIONAL FORCES

A key element in the overwhelming performance of our conventional forces in the
gulf has gone virtually unnoticed. Without the 1986 Goldwater-Nichols Defense
Department Reorganization Act, which placed the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff in the chain of command and strengthened the role of the regional military
commanders in chief (like Gen. H. Norman Schwarz kopf), it is doubtful that we
could have achieved the integration of military command that was so crucial to
the military's performance. When you think about it, the civilian secretaries of
the Army, Navy and Air Force and their uniformed chiefs of service were almost
invisible during the gulf war. For the first time in American military history,
a war was a truly integrated effort.

Now, the same reorganization should be extended to the services themselves, to
sweep out atomic-age anachronisms. The nuclear types who have dominated the Air
Force since World War II have to give way to the tactical fighter pilots and
airlifters who represent the real strategic forces today. And the dead hand of
Adm. Hyman G. Rickover has to be pried from the Navy's throat and his nuclear
submarine force subordinated to the surface battle groups that provide real,
strategic power-projection capability.

When the atomic age began, the Army, fearful that it was losing its mission,
grasped in desperation at "rapid reaction" forces, a division of troops that was
kept on constant alert and could be deployed in a matter of hours. Now it's time
to let that go, along with the glamorous but long obsolete "airborne mafia,"
like the 82d Airborne, which have dominated postwar military thinking. In the
armor-dominated modern battlefield, the Army is again the decisive military
force, the only one capable of destroying an enemy and its will to resist. The
Army should leave rapid deployment to the Marine Corps, a role that the marines
are ideally armed, trained and equipped to perform.

Finally, the "total force" concept embracing the active military, National Guard
and reserves needs rethinking as well. Reserve forces, which essentially kept
house for the combat units, were crucial to the success of the gulf war. But for
the Army, at least, the war in the gulf showed that we cannot rely on part-time
training for combat units.

For example, National Guard brigades for the Army's 24th Infantry Division and
First Cavalry Division were not ready to go and had to be replaced with active
Army units. And when the two National Guard units finally were activated, they
were deemed uneady for combat and dispatched to the National Training Center in
the Mojave Desert. It is an issue that must be resolved because current plans
call for one-third of the Army's existing combat divisions to be placed in the
reserve forces.

JUST AFTER WORLD War II, promising to cut the fat and not the muscle, President
Harry S. Truman and Louis A. Johnson, his feckless Defense Secretary, proceeded
to slash military spending to the bone. They created our first hollow military.
Fighting units were reduced to two-thirds strength, new weapons were ignored and
maintenance was allowed to slip.

When the Korean War broke out in June 1950, thousands of Americans paid for this
penny-pinching in blood, a tragedy I witnessed firsthand. My commander was
killed for want of a less-than-a-dollar spare part. When the driver was shot,
his tank retriever stalled and could not be restarted because it lacked a
solenoid. When he and the crew tried to escape they were gunned down. Korea may
well be the "forgotten war," but the terrible price of false economies must
never be overlooked.

As Mark S. Watson pointed out 40 years ago in his history of World War II, "The
facts of war are often in total opposition to the facts of peace. . . . The
efficient commander does not seek to use just enough means, but an excess of
means. A military force that is just strong enough to take a position will
suffer heavy casualties in doing so; a force vastly superior to the enemy's will
do the job without serious loss of men."

The Persian Gulf war revalidated that truth. Whether America will have an
"excess of means" in the future remains to be seen. It will depend not only on
the size and shape of America's post-war military but also on the pitfalls and
dangers of the strategic environment.

"Know the enemy and know yourself," said the Chinese military strategist Sun Tzu
more than 2,000 years ago, and "in a hundred battles you will never be in
peril." Although we cannot always "know the enemy" we can know ourselves. As we
draw down our NATO forces in Europe, saving money, we also limit our ability to
respond quickly in emergencies. As we close military bases at home we limit our
ability to mobilize and train our reserve forces.

The "peace dividend" won't disappear; defense cuts planned for the next five
years will produce a cumulative saving of $243 billion. In any case, military
spending as a percentage of the gross national product is projected to fall to
about 3.6 percent by 1995, the lowest since before the Second World War. But as
George Washington wrote in 1780, "There is nothing so likely to produce peace as
to be well prepared to meet an enemy." We ignore his counsel at our peril.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 19, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

RECORDINGS VIEW;
Playing Name That Tune With 'Miss Saigon'

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 26; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 942 words


Can a melody be genuinely original and still stick in the mind? Or are catchy
songs memorable only because they subliminally recall other tunes in our musical
memory banks? That is one of the questions raised by the original London cast
album of "Miss Saigon" (Geffen 24721-2; all three formats). (The American cast
album will be released Sept. 3.)

"Miss Saigon," of course, is one of four Broadway musicals nominated for a Tony
Award for best original score; the others are "Once on This Island," "The Secret
Garden" and "The Will Rogers Follies."

Certainly the score for "Miss Saigon" is catchy and lush. But the more carefully
one studies it, the more crudely imitative and pieced together it sounds. The
show, which has music by Claude-Michel Schonberg and lyrics by Alain Boublil and
Richard Maltby Jr., aspires to be a hybrid of Puccini and Rodgers and
Hammerstein. "Un bel di" from "Madama Butterfly" wants to meet "Younger Than
Springtime" from "South Pacific." As in "Madama Butterfly," whose story "Miss
Saigon" updates to Vietnam in the 1970's, the Western melodies are discreetly
trimmed with Asian percussive effects, and occasionally the tunes themselves
affect an Eastern modality. Infused into the blend are strong undercurrents of
1970's pop styles, from early disco (the grinding opening number, "The Heat Is
On in Saigon") to the Broadway of John Kander and Fred Ebb (the satirical
"American Dream").

On the surface, "Miss Saigon" is a listenable pastiche that has been skillfully
orchestrated by William D. Brohn to keep its seams from showing and to sound
important. In substance, it falls far below the standards of its prototypes. The
most distinguished theatrical melodies, whether from opera or musicals, have
traditionally been vignettes that have a graceful sense of closure, told in a
fluid musical language.

In the best Puccini and Rodgers, there is the feeling of a melody going
somewhere, even though it is contained within a tight formal structure. The
tunes of "Miss Saigon," though catchy, lack this quality of mysterious,
inevitable flow. The least derivative ballad, the love duet "Sun and Moon," is
also the most old-fashioned, with its echoes of "You Are Love" from "Show Boat."
Most of the rest are little more than a series of short melodic phrases, usually
cliches, repeated and piled on top of one another with lyrics slapped on.

Underscoring the creakiness of the melodies is the score's bald appropriation of
familiar sounds and tune fragments, which are re-used in much less interesting
ways than in their sources. While the borrowings never approach outright
plagiarism, they reveal Mr. Schonberg to have an indiscriminately retentive ear.

The album's opening moments, in which the sounds of a helicopter precede "The
Heat Is On in Saigon," duplicate the beginning of Billy Joel's "Goodnight
Saigon," a record that has more emotional and historical voltage than the entire
score of "Miss Saigon." The title phrase of that opening number also borrows a
signature motif from Randy Newman's song "Mama Told Me Not to Come" (a No. 1 hit
for Three Dog Night in 1970) and treats it as a gratingly redundant thematic
fragment.

The show's first big ballad, "The Movie in My Mind," recalls the far more
felicitous "Windmills of Your Mind," by Michel Legrand and Marilyn and Alan
Bergman. "Why God Why?" makes for jarring listening because its opening phrase
is identical to that of Rodgers and Hart's "There's a Small Hotel." It is
revealing to see how Rodgers took the same phrase and shaped it into a fluent
musical paragraph, while Mr. Schonberg treats it so stiffly that it remains
virtually undeveloped.

"The Last Night of the World" borrows directly from "Evergreen," the Barbra
Streisand-Paul Williams love song from Ms. Streisand's remake of "A Star Is
Born." The title phrase of "This Is the Hour" re-uses the opening bars of the
1958 Kingston Trio hit "Tom Dooley," distending an appealing folk theme into
something pompous. "Bui Doi," a martial anthem intended to stir compassion for
the mixed-race children of American servicemen and Vietnamese women, lifts bars
from Max Steiner's "Tara's Theme," from "Gone With the Wind." Part of the tune
"What a Waste" parrots "Who's Sorry Now?"

One's awareness of the cliches and borrowings is augmented by the way many of
the lyrics seem to have been forced onto Mr. Schonberg's clumping melodies. In
"Miss Saigon," as in virtually all the other big musicals that have come to
Broadway from London during the last decade, ease of lyrical phrasing and
conversational diction don't seem to matter. In the Broadway musical "Baby" and
the Off Broadway revue "Closer Than Ever," Mr. Maltby has shown himself to be a
lyricist of exceptional wit and psychological insight. The lyrics in "Miss
Saigon," instead of revealing character, go for a declamatory bombast that is
forceful but empty. But considering the blunt flat-footedness of the melodies,
Mr. Maltby and Mr. Boublil may have had little choice but to go with words that
often sound like raw, unidiomatic translations into English from another
language.

The one number in "Miss Saigon" that has a real inner life is "The American
Dream," the Engineer's sleazy, humorous ode to Western capitalist decadence.
This showstopper for Jonathan Pryce, who plays the Eurasian pimp, is an
amusingly slithery tribute that echoes Brecht-Weill by way of Kander and Ebb
without cannibalizing from either source. For a moment, the score's aura of
militaristic self-importance evaporates. In a score that virtually defines
kitsch, "The American Dream" glints like a tarnished silver dollar.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Willy Falk and Lea Salonga singing "The Last Night of the World"
in "Miss Saigon"--a little "Evergreen"?

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 19, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Nostalgic for Dr. King

SECTION: Section 7; Page 46; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 127 words


To the Editor:

Rabbi Harold S. Kushner is right to say that "whites" did not kill the Rev.
Martin Luther King Jr. (Letters, April 28). No more, say, than whites killed
John Kennedy, blacks killed Malcolm X or Jordanian immigrants killed Robert
Kennedy.

But when Rabbi Kushner says that most whites idolized King, he mistakes 1990's
nostalgia for 1960's sentiment.

If the latest biographers and historians have got it right, some whites idolized
King. Most whites, in the North and the South, wished he would go away,
especially after 1965, when he took the civil rights movement north, joined the
struggle for racial equality to a struggle for economic equality and began to
speak out against the Vietnam War.

JAMES E. GOODMAN
Cambridge, Mass.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 19, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Casting For Trout In Western Waters

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES;  Howell Raines is the Washington editor of The New
York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2; Page 41; Column 2; Sophisticated Traveler Magazine

LENGTH: 2909 words


I STARTED MY SONS, NOW 18 and 20, on fly fishing as soon as they were old enough
to master the four-beat rhythm of the cast. When my wife, Susan, signed up for
fly fishing lessons last year, we lost our last holdout against folie a famille.
So we headed west on one of the most daunting ventures in the field of domestic
travel: the family fly fishing vacation.

First, let us deal with a threshold question. Should your family undertake such
a trip? Almost certainly not. Fly fishing can be expensive, difficult for
beginners and even dangerous in some of the rowdier streams. If eating fish is
your goal, it is extremely inefficient, since taking a fish to eat is either
illegal or bad form in almost all the best waters. So far as I can tell, the
only people who sincerely urge non-fly-fishers to take up the sport are the
people who sell tackle. My advice is that if you are not already sending money
to Orvis and L. L. Bean, if the names Sage and Loomis do not put you in mind of
spending $325 for a new rod, leave it at that.

On the other hand, if you are already fly fishing, there will almost certainly
come a time when you want to contemplate the heart of the sport.  Then you are
likely to find yourself landing at an airport in Montana or Wyoming. In our
case, it was Butte, Mont., the birthplace of Evel Knievel, the site of what once
was one of the world's largest open-pit copper mines and the best place to rent
a car that will take you to the Big Hole River.

Selectivity is a problem in the West. It is big, and it is full of rivers that
are legendary in the sport. In Montana alone, there are the Big Hole, the
Bighorn, the Missouri and the Big Blackfoot, which has a kind of holy status as
the setting of one of our best books on fly fishing, "A River Runs Through It,"
by Norman Maclean. In Wyoming, you have the Yellowstone, the Madison, the
Gallatin and the glorious Snake, which actually becomes better when you cross
into Idaho and get two Snakes, the South Fork and the Henrys Fork. In northern
Utah, there is the Green River, which boasts more trout per mile than almost any
other river in America.

Then there is the scenery. Someone once said that the true joy of pursuing trout
is that they live in such beautiful places. That is doubly true of that
wonderful area where the borders of Montana, Idaho and Wyoming come together in
a slightly cockeyed intersection.

The views along the 20-mile section of the Snake River that runs beside the
Tetons are simply supernal. Like the Big Sur coast, this is one of those
American spots of such intensely concentrated beauty as to make one say, "Yes,
this is it. Bury me here." Elsewhere, the routine beauty of lodgepole pines,
granite escarpments and red rock canyons inspires the happy sense of being
time-warped onto the set of a John Ford Western.

Ben, Jeffrey and I had the typical Easterner's response. We wanted to eat the
whole thing. Susan, being lower on the fanaticism curve, prevailed on us to
accept an itinerary that called for concentrating on a few pieces of quality
water. We planned to spend three weeks in Montana, Wyoming and Idaho during
early August, a prime month on Western streams. We picked the Big Hole in
Montana, the Yellowstone and Madison Rivers in Yellowstone National Park, the
Snake at Jackson Hole, Wyo., and across the border in Idaho. Then it was back to
Wyoming for wilderness fishing at a guest ranch on the headwaters of the Gros
Ventre River.

Such planning is essential if you want to have quality fishing, and particularly
important if you want to fish with first-rate guides. Fishing guides the world
over come in two categories, the time servers and the enthusiasts. It's the
enthusiasts you're after if you are interested in something other than a boat
ride, and that's certainly what we got in Wayne Clayton and Stuart Decker. They
work out of the Complete Fly Fisher, an excellent fly shop and lodge at Wise
River, Mont., where the tiny Wise River enters the larger Big Hole.

"We're going to have fun today," whooped Stuart as soon as he got Ben and Jeff
into his raft. "These guys can cast." After a day of Stuart's coaching on long
distance techniques, they were casting even better, carving the air with long
powerful loops that looked like scenes from instructional films. Both boys now
speak reverently of that day as a watershed experience in their fishing careers.
For the next three weeks, we heard an astonishing number of sentences beginning
with "Stuart says."

But not every fly fisherman aspires to mastery, and it's not a necessity for
enjoying Western rivers. Wayne Clayton estimated that only 10 percent of his
clients are expert anglers. They are the ones who go after the big fish in
difficult lies. About half are novices, who, with coaching, are able to catch
respectable fish.

"If I'm guiding someone who doesn't cast well enough to reach the 20-inch brown
trout that's tight against the bank, then we cast to the 15-inch rainbow out in
the main current," said Wayne, a Vietnam veteran who guides 200 days a year and
goes fishing for fun on his days off.

In one particularly productive stretch of the Big Hole, I was indulging my
weakness for watching birds when I heard Wayne shout, "Set the hook!" I obeyed
on reflex and hooked my biggest fish of the trip, a brown trout of 19 inches.
After releasing this beautiful and totally undeserved fish, I said to Wayne,
"Now I can ask the question I was about to ask when that fish struck: Is that a
water ouzel over there?"

Bird watching on Western streams became for me an irresistible distraction. I
developed a particular fondness for ouzels, a humble robin-size bird that makes
its living by walking on stream bottoms. In the category of magisterial birds of
prey, we saw plenty of ospreys and bald eagles. But nothing beat the sight of
white pelicans, summer visitors from the Gulf of Mexico who ride the turbulent
rivers of Yellowstone National Park with a goofy aplomb.

We certainly owe Ulysses S. Grant our thanks for preserving the Union, but for
my money, his best single day's work took place on March 1, 1872, when he
created Yellowstone National Park.  There are 3,472 square miles in the park,
and if you get out while the RV owners are still snug in their bunks, the old
gods still rule.

That was underscored for me one morning when my sons and I were casting for
cutthroat -- a handsome coppery trout that is indigenous to the Rockies -- at a
spot on the Yellowstone River called Buffalo Ford. This area, near the Lake
Lodge in the center of the park, is one of the most popular fly fishing venues,
yet that morning might have been the one when the world began.

We had the entire stream to ourselves except for a brown beast that lumbered out
of the pines, waded into the deep main channel and then swam like a huge dog
until it reached the eastern shore about 50 yards below Ben's fishing spot.

"Well, I guess we know why they call it Buffalo Ford," he said.

Rapids-shooting pelicans and swimming buffaloes add spice to an outing. Even so,
it's hard to upstage the Yellowstone cutthroat, or Oncorhynchus clarki bouveri,
formerly named Salmo clarki lewisi for the two explorers who brought their
"corps of discovery" to the Yellowstone River in 1806.

THE SIX MILES OF catch-and-release water immediately north of Yellowstone Lake
teems with these handsome fish. I know of no better spot for making a middling
fisherman feel like an expert. Get there just after the season's mid-July
opening, cast a No. 16 Parachute Adams with reasonable delicacy, and something
stimulating will happen.

Later in the season, the fish get smarter, but cutthroat are the innocents of
the trout world. So much so that many expert fly fishermen shun them and prefer
other streams in the park, such as the dramatic Firehole, with its fuming sulfur
pots and boiling springs and its persnickety rainbows.

Yellowstone was filled to capacity when we were there.  But wherever a fly
fishing family wanders in the park, they are beneficiaries of the average
tourist's affection for asphalt. On the west bank of the Yellowstone, near the
parking areas, there are plenty of people. Cross over to the eastern shore and
hike up from the lake on the Howard Eaton Trail, and your only traffic worry is
intersecting with the mother grizzlies that sometimes use the area for rearing
their young. Always give bears the right of way.

On the Yellowstone and the Madison, we liked to fish the evening rise and then
meet at the car just before dark for iced beer and a picnic supper of cheese and
sausages. Every day that we did this we found that we had the stream and picnic
areas entirely to ourselves.

When we moved south to Jackson Hole, a valley in northwest Wyoming that extends
about 50 miles north from the town of Jackson to the southern boundary of
Yellowstone National Park, we found tourists aplenty, and a brutally tempting
array of goodies at the town's fly fishing stores. We quickly established
ourselves as easy marks at the Jack Dennis Outdoor Shop and across the street at
High Country Flies. For $10 a day, Jack Dennis rents first-rate fly rods and
reels, providing an excellent and mildly addictive way to try out a wide variety
of Sage and Loomis rods.

Just outside Jackson, in a vast meadow at the National Elk Refuge, there is a
stream called Flat Creek, which is noteworthy for several reasons. One, it has
strict limitations on fish between 11 and 18 inches (prime breeding sizes) -- a
welcome regulation in a state that has been unconscionably slow to protect its
trout from people who regard a frying pan as an essential part of their gear.
Secondly, it is good for one's humility to meet the smarter cousins of the
Yellowstone cutthroat. The Snake River finespot cutthroat that live in Flat
Creek are as spooky as any Eastern brown trout and often streak away in fits of
survivalist terror the moment one's fly touches the water.

This is what serious fly casters call "highly technical fishing," and a little
of it goes a long way. Even so, Scott Sanchez, an assistant manager at the Jack
Dennis shop, can set you up for this fishing and predict the times when "the
fish get hungry enough to become more interested in eating than hiding."

By the time we set out from Jackson for the South Fork of the Snake River, just
across the border in Idaho, Susan was beginning to feel a little edgy. She had
been content to practice her casting and laugh off missed strikes in Montana.
Now she wanted to catch a fish. Luckily, she and Ben were guided that day by Tom
Montgomery, a Massachusetts man who got the fly fishing bug in college and went
West to find acclaim as a fishing photographer and writer and, by most accounts,
the best fisherman in Jackson Hole.

It was a superb day for casting dry flies from locally made boats known as South
Fork skiffs, and under Tom's tutelage Susan brought three fish to hand,
including one legitimate trophy of more than 16 inches. "By the end of that day,
I was beginning to feel like a fisherman," she recalled later.

Meanwhile, Jeffrey and I were being guided by Paul Bruun, a former Jackson town
councilman who is the godfather of the local fishing guides. He is also a
designer of the Patagonia fly fishing vest and the South Fork skiff.

If they gave doctorates in dealing with recalcitrant trout, Paul would have one.
The high point of our day came when he spotted a big cutthroat that was "lit
up." That is to say, the fish seemed to glow -- this occurs with saltwater fish
such as marlin, but is rare in freshwater. The luminescence, Paul said, signals
that the fish is in a feeding frenzy.

Indeed, this particular fish was rising regularly to feed on insects, but it
rejected all our standard mayfly and grasshopper imitations. In addition, its
location in fast current under a willowy bank made it difficult to reach with
the fly. Finally, Paul concluded that the fish was taking nymphs so tiny as to
be almost invisible to the naked eye. He tied a fly no larger than a pinhead to
my tippet, and with one clean and lucky cast, I took the fish.

"Your old man is a pretty good fisherman," he said to Jeff by way of
congratulating me on the accuracy of my casting. I swelled with pride, but we
all knew that I would never have taken that trout on my own. Such difficult
fish, plus an education in how to work them, are what you get when you pay $215
to $325 a day for a top Western guide.

For reasonably skilled fishermen, guides are not essential, especially for the
innocent trout in remote mountain streams. Paul W. Hansen, a regional director
of the Izaak Walton League of America, put us on to Darwin Ranch, the magical
place where we spent the final week of our vacation. Darwin is one of the most
remote guest ranches in the West. The 160-acre ranch is in the center of a vast
tract of Federally owned wilderness about 35 miles east of Jackson. It is owned
by Loring Woodman, a committed conservationist who takes up to 20 guests a week
at an average daily rate of about $100 each.

There is no television. The telephone is unreliable. The fishing starts where
the Gros Ventre River curves within 50 feet of the main lodge. Two hours on the
back of one of the ranch's serviceable horses will get you to places like Clear
Lake, a round glacial impoundment where big cutthroat cruised around like
submarines and ignored our flies.

Wyoming's wasteful and primitive attitude toward its spectacular endowment of
mountain trout water has left this fishing without the protection it needs. I
was sickened to find Styrofoam worm containers on the best pool of the upper
Gros Ventre. Ideally, this should be catch-and-release water. At a minimum,
Wyoming should duplicate the steps Montana has taken on the section of the Big
Hole near Wise River, where only artificial lures are allowed.

I am opposed in principle to killing wild trout. But I am also weak when it
comes to fish cookery. Loring Woodman asks his guests at Darwin to release their
fish as a matter of course, but after years of studying the Gros Ventre, he has
concluded that the occasional streamside lunch does no harm.

So one morning, the four of us rode up past 9,000 feet to a canyon pool where
Ben and Jeff had discovered cutthroat stacked like guppies in a tank. Susan,
armed now with her Snake River expertise, quickly took several fish on a
grasshopper imitation. I managed to keep my guilty conscience in check while Ben
and Jeff gutted three fish on the spot, wrapped them in foil along with butter
and lemon slices and popped them into a fire.

Soon we were left with three fish heads, each dangling a lacy skeleton. All the
cliches of gustatory delight apply.

WHERE THE FISH ARE

Information on guides and Western fishing techniques can be found in several
magazines, including Fly Fisherman, Fly Rod and Reel, and Trout, as well as in
the state-by-state angling atlases published by Stream Stalker Publishing in
Aspen, Colo. Guides should be booked a few months in advance. Lists of
outfitters and guides in Wyoming and Montana can be obtained, respectively, from
the WYOMING GAME AND FISH DEPARTMENT (5400 Bishop Boulevard, Cheyenne, Wyo.
82001; telephone: 307-777-4559) and the BUTTE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (2950 Harrison
Avenue, Butte, Mont. 59701; 406-494-5595).

The JACKSON HOLE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE, Post Office Box E, Jackson, Wyo. 83001
(307-733-3316), lists well over a hundred accommodations of all types, including
inns and lodges within Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks. For
information on lodgings near the Big Hole and Madison Rivers, write to the BUTTE
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Reservations are necessary for the high season, generally
from the end of May to the end of September. A number of Montana and Wyoming
ranches, such as those listed below, are situated beside trout waters and cater
to experienced as well as would-be anglers. (Rates quoted are for high season
and include all meals.)

DARWIN RANCH, Post Office Box 511, Jackson, Wyo. 83001 (307-733-5588), is on the
Upper Gros Ventre River, surrounded by the Bridger-Teton National Forest. From
July 21 to Aug. 25, reservations are by the week only; no more than 20 guests
are accommodated at any one time. The daily rate for a cabin for two, with
private bath and porch overlooking the river, is $113 a person, including guide
service.

CRESCENT H RANCH, Post Office Box 347, Wilson, Wyo. 83014 (307-733-3674), is a
1,700-acre ranch, five miles south of Grand Teton National Park, with seven
miles of private streams. The ranch has 10 guest cottages -- 1927 log cabins
with modernized interiors -- that accommodate two to six people. Daily rates for
a one-bedroom cabin for two are $195 a person; guides are available at a rate of
$225 a day. The ranch also offers a fly fishing package, which includes a week's
lodging and meals and five days of guided fishing for $1,840 a person, double
occupancy.

THE COMPLETE FLY FISHER, Post Office Box 105, Wise River, Mont. 59762
(406-832-3176), is on the banks of the Big Hole River. Each of the ten
one-bedroom guest cottages has a glassed-in deck facing the river; the weekly
rate for two people, which includes fly fishing instruction (a majority of the
guests are beginners), guides (one for every two anglers) and transportation to
and from Butte airport, is $3,250. A two-bedroom, two-bath log cabin right on
the river is $200 a night for two, $250 a night for four.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A rainbow trout, one of the several species that swim the
mountain streams and rivers of Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming. (pg. 41); Fly
fishing at Mesa Falls on Idaho's Henry's Fork, a tributary to the snake, a river
legendary in the sport. (pg. 40)

Map of Yellowstone park and its surrounding areas. (pg. 42)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 19, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Alexander Kendrick, CBS Correspondent, 80

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 29; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 267 words


Alexander Kendrick, who in nearly four decades as a newspaperman and television
correspondent covered world events, including World War II from the Russian
front, and as an author wrote a biography of of his colleague Edward R. Murrow,
died Friday at Hahnemann Hospital in Philadelphia. He was 80 years old.

Mr. Kendrick died of a heart attack, said his brother, Vic Kendrick.

Alexander Kendrick was born in Philadelphia and began his journalism career
there with The Public Ledger, which later folded. He switched to The
Philadelphia Inquirer, which at the start of World War II sent him to cover the
Murmansk Run, where American freighters evaded Nazi U-boats to ferry supplies to
the Soviet Union.

After the war, on a trip to Rome, Mr. Kendrick became friends with Murrow and
joined him as a radio and television correspondent at CBS News.

As a foreign correspondent, Mr. Kendrick reported from scores of cities,
including Moscow, Vienna and London, where in 1965 he was succeeded as CBS
bureau chief by Dan Rather.

Mr. Kendrick returned to Washington, where he continued to report and also
turned to writing books. In 1969, he wrote a biography of Murrow, "Prime Time:
The Life of Edward R. Murrow," and five years later wrote "The Wound Within," an
analysis of American policy during the Vietnam War. Both were published by
Little, Brown.

He retired from CBS 15 years ago and returned to Philadelphia.

Mr. Kendrick's wife, Sarah Kunitz, a Soviet citizen he met while on a
sightseeing ferry in Moscow, died in 1981.

He is survived by his brother and a sister, Julisa K. Simmons.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Soviets Cooperating on Military Books in the West

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1147 words


With the change in East-West relations, the Soviet Union is now cooperating with
Western publishers on books about the Soviet military, providing the sort of
facts, figures and even photographs that spies had for decades risked life and
limb to obtain.

"If the Soviets knew you'd had this kind of material five or six years ago,
they'd have come after you with their agents," said Moise Feder, the editor of
the Military Book Club. "Now they're helping make it available to us in the
West."

The books are remarkable for detailing everything from Soviet military training
methods to specification of the most modern Soviet submarines and airplanes, and
publishers are gambling that American readers will be sufficiently intrigued by
the revelations of what was once classified information to make the books big
sellers.

Some of the information in the books has come from unofficial Soviet sources and
some from ranking military and intelligence sources in Eastern Europe. But most
was supplied by Soviet officials who, for political and economic reasons, have
been willing to provide Western publishers with facts, figures and photographs
that were formerly kept secret.

Soviets Are More Open

"We're now at the end of the cold war, we hope, and the Soviets are much more
open at every level," said John W. R. Taylor, who for 30 years was editor of
"Jane's All the World's Aircraft," one of the series of authoritative military
reference books published in London.

Mr. Taylor is also the editor of "Soviet Wings: Modern Soviet Military
Aircraft," just published by Presidio Press in Novato, Calif. and simultaneously
by publishers in England, Canada, France, Japan, Yugoslavia, Italy and Germany.
The book consists of 141 color photographs never before published in the West,
including some featuring the latest Soviet combat aircraft. All the photos are
by Aleksandr M. Dzhus, a Soviet aerial photographer.

Soviet aircraft have sometimes participated in air shows in the West, but Mr.
Taylor and others said those planes were usually photographed sitting on
runways, their weapons covered up. But "Soviet Wings" shows them taking off from
carrier decks, shows their armament and electronic jamming equipment and has
detailed specifications.

"We had so few good pictures of Soviet aircraft that the joke in aviation and
intelligence circles was that they built only blurred aircraft," said Lionel
Leventhal, the head of Greenhill Books in London, a leading publisher of
military books. Mr. Leventhal acquired the photographs for "Soviet Wings" from a
Moscow publisher and arranged for the book's simultaneous publication on three
continents (but not in the Soviet Union).

The book is a main selection of the Military Book Club. "It's something of a
gamble for us," Mr. Feder said, "because it's an expensive book." (It retails
for $50, and the club price is $30.) "But some of those planes haven't been seen
before, and most of the photographs compare well to those of American aviation
photographers."

A Year With the Soviet Military

Next month, AbbevillePress will publish "Inside the Soviet Military" by Carey
Schofield, a British journalist, with photographs by Leonid Yakutin, a Soviet
naval officer and military photographer. They spent a year with the Soviet
military, visiting a naval base at Vladivostok, covering parachute training at
Ryazan, watching the winter maneuvers of Warsaw Pact troops and visiting many
other bases, units and warships.

In his foreword to the book, Christopher Donnelly, Sovietologist in residence
for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, wrote that never before had a
Western observer been allowed to see and report on the Soviet armed forces from
the inside, and never had such unrestricted access to military installations and
personnel been granted.

"That it was granted at all is amazing," Mr. Donnelly said. "That it has been
granted so completely and free from official restraint is one of the most
heartening signs for the development of that dialogue essential to a permanent
improvement of relations between the U.S.S.R. and the West."

The reasons for such cooperation are not always clear, although the authors and
publishers of those books attribute it to the new Soviet policies of openness.
But there may be other motivations as well. Asked what inspired the Soviet
authorities to make available the revealing photographs of Soviet planes, Mr.
Leventhal replied: "Money. I'm paying them in Western currency." He declined to
say how much.

Airplanes and Submarines

Norman Polmar, a naval analyst and a consultant to the Department of Defense,
said: "The Soviets for years have wanted to sell commercial airplanes, and
'Soviet Wings' is a reflection of that goal. But they're not as open about their
submarine fleet, because they're not trying to sell submarines."

Nevertheless, Mr. Polmar received greater cooperation from Soviet officials than
he expected while writing "Submarines of the Russian and Soviet Navies,
1718-1990." Just published by the Naval Institute Press , the detailed book is
co-authored with Jurrien Noot, a research analyst on the staff of the Supreme
Allied Commander Atlantic.

Mr. Polmar said his requests for photographs and certain specifications were
honored sometimes and disregarded at other times with no discernable pattern.
Nevertheless, he said he had noticed big differences in Soviet attitudes about
its military.

"I sat down with the new Soviet naval attache a few weeks ago," he said, "and at
that first meeting he told me he was a Soviet nuclear submariner. Ten years ago
when you met a Soviet attache, they would always say there are in headquarters,
or on staff work, or served on surface ships. They just didn't talk about who
they were and what they did."

The Soviet Union is not forthcoming about everything pertaining to its military,
said Milan Vego, a former Yugoslav naval officer who teaches at the Defense
Intelligence College and is a consultant at the Center for Naval Analyses.

"They have opened up some archives, and it's possible to subscribe to Soviet
magazines that were formerly forbidden, so for the first time you can consult
originals on military subjects," Mr. Vego said. "But the Soviets still are not
forthcoming about tactics; those you have to pursue in East European magazines."

Despite such detours, publishers say they expect the openness to continue.
Aristide D. Caratzas, which publishes books in the humanities and modern
history, is planning a range of books from the Soviet Union, including
geographical handbooks. And Presidio Press has contracts with high-ranking
Soviet military officers for four books, including one on the Afghan war told
from the Soviet perspective, and another describing Soviet military aid to North
Korea and North Vietnam, and to Egypt and Syria in their wars against Israel.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
Life and Ritual Death Of a U.S. Army Couple

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 726 words


Unless the playwright's name happens to be Shakespeare or Shaw, a theatergoer
rarely has the opportunity to see an author's plays in context with one another,
to weigh individual merits and identify recurrent themes and motifs. The new
Signature Theater Company is meeting an artistic need by devoting an entire
season to a single writer and by having him in residence. The company begins
auspiciously with Romulus Linney, who has a rich and varied body of work, one
that should certainly benefit from such scrutiny.

The opening production is a pairing of "F.M.," a one-act comedy from the 1980's,
and an abbreviated version of the 1972 Broadway play, "The Love Suicide at
Schofield Barracks." As directed by Mr. Linney, both are running at the Kampo
Cultural Center through June 2.

In revival, "The Love Suicide" remains one of the author's more troublesome
efforts, but it has been improved through distillation. In full-length form this
story of a United States Army general and his wife, who commit ritual suicide to
protest the war in Vietnam, had a certain idealistic pretension. The couple, not
seen on stage, seemed unbelievably selfless.

Though problems of credibility remain, the 70-minute version focuses more
tightly on those who have been influenced by the life and death of the couple.
In a special court of inquiry, called at the request of the general himself, a
series of witnesses offer testimony as well as their own surmises about the
reason for the suicide. They include aides who are resentful of the general's
humanistic approach to military affairs and a hard-bitten poet with an
underlying understanding of the couple's tragic self-awareness.

As the double portrait emerges, one feels crosscurrents of sympathy and horror.
For symbolic purposes the suicide was supposed to have involved the death of an
innocent victim. The playwright does not attempt to excuse the general's mania
but to help us see the extremes to which the guilt-ridden can be driven. To a
certain degree, the play is a precursor of Mr. Linney's "2," about the Nuremberg
trials, a work that deals more perceptively with questions of conscience.

"The Love Suicide" benefits from being presented on a small open stage and from
Mr. Linney's understated direction. As a result, theatergoers are brought closer
to the tribunal. Mary Jane Wells, Gordon G. Jones and Fred Burrell, among
others, manage to uncover bitter humor beneath the drama.

In his long career, Mr. Linney has alternated ambitious morality and history
plays with light comedies, often dealing with provincial American life. One of
his most amusing one-acts is "F.M.," first seen in a trilogy entitled "Laughing
Stock." This is a satiric study of an adult class in creative writing, in which
a struggling novelist (Ann Sheehy) tries to educate a pair of small-town
dilettantes, a man-hating divorcee (Adrienne Thompson) and a shrinking violet
(Elisabeth Lewis Corley) from the Olivia de Havilland school.

Into this hothouse strides a rough, bourbon-soused renegade (Scott Sowers) with
a bulky manuscript and a Faulknerian imagination. The plot twists may be
predictable, but the journey is signposted with laughter, as Mr. Linney spoofs
artistic attitudinizing while leaving room for a heartening conclusion.

The Linney festival is scheduled to continue in the fall with "The Sorrows of
Frederick," to be followed by new plays as well as revivals by this virtuosic
dramatist. After exploring the theater of Mr. Linney, the company could turn to
plays by contemporaries like John Guare, Sam Shepard and Lanford Wilson, to name
a few with substantial bodies of work.

F. M. and The Love Suicide at Schofield Barracks

Two one-act plays written and directed by Romulus Linney. Production stage
manager, Ellen Melaver; lighting design, Jeffrey S. Koger; set design, E. David
Cosier; costume design, Teresa Snider-Stein; original music composition, Paul
Earls. Presented by the Signature Theater Company. At the Kampo Cultural Center,
31 Bond Street, between Lafayette and Bowery.

F. M.

WITH: Elisabeth Lewis Corley, Ann Sheehy, Scott Sowers and Adrienne Thompson.

THE LOVE SUICIDE AT SCHOFIELD BARRACKS

WITH: Kernan Bell, Constance Boardman, Fred Burrell, S. J. Floyd, Gordon G.
Jones, Garrison Phillips, James Seymour, Mary Jane Wells and John Woodson.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Alexander Kendrick, CBS Correspondent, 80

SECTION: Section B; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 268 words


Alexander Kendrick, who in nearly four decades as a newspaperman and television
correspondent covered world events, including World War II from the Russian
front, and as an author wrote a biography of of his colleague Edward R. Murrow,
died Friday at Hahnemann Hospital in Philadelphia. He was 80 years old.

Mr. Kendrick died of a heart attack, said his brother, Vic Kendrick.

Alexander Kendrick was born in Philadelphia and began his journalism career
there with The Public Ledger, which later folded. He switched to The
Philadelphia Inquirer, which at the start of World War II sent him to cover the
Murmansk Run, where American freighters evaded Nazi U-boats to ferry supplies to
the Soviet Union.

After the war, on a trip to Rome, Mr. Kendrick became friends with Murrow and
joined him as a radio and television correspondent at CBS News.

As a foreign correspondent, Mr. Kendrick reported from scores of cities,
including Moscow, Vienna and London, where in 1965 he was succeeded as CBS
bureau chief by Dan Rather.

Mr. Kendrick returned to Washington, where he continued to report and also
turned to writing books. In 1969, he wrote a biography of Murrow, "Prime Time:
The Life of Edward R. Murrow," and five years later wrote "The Wound Within," an
analysis of American policy during the Vietnam War. Both were published by
Little, Brown.

He retired from CBS 15 years ago and returned to Philadelphia.

Mr. Kendrick's wife, Sarah Kunitz, a Soviet citizen he met while on a
sightseeing ferry in Moscow, died in 1981.

He is survived by his brother and a sister, Julisa K. Simmons.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 21, 1991, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

An obituary yesterday about Alexander Kendrick, a retired CBS News
correspondent, incorrectly described his wife, the former Sarah Kunitz, who died
in 1981. A New York City resident, she met her husband while vacationing in the
Soviet Union; she was not a Soviet citizen.


TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 21, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

George A. Custer, 67, Retired Army Colonel

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 21; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 171 words

DATELINE: MONROE, Mich., May 20


George Armstrong Custer 3d, a retired Army colonel who vigorously opposed
attempts to rename a national monument dedicated to his great-granduncle, died
of a heart attack on Saturday at a hospital in Toledo, Ohio, He was 67 years
old.

Colonel Custer, who lived in Pebble Beach, Calif., was visiting Monroe when he
was stricken.

His great-granduncle, Lieut. Col. George Armstrong Custer, died with all 225 men
in his command at the Battle of the Little Big Horn in southeastern Montana on
June 25, 1876.

The great-grandnephew was an outspoken opponent of Federal proposals to rename
Custer Battlefield National Monument to the Little Bighorn National Battlefield
Park and to build a monument to the Cheyenne, Sioux and Arapaho Indians who
fought Custer and his Seventh Cavalry.

Colonel Custer served in World War II, Korea and Vietnam before retiring in
1974. He earned eight air medals, the Silver Star and the Distinguished Flying
Cross.

Survivors include his wife, Margaret, three daughters and two sons.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 21, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Walter Henry Rozell Jr. Banker, 81

SECTION: Section D; Page 21; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 138 words


Walter Henry Rozell Jr., a former vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, died May 14 at Toronto Western Hospital. He was 81 years old and lived
in Toronto.

He died of kidney failure, said his son, Douglas, of Yorktown Heights, N.Y.

Mr. Rozell, a native New Yorker, graduated from Amherst College in 1932 and the
Rutgers University Graduate School of Banking. He joined the Federal Reserve
Bank in 1934 and retired in 1967. He was also governor of the State Bank of
Ethiopia from 1953 to 1956 and was given the Star of Ethiopia by Emperor Haile
Selassie. From 1968 to 1975, he served as a consultant to the central banks of
Thailand, Nigeria and South Vietnam.

A widower, Mr. Rozell is survived, in addition to his son, by a daughter,
Suzanne Rozell Scorsone of Toronto, and seven grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 21, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
LTV Puts Past Glory On Block

BYLINE: By THOMAS C. HAYES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1029 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, May 20


The LTV Corporation, which had long insisted it would not sell its once-renowned
aircraft and military electronics operations, said today that it was putting
those glamour assets on the block to help meet future pension obligations.

The decision to sell the division that has built combat planes since shortly
after World War I raised fresh anxieties for the aircraft unit's 16,100
employees. It also underscored the high price LTV must pay to make good on
pledges made more than 10 years ago to pay income and health benefits to its
current and future retirees.

The steel company entered Chapter 11 bankruptcy in July 1986, saying it could
not afford to finance $2 billion in future pension liabilities. But the Supreme
Court ruled in June that bankrupt companies could not force the Federal
Government to assume pension obligations.

Could Happen to Others

Industry consultants said that a prolonged recession could place other companies
with underfinanced pension obligations and their creditors in a similar trap of
being forced to raise cash for retirement programs by selling operations.

"In a recession, some of these companies are going to hit financial hard times,"
said Harry Conaway, a principal in the Washington office of William M. Mercer, a
benefits consulting firm. "Their unfunded pension liabilities are going to
become big burdens."

Other major companies that had funded less than two-thirds of their pension
obligations at the end of last year included Pan American World Airways; the
Western Union Corporation (now the New Valley Corporation); Carter Hawley Hale
Stores, and the Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Company, according to the Pension Benefit
Guaranty Corporation, the Federal agency that insures business pension programs.


Payroll Has Shrunk

LTV's payroll has shrunk with the rest of the domestic steel industry, so that
the company today supports four retirees for every worker, compared with just
one retiree for every worker in 1980.

LTV's president and chief executive, David H. Hoag, said he wanted to use cash
from the sale of the LTV Aerospace and Defense Company to reduce the burden of
pension obligations, now increased to $3.1 billion, that LTV's steel operations
would carry after the company emerged from bankruptcy. Some analysts said LTV
might have difficulty finding a buyer for the unit and might sell it piecemeal.

Mr. Hoag's predecessor as chief executive, Raymond A. Hay, who is chairman, had
said often that the aerospace and defense company would continue as part of LTV
under any reorganization plan.

Creditors of the aircraft unit assailed the move. They said that a cash transfer
into the steel division would slash the amount of money available to repay $170
million in unsecured loans that they advanced to the LTV aircraft unit before
the bankruptcy.

Few Buyers Seen

Attempts to sell the aircraft unit this year may draw few bidders and a
painfully low price because of recession in the aerospace industry and Pentagon
budget cuts.

Paul H. Nisbet, an aerospace analyst at Prudential Securities Inc., said few
rivals could afford to bid for the company, with the possible exceptions of the
Boeing Company and the Lockheed Corporation. "There is not a great deal of
demand for aerospace companies, particularly defense properties," he said. "The
price would have to be awfully low."

The company said it would receive investment banking help from Lehman Brothers
to negotiate a sale.

Current projects of the aerospace and defense company include making parts of
the B-2 stealth bomber and parts of the C-17 cargo aircraft. It has large plants
in Buffalo, Dallas, Indianapolis and several other cities. Revenues at the
aerospace and missiles unit were $2 billion last year, and have declined
steadily from $2.56 billion in 1987. Its order backlog amounts to $5 billion.

Just this month the company won a $1.5 billion order from Boeing to make
sections of its 747 jumbo jet and parts for 757 and 767 airliners.

Posted Recent Losses

The unit, including missiles and electronics, earned $165 million from
operations in 1987 but has since been buffeted by Pentagon reductions and its
own troubles with cost overruns. It lost $84.7 million in 1989 and $17.3 million
in 1990.

LTV's steel operations, the nation's third largest after United States Steel and
Bethlehem, contributed more than $4 billion of the company's total revenues last
year.

Mark Feldman, a lawyer for the aerospace creditors committee, called plans to
sell the aerospace company "a cynical and ill-conceived attempt to confiscate
the value which rightfully belongs to the aerospace creditors."

"There is no business justification whatsoever to sell aerospace at this time,"
he continued.

The group is one of five creditor councils whose members have not received
payments on $4.9 billion in debts since LTV entered bankruptcy. Earlier this
month, LTV proposed a reorganization plan that would pay creditors 7 cents to 26
cents on the dollar in new stock.

Value Has Decreased

The aerospace unit might have attracted bids of $2 billion in 1987, but the
current value probably is less than $500 million, analysts said. LTV said
earlier this month it had to raise $300 million in cash soon as part of its
proposed, 30-year funding program for the retiree funds. Howard A. Rubel, an
analyst at C.J. Lawrence Inc., said the aerospace unit probably would be sold
piecemeal to several bidders.

LTV was founded in Dallas in 1961 as the result of a series of mergers and
acquisitions by James Ling. Ling Electric acquired Temco, an electronics and
missile company, in 1960, and the next year Ling-Temco acquired Chance Vought,
which had been founded on Long Island in 1917. The company's colorful legacy in
aviation includes the VE-7, the first plane to fly from a naval carrier in the
1920's; the F4U Corsair that downed Japanese foes at a rate of 11 to 1 in World
War II, and the A-7 Corsair II, which pilots have flown in combat from Vietnam
to Iraq.

The missiles and electronics unit makes the Army's multiple launching rocket
systems and the Hummer, the modern replacement of the Jeep.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The LTV Corporation, maker of the A-7 Corsair II, flown in
combat from Vietnam to Iraq, has decided to help meet pension obligations by
selling a division, which has built planes since shortly after World War I.
(Associated Press) (pg. D5)

Graphs: 'The Importance of Aerospace' shows LTV's total sales from '80 to '90,
their 1990 sales and operating income (Source: Company reports) (pg. D5)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 21, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Challenging the Cold War Today: Scholar on L.I. Battles the 'List'

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1354 words

DATELINE: STONY BROOK, L.I.


It has been almost five years since Choichiro Yatani's life was interrupted by
an accusation that, even then, seemed to echo from another time: immigration
officials charged that he was on a sealed Government list of Communists.

Ever since, he said recently, he has been searching for an answer. "My question
is: Why did this happen to me?"

On a summer day in 1986, immigration agents at Kennedy International Airport
stopped the Japanese scholar on his way from a conference in the Netherlands to
his home near the State University campus here. Despite his denial that he had
ever been a Communist, they detained him for 44 days, never told him the
evidence against him, and began proceedings to deport him as an undesirable
alien.

Then, after a flurry of news coverage, he was allowed to return to the
university. He had lived in the United States with his wife for nine years, and
his two children were born here.

In the years since, the Cold War has ended. But not for him.

Relying on what officials still say is classified information, the Government
has refused to remove his name from the "lookout list" of ideologically suspect
aliens that it maintains under the 1952 McCarran-Walter Act. This week, a
five-year fight Mr. Yatani has waged to clear his name is to draw toward a
close. It amounts to a test on the place of the McCarthy-era law in a changed
world.

Congress amended the law last year to provide that an alien cannot be denied
entry for ideological beliefs or associations if such expression would have been
protected under the Constitution if it had occurred in this country.

The amendment also provided that aliens should be permitted to request removal
of their names from the list. A lawsuit by Mr. Yatani, making such a request, is
the first under the new law.

On Friday, Judge John E. Sprizzo of Federal District Court in Manhattan is to
hear Mr. Yatani's suit. The Government argues that he has no right to challenge
whether his name should be on the list, and that whatever rights he might have
do not outweigh the Government's obligation to enforce its immigration laws.

To the softspoken doctoral candidate in psychology, the case has become not only
a personal cause, but a campaign on behalf of some 250,000 others from around
the world whose names, like his, are recorded for ideological reasons on a list
that continues to grow as fast as ever.

In all, according to information gathered by Mr. Yatani's lawyers at the Lawyers
Committee for Human Rights, about 100,000 aliens were on the list in 1980. By
1990 that number had grown to 367,771, with 69 percent listed on ideological
grounds, said Arthur C. Helton, the director of the Lawyers Committee's Refugee
Project.

Others who have been barred from this country under the law include Patricia
Lara, a Colombian journalist, the authors Graham Greene and Gabriel Garcia
Marquez, and the actor Yves Montand.

Now 44, Mr. Yatani sat on the campus here not long ago saying he was not
important like those people. But during the last five years, he said, he has
learned the damage that can be done to anyone by a simple charge.

Questions and Phone Calls

He is afraid to travel, he said, even to see his aging parents in Japan, because
it might all happen again. His sons, ages 8 and 10, have had to answer questions
at school about why their father was arrested and whether he is a terrorist.
There were angry telephone calls to his house by people who would not give their
names.

"So many things happened," Mr. Yatani said with a catch in his voice.
"Questioning myself. My wife questioning me."

For a time, he virtually put his work on his doctoral thesis aside as he helped
prepare his case, testified in Congress, worked for changes in the law and wrote
a book in Japanese about his experiences. "It harms him and preoccupies him,"
said his thesis adviser, Dana H. Bramel, a psychology professor here. "It
worries him all the time. It is a very heavy burden which he carries."

His teaching career, Mr. Yatani said, has not moved as quickly as he had
expected before that day at the airport when the immigration officers murmured
something about an "order from D.C." And he never knows, he said, whether the
whispers and the questions he has heard from colleagues have meant lost
opportunities.

"They believe the Government must know something about me: 'But Choichi is
hiding something.' This hurt me a lot. Because whatever I say, whatever I do,
they think, 'Choichi is a Communist. Choichi is a radical.' "

Much of that worry, Mr. Yatani said, comes because the Government, having made
the charge, has yet to give him a way to answer it. He has maintained from the
beginning that he was never anything more than the student body president at
Doshisha University in Kyoto during the stormy days of the Vietnam War. Once, in
1968, he was arrested in an anti-war demonstration.

Mr. Yatani sued at first under the Freedom of Information Act to find out why he
had been listed. The Federal Magistrate who heard that case in 1987, David F.
Jordan, criticized the Government for "disturbing" conduct in dragging its feet
in supplying documents.

When classified documents were finally supplied to the court, Magistrate Jordan
read them in secret and wrote an opinion concluding that if the information in
those documents formed the Government's basis for treating Mr. Yatani
differently from others seeking entry into this country, "said information does
not provide a reasonable basis for such treatment."

'Devoid of Merit'

Still, the Government refused to remove his name or even, at times, to confirm
that his name was ever on the list, and so Mr. Yatani filed the suit.

The assistant United States Attorney handling the case, Diogenes P. Kekatos,
said the Justice Department would not comment. But in court papers, Mr. Kekatos
said Mr. Yatani's constitutional claim "is utterly devoid of merit and borders
on the frivolous."

When he was asked directly by Judge Sprizzo, Mr. Kekatos said the Justice
Department believes there is no way for anyone to contest being included on the
list.

In a recent interview, Cornelius D. Scully 3d, the director of the State
Department's Office of Legislation, Regulations and Advisory Assistance of the
Visa Office, said the State Department stands by its position that Mr. Yatani's
name belongs on the list.

Magistrate Jordan was wrong in Mr. Yatani's Freedom of Information Act case, Mr.
Scully said. "I have the alien's visa file," he said. "There is in that file
classified information which, under the prevailing standards, would have
warranted the alien's exclusion regardless of what the judge may have thought or
said."

Some national security experts say battles like Mr. Yatani's are inevitable as
the world adapts to a new political climate. Deep inside the Government's
security agencies, some of them say, people who were schooled on decades of fear
of the Soviet bloc are clinging to old ways of doing business.

Alien blacklists, in that view of the world, are necessary tools of the trade,
said Doris Meisner, a former acting commissioner of immigration who is now with
the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. After all the years and all the
fears that went into making them, she said, the lists are likely to be modified
only because of external pressure like the suit from Mr. Yatani, no matter how
much the world changes.

"So much of this kind of mentality was based on the idea of a Soviet presence
and an international Communist threat," Ms. Meisner said. "But I don't think
that one should be lulled into thinking that change will come from the inside."

On campus the other day, Mr. Yatani let himself imagine for a minute what it
might have been like if he had simply decided to give up on America and gone
back to Japan after he was released five years ago. By now, all of the suspicion
and the fighting might be behind him, he said.

"I could have kept myself away from this case," he said. "Why didn't I? Because
it is them who did this, not me. And the real problem is it is not only me."

NAME: Choichiro Yatani

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Choichiro Yatani, a Japanese scholar, whose name appears on a
"lookout list" of ideologically suspect aliens. (Michael Shavel for The New York
Times) (pg. B7)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

History Suggests Bush's Popularity Will Ebb

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. KAGAY

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 761 words


President Bush's high approval ratings, increased by the Persian Gulf war, are
not likely to last for long, if the experiences of his nine immediate
predecessors are a reliable guide, according to a new study by researchers at
the Gallup Organization.

Mr. Bush's historic peak of 89 percent approval in a Gallup poll in early March,
just after the fighting ended in the gulf region, has already begun to fade,
standing at 77 percent in the latest Gallup poll. Taken by telephone with 1,002
adults nationwide from May 16 to 19, the poll had a margin of sampling error of
plus or minus four percentage points.

According to the new Gallup historical study, Mr. Bush's rating can be expected
to continue to decline over the next several months until it reverts to the
mid-60 percent range, his level before the gulf crisis began.

Still, Mr. Bush's surge in popularity in mid-January, when the air war began,
was one of the largest rises in the 50-year history of polling and has already
lasted longer than the average rise experienced by his nine predecessors, from
Franklin D. Roosevelt to Ronald Reagan.

Five Decades of Polling

In the new study, " 'Rally Events' and Presidential Approval," Larry Hugick,
vice president of the Gallup Organization, and Alec M. Gallup, co-chairman,
analyzed hundreds of Gallup polls from more than five decades -- beginning in
1938 during Roosevelt's second term -- to measure the impact of international
crises, diplomatic events and military operations on Presidential popularity.

Past studies, like the book "War, Presidents and Public Opinion" (John Wiley &
Sons; 1973), by John Mueller of the University of Rochester, have identified the
tendency of the public to rally round their flag, troops and President during
many foreign crises. Though the magnitude of such surges have been documented,
the new study is the first to look closely at their duration, and it finds they
do not last long.

The findings, reported at the annual meeting of the American Association for
Public Opinion Research that ended on Sunday in Phoenix, showed that each of the
last 10 Presidents experienced at least one such rally of opinion over a foreign
event. The 42 rallies studied have occurred on average every 1.2 years.

Increases in support for previous Presidents from these events averaged eight
percentage points. The smallest examined by the researchers was three percentage
points, while the largest was 19 percentage points.

10 Weeks of Higher Favor

Mr. Bush's 18-percentage-point surge, registered in mid-January as the air war
on Iraq began, was one of the three largest rises in Presidential popularity
ever recorded by Gallup. Jimmy Carter saw a 19-percentage-point increase when
American hostages were seized in Iran in November 1979, and Richard M. Nixon saw
a 16-percentage point lift at the time of the Vietnam peace agreements in
January 1973.

Rallies in support for previous Presidents lasted an average of 10 weeks. The
briefest were over in a week, while the longest disappeared after about seven
months. Mr. Bush's surge has persisted for four months, well beyond the average.


Holding Goodwill Till '92

The most long-lived increases in public favor were the 30 weeks for Franklin D.
Roosevelt after Pearl Harbor in 1941, the 31 weeks for John F. Kennedy after the
1962 Cuban missile crisis and the 30 weeks for Jimmy Carter after the American
hostages were seized in Iran in 1979.

Mr. Hugick and Mr. Gallup concluded: "Based on our analysis of rally events
throughout polling history, the effects of the Persian Gulf war on George Bush's
approval seem likely to be sustained for several more months. It is highly
unlikely, however, that the approval boost resulting from the gulf war will
carry over into election year 1992."

But some other analysts believe Mr. Bush's increase in favor from the gulf war
may prove more long-lived, similar to that resulting from the 1982 Falklands
war. "In the British General Election of 1983, a year after the Falklands war,
British voters rewarded its successful outcome" by returning the incumbent
party, said Helmut Norpoth, professor of political science at the State
University of New York, Stony Brook.

George C. Edwards 3d, director of the Center for Presidential Studies at Texas
A&M University, said: "The key to the whole thing is what topics are salient in
1992. The gulf victory may be sustained by multiple homecomings, but won't
remain salient throughout the Presidential campaign. We can't have ticker tape
parades forever."

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  Gallup poll measurements of the size and duration of the largest
increases in each President's approval rating before and after dramatic
international events.
                                           Percentage point    Duration of
                                                increase in  the increase,
                                            public approval       in weeks

Franklin D. Roosevelt
Pearl Harbor                                             12             30

Harry S. Truman
Truman Doctrine                                         +12            NA*
South Korea Invaded                                       9             10

Dwight D. Eisenhower
Bermuda Conference/
Atoms for peace speech                                   10             20

John F. Kennedy
Cuban Missile Crisis                                     13             31

Lyndon B. Johnson
Speech halting bombing of
North Vietnam and withdrawing
from 1968 Campaign                                       14             19

Richard M. Nixon
Vietnam peace agreement                                  16             15

Gerald R. Ford
Mayaguez incident                                        11             25

Jimmy Carter
Hostages seized in Iran                                  19             30

Ronald Reagan
Beirut bombing/Grenada invasion                           8           NA**
First Summit with Gorbachev                               7              4

George Bush
Iraqi invasion of Kuwait                                 14              9
Gulf war begins                                          18             18


* No polls conducted
** Overlapping events

(Source: The Gallup Organization)
Table: "Temporary Rises in Popularity"

TYPE: Statistics

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1217 words



INTERNATIONAL A3-16

Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated in a powerful explosion as he walked toward a
platform at a rally near Madras. The former Prime Minister of India, he hoped to
return to power in this week's elections.  Page A1

Mr. Gandhi swept through the crowd, a new up-close style of campaigning that
clearly posed risks. But he said he had no choice. A correspondent with him
recounts his last interview, followed by a blast and the wails of shocked
bystanders. A1

He had been the reluctant Gandhi, content on the political sidelines as his
mother and brother strained to command an immense and diverse land. But their
deaths forced him to gather up the Gandhi mantle. A12

The dynasty that was modern India is gone A11

Indians express anger, revulsion and disbelief A11

Bush calls assassination "appalling" and a lossA11

The President of Ethiopia resigned and fled the country. Officials of his
Government then called on the United States to try to arrange a settlement with
rebels who were reported nearing the capital. A1

Ethiopian ruled ruthlessly, killing colleagues A13

News analysis: Mikhail Gorbachev, in a series of gestures over the past month,
has signaled a readiness to come in from the cold after a bitter winter of
estrangement from his comrades in reform. A1

President Bush wants to kill a plan to invite President Gorbachev to a
seven-nation summit meeting in London. Officials said prospects also looked dim
for a superpower summit conference in Moscow in June. A3

Four ex-officials of East Germany arrested A3

Bush tells Belgrade that U.S. may consider restoring aid A8

Kuwait brought 22 people to court on charges of collaborating with Iraqi
invaders during the war. The trials began two days after a swift first round of
legal hearings provoked a wave of international criticism. A16

Public health in Iraq is deteriorating rapidly under the strain of postwar
epidemics, power disruptions, shortages of doctors, nurses and medicines and the
closing of hospitals and clinics, a study shows. A16

Tokyo agrees to pay off shortfall in gulf war aid A15

Bush is said to ignore the Vietnam War's missingA9

Beijing marks 40 years of Tibet's "liberation" A14

Oslo Journal: Who's in charge? Chances are it's a woman A4

NATIONAL A18-26, D23

President Bush is still in good health, although he has complained of fatigue
nearly two weeks after he began treatment for Graves' disease, a disorder that
makes the thyroid produce too much hormone. A18

Mr. Bush's high approval ratings, boosted by the Persian Gulf war, are not
likely to last for long, if the experiences of his nine immediate predecessors
are a reliable guide, a Gallup study has found.  A18

The Rockefeller name rings a bell in New Hampshire but the man visiting there as
he considers a run for President is not well known. Senator John Rockefeller of
West Virginia is asking voters about health issues.  A20

Senate, for the record, votes to bar speaking fees A20

The $105 billion transportation bill has sharply divided the Bush Administration
and a Senate panel, and no compromise appears near. At stake is Federal aid to
states that affects nearly every American. A22

Lawmakers humble in pleading for military bases D23

The battle over the civil rights bill continued with a skirmish between
Republicans and Democrats to control the political high ground of being against
quotas in employment, the bill's biggest emotional issue.  D23

Stereotypes hobble blacks at all levels, former official says D23

E.P.A. ready to battle drainage from cities and farms A22

Three problems delay launching of space shuttle A26

The four Los Angeles police officers charged with beating a motorist may have
their trials moved out of the city, a judge said after the publication of an
internal police report. A21

Yuba City Journal: Pistol permits makes sheriff a target A18

REGIONAL B1-5

A City Councilman's road to riches in New York City starts with a $55,000
salary. That escalates quickly as Council members begin to claim the perks --
from the Lulu, to the Golden Apple -- that their office has traditionally
included. A1

Councilman Noach Dear: a master of overlap B4

A City Councilman and a special fund he set up are under investigation. The
F.B.I. sought records from the Councilman, Robert J. Dryfoos, as the Council's
ethics committee prepared its own inquiry. B5

Koch's campaign panel fined for '89 race B3

A beer can thrown at Mayor Dinkins as he marched with a gay group in the St.
Patrick's Day Parade got the assailant an unusual sentence: a week at the
Mayor's Office for the Lesbian and Gay Community. B1

A homeless shelter in Westchester is occasionally mistaken for new condominiums.
Although it may mesh architecturally, the project still stands out like a sore
thumb in the minds of many who opposed it. B1

A new fiscal plan in Connecticut was drafted by legislators leading the charge
against Governor Weicker's income tax proposal. The plan seeks expanded sales
and business taxes and deeper spending cuts. B1

New Jersey faces a larger shortfall in the state budget than earlier expected.
Blaming a weak economy, the State Treasurer said the deficit would be an
additional $768 million for the coming fiscal year. B5

Albany leaders agree to restore school aid cuts B5

Four victims of the Bronx explosion, in which a huge fireball erupted after a
car and a gasoline truck collided, had come to the city from Canada to enjoy a
three-day weekend. B1

Crime in New York declined in January B3

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

The Living Section

Food

New York tries to be the buckle on the barbecue belt C1

At the Indy 500, a heady mixture of garlic and oil C1

Living

New respect for Polish bluebloods C8

Arts/Entertainment

Buyer vows to return Indian masks C11

Two young Off Broadway actresses C11

Theater: "The Way of the World" C11

Theater in Review C15

Film: "Straight Out of Brooklyn" C11

Word and Image: A Czechoslovak novel C16

Met opera on public television C18

Education Page

Educators are fighting tax loopholes that allow companies to donate to schools
but then extract as many breaks as they can from their communities, cutting off
money needed to finance public education.  A1

Scandal over cheating at M.I.T. stirs debate A23

Sports B6-11

Auto Racing: Can speed and safety coexist at Indy 500?  B9

Baseball: Mets beat Cubs B7

Yanks lose to Indians B11

Is Steinbrenner trying to oust Nederlander?  B11

Basketball: Bulls take 2-0 lead over Pistons B7

Trail Blazers tie series with Lakers B8

Columns: Anderson on Handley B9

Claire Smith on baseball B11

Football: No L. T. at mini-camp B7

Hockey: Penguins beat North Stars B8

Obituaries D25

Greg Rice, a champion runner of the early 1940's

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A24

India: Surviving the shock

An overdue exit in Ethiopia

Why blindfold the camera?

Topics: Best of Bloomie's

Letters A24

Tom Wicker: High noon, low hype A25

Leslie H. Gelb: F-22 = $95 billion A25

Shashi Tharoor: Rajiv Gandhi and the politics of fear A25

William Desmond: I'm not going to Harvard A25

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Aide Resigns in Dispute About Vietnam's M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 685 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 21


The head of a Pentagon intelligence unit assigned to account for United States
servicemen missing in Vietnam has resigned, accusing Bush Administration
officials of seeking to discredit and perhaps even cover up reports of sightings
of Americans in the country.

The Army officer, Col. Millard A. Peck, left his job on March 28, stapling an
unusual memorandum and farewell note to his office door that charged that his
department was being used as a " 'toxic waste dump' to bury the whole 'mess' out
of sight and mind in a facility with limited access to public scrutiny."

The resignation after only eight months in the job was first made public in a
hearing before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in early April. Details of
his memo were reported last week in the Washington Times and in The Los Angeles
Times today.

The unit run by Colonel Peck was the Defense Intelligence Agency's Special
Office for Prisoners of War and Missing in Action.

In his memo, Colonel Peck, a highly decorated veteran of three tours in Vietnam
who has spent more than 20 years in the Army, faulted Administration officials
for failing to pursue leads. "The mindset to 'debunk' is alive and well," he
said. "It is held at all levels, and continues to pervade the P.O.W.-M.I.A.
office."

He added: "A cover-up may be in progress. The entire charade does not appear to
be an honest effort and may never have been."

The United States still lists nearly 2,300 Americans as missing in action or
unaccounted for in the Vietnam War, and President Bush has called resolution of
the problem one "of highest national priority." Although the resolution of the
contentious issue is not a condition for the improvement of relations between
the United States and Vietnam, the "pace and scope" of the process is related to
the cooperation of the Vietnamese in accounting for the lost American
servicemen.

The Pentagon has opened an investigation into Colonel Peck's allegations, and
will withhold all public comment until the investigation is completed, a
Pentagon spokesman, Lieut. Col. Steve Roy, said today. But, he added, "There
have been seven inquiries into the role of the Pentagon in investigating
sightings of M.I.A.'s and P.O.W.'s. Those inquiries essentially have found that
we were acting correctly and were fully committed to the process."

Colonel Peck did not return phone calls to his new office in the Military
District of Washington, which provides administrative services and ceremonial
functions for all military activities in the Washington area.

Three Republican senators, -- including Senators Jesse Helms of North Carolina,
Robert C. Smith of New Hampshire and Charles E. Grassley of Iowa -- have charged
that the Pentagon has long been involved in a conspiracy to cover up evidence of
Americans still living in Vietnam.

Since the end of the Vietnam War, successive administrations have consistently
defended their highly skeptical approach to reports that Americans have been
seen in Vietnam.

Senior Bush Administration officials say that the yearning by families of
missing servicemen for any information about their loved ones has spawned a
number of scams by unscrupulous Vietnamese, including an odious trade in human
bones and offers to provide help in locating servicemen in return for
sponsorship for permanent residency in the United States.

In his memo, Colonel Peck singled out Ann Mills Griffiths, executive director of
the National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast
Asia, for particular criticism. Ms. Griffiths, whose brother has been missing
since 1966, he said, "occupies an interesting and questionable position in the
whole process," because of her access to "top secret, code-word message traffic"
even before D.I.A. officials receive it.

In recent years, some others have criticized Ms. Griffiths and her organization
for taking the side of the Pentagon instead of the families of the missing
servicemen. In response to Colonel Peck's charges, Ms. Griffiths said today that
"Accusing an M.I.A. sister of impeding the effort is ludicrous."

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Book Notes

BYLINE: By Edwin McDowell

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 553 words



2 Volumes at $1.35 a Page

This November, Alfred A. Knopf will publish the most expensive book in its
history: "The Sistine Chapel," a two-volume work that will sell for $1,000. It
will be limited to 2,500 sets in North America, while Random Century -- like
Knopf, a unit of Random House Inc. -- will publish 2,500 copies in England.

"We feel we can sell about 500 in bookstores," said Bruce Harris, an executive
vice president of Random House. The remainder, he said, are likely to sell to
museums and to individuals. The book will also be published in Italy, Germany
and France.  Publishers are free to adopt different formats -- the Italian
publisher is expected to issue it in three volumes -- but everyone had to agree
to price it about the same.

In 1980, Abbeville Press sold 600 copies of "The Vatican Frescoes of
Michelangelo," a two-volume set priced at $6,000. That same year saw the start
of the 13-year project to clean and restore Michelangelo's Sistine frescoes. The
$4.2 million restoration is being underwritten by the Nippon Television Network
Corporation of Japan, in return for exclusive photographic, film and television
rights.

"The Sistine Chapel," to be printed in Switzerland, will contain more than 740
pages and more than 600 photographs, many of them full page with double-page
spreads and gatefolds. One gatefold, showing before-and-after scenes, is 17
inches high and 4 feet wide. All the photographs are by Takashi Okamura, a
Japanese who has taken the photos for several books on Vatican art.

Mr. Harris said "The Sistine Chapel" had been signed up some years ago by
Harmony Books, a unit of Crown Publishers. In 1986, Harmony published "The
Sistine Chapel: The Art, the History and the Restoration," by Carlo Pietrangeli
and others. That work focused on the 14 lunettes, all that had been cleaned to
that time. After Random House bought Crown in 1988, "The Sistine Chapel" was
moved to Knopf.

A Journalistic Career

Peter Arnett's book will probably end with his experiences in Baghdad and the
Persian Gulf, said Lynn Nesbit, Mr. Arnett's agent, but it will range across his
entire journalistic career, including his 13 years in Vietnam. The untitled book
is due for delivery in the fall of 1992, for publication the following year by
Simon & Schuster, which recently acquired North American hard-cover rights. It
has also sold to publishers in more than a half-dozen countries, including
Germany, Japan, Holland and Italy.

Ms. Nesbit would not comment on reports that Simon & Schuster paid about
$625,000 for the book. But in Italy alone it sold for $300,000, she said, adding
that the entire package will earn between $1.5 million and $2 million.

Battlefield to Show Biz

"Fighting For Air" (Simon & Schuster), Liz Trotta's book about her years as a
reporter for NBC and CBS News, was recently published to enthusiastic
endorsements from Walter Cronkite and David Brinkley, as well as from such
ideological opposites as George F. McGovern and William F. Buckley Jr.

While part of the book is about various wars the author covered, beginning with
Vietnam in 1968, part is also about the corporate wars that, according to Ms.
Trotta, often pit reporters who object to the show-biz aspects of television
news against their producers and managers.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 23, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1152 words


International A3-15

Sonia Gandhi will lead the party of her slain husband, Rajiv Gandhi, Congress
Party officials decided, in a move that stunned India and seeks to capitalize on
a large sympathy vote. Page A1

Woman in the News: Sonia Gandhi is a reluctant candidate launched by tragedy.
Recently, she had been more involved with restoring oil paintings than Indian
politics.  A1

News analysis: Congress is a landmark party in decline A15

After Gandhi, India still governed by caretakers A14

Indians in U.S. now fear more violence in homeland A15

President Gorbachev pleaded for aid from the democratic world, asserting that it
would be well worth it to the West to bolster global security by priming a
Soviet recovery. A1

U.S. and Soviets near settling arms pact dispute A10

Albanian politician, in U.S., denounces the Communists A10

Rebel Ethiopian forces advanced, getting to within 23 miles of the capital,
Western diplomats said. They appeared poised to either force their way into the
capital or dictate a settlement at peace talks scheduled for Monday. A8
Ex-Ethiopian ruler arrives in Zimbabwe, beginning exile A9

Ethiopians in U.S. pleased but fearful of further violence A9

South Africa banned spear carrying, along with other primitive weapons in areas
afflicted by unrest around Johannesburg, acceding to a demand by the African
National Congress. A6

Lagos Journal: School chief promotes (250) mother tongues A4

Israel's settlement construction in the occupied territories was criticized by
Secretary of State Baker. He said that nothing has more complicated his efforts
to convene Arab-Israeli peace talks. A5

Israeli pacifist rejects plea to end his protest fast A3

Syria and Lebanon sign cooperation treaty A3

Iraqi soldiers would withdraw from the Kurdish city of Dohuk and allied forces
would move in under an agreement reached by allied and Iraqi military commanders
to spur Kurdish resettlement. A11

U.N. team inspects Iraq's stock of uranium A12

Chinese advocates of change reportedly make small gains A6

On Philippine treaty, gap is said to narrow A13

National A18-29, B12-13

Ivy League schools' data sharing on student financial aid will stop along with
any collaboration on tuition increases, the schools announced, facing Justice
Department charges that they violated antitrust laws.  A1

Sony would lease the A.T.&T. tower, one of the architectural highlight of
Manhattan's skyline, in an agreement that has been tentatively settled, real
estate executives said.  A1

A $291 billion military budget was approved by House. The budget was was in
concert with the Administration on the total but differed sharply on the
details, including the cost of two of the Pentagon's most prized weapons
systems. A20

Changes to a campaign finance bill were rejected by the Senate, beating back a
Republican effort to strip the bill of spending ceilings and partial public
financing. A24

Bush plan for banks is dealt blow D1

Transport bill that Bush may veto gains in Senate A23

Attorney General Dick Thornburgh was granted a White House waiver of
conflict-of-interest rules, allowing him to negotiate a settlement of the Exxon
Valdez oil spill despite investments in two oil companies. A18

Ethics office is reviewing Sununu's travels A21

President Bush's medical problems have included some serious side effects,
including mental fatigue, from his overactive thyroid and its drug treatment
that were not previously dislosed. B12

Survey of family leave finds little burden A29

Report offers new answer to gamma ray puzzle A28

NASA sees threat in cracked shuttle part A25

Rizzo reappears on Philadelphia political scene A18

St. Paul Journal: A tale of the madam and the mayor A18

Regional B1-11

Peter Vallone, City Council Speaker, has emerged as the city's second most
powerful elected official, crusading to turn the long-criticized legislative
body into a respectable counterweight to the mayor. A1

More than a long hallway keeps Dinkins and Vallone apart B2

City Councilman Robert Dryfoos of Manhattan received a $25,000 check from a
prominent developer whose apartment project he had championed before a city
agency, bank records show. B3

Ethics panel to examine Councilman and fund B2

Stricter gun-control measures were agreed to by state lawmakers which would
lengthen penalties for illegal possession or sale of firearms and close
loopholes in the city's gun laws, state officials said. B1

Cuts may force CUNY to turn away students B3 A man who adopted many children who
had physical handicaps and other serious problems now faces charges of sexually
abusing his 14-year-old adopted daughter. Some neighbors praised him as
personable, others said he seemed peculiar. B1

$2.7 million settles West Point child-abuse case B9

In Canada, grief rather than blame B5

Rivalry over boyfriend ends in killing on S.I.  B7

Homeless people cannot be barred from libraries because their presence, their
staring or their hygiene annoys or offends other library patrons, a Federal
judge ruled. B1

Weicker says he'll veto a no-income-tax plan B6

Syria invitation to gulf parade is reconsidered B7

Times Square Journal: Joe Franklin must move B1

Business Digest D1

The Home Section

It's new. It's now. Can you sit in it?  C1

Country vs the city: weekend diplomacy C1

A Brazilian gardener in search of paradise C1

Parent & ChildC2

A rocking chair for the disabled C5

Childbirth classes in just one evening C8

College presidents with two pied- a-terre C12

Arts/Entertainment

Film: Behind the Cannes infighting C17

Film making returns to New York C17

Music: New Philharmonic manager C17

Bolshoi names singers for U.S. visit C20

Dance: "The Cage," by City Ballet C15

Jose Greco is back in town C19

Word and Image: Character may survive her series C17

Book: "Fall of the Godfather" C23

NBC is winner in May sweeps C30

Home Videos C30

A TV salute to Kirk Douglas C32

Obituaries D21

Hoang Van Hoan, Vietnam aide who defected to China

Julian Orbon, composer

Sports B14-21

Baseball: Cubs beat Mets B15

Dykstra's life on the edge B15

Yanks rout Indians B17

Cubs name Essian manager B17

Basketball: Checketts wants Riley B20

Pistons worried B20

Column: Vecsey on Penguins B15

Football: Giants get rings B21

Hockey: North Stars confident B18

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A30

Where to aim the embargo

Redeeming Albany

Gizmos for gizmos

Smaller, for the futureLetters A30

William Safire: Clark Clifford's confession A31

Kim Dae Jung: Sabotage in Seoul A31

Elizabeth Joseph: My husband's nine wives A31

William G. Milliken: Innovative solutions for budgets in crisis A31

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 23, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section C; Page 30; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1156 words


Increased Exposure

The country may eventually forget "Home Alone," but it's not likely to be this
summer. By Aug. 22, when Fox Video is scheduled to release it on tape, the
third-highest-grossing movie in history will have become the most heavily
promoted video.

The price of "Home Alone" will be $24.98, making it the first new low-priced
nonanimated movie to enter stores since "Pretty Woman" was released last
September.

A smash hit at a low price calls for a sponsor. "Home Alone," in an ununusual
step for video, will have two of them. Pepsi will offer a $5 rebate and have a
30-second commercial on the tape. And American Airlines , which will have a
10-second spot on the tape, will promote the video on its flights and offer
discounts on air travel to those who buy a copy.

"With these two sponsors, we spread the distribution and the exposure," said C.
Bruce Pfander, Fox's vice president of marketing. The object, he said, is to
move "Home Alone" promotion into grocery chains, convenience stores and discount
outlets.

Mr. Pfander said American Airlines, the carrier whose plane departs without
Kevin (Macaulay Culkin) in the movie, originally wanted to sponsor the video
alone. But he said Fox held out for a consumer product with broad distribution
in many outlets.  "Pepsi offered us the strongest package," he said.

Depending on negotiations, Macaulay Culkin may or may not appear in the Pepsi
commercial. Either way, Fox said it expected to sell at least 10 million copies
of "Home Alone," which would make it the second-highest-selling video movie
ever. "Our challenge is to keep this thing alive from August through the gift
season," Mr. Pfander said. If that happens, "Home Alone" might even challenge
"E.T.," which with 12 million copies sold is the No. 1 selling video.

Connecticut Cowboys

This summer there will be a more modest promotion for a well-known title from
television. Cabin Fever Entertainment of Greenwich, Conn., distributes videos of
country music, like Hank Williams Jr.'s "Full Access," and shows about the West
like "The Best of the Wild West," starring Chuck Connors and Randy Travis,
"Heroes of Rodeo: Guts and Glory" and "The Making of Lonesome Dove," a
documentary about the 1990 television mini-series.

This month Cabin Fever was awarded distribution rights for "Lonesome Dove"
itself and a video of the television series is to be released in August.

New Video Releases

Mermaids
1990. Orion. $94.98. 1 hour, 41 minutes.
Closed captioned. PG-13.

Cher is Mrs. Flax, a restless mother who packs up her daughters Charlotte
(Winona Ryder) and Kate (Christina Ricci) and moves to the seaside village of
East Port, Mass., where her liberated attitude startles the locals. Much of
Richard Benjamin's film centers on Charlotte's love problems, leading to a
"terribly gentle, if wise-cracking comedy about the serious business of growing
up." (Vincent Canby)

Jacob's Ladder
1990. LIVE. $92.95. 1:56. CC. R.

In Adrian Lyne's "slick, riveting, viscerally scary" film, Jacob (Tim Robbins)
is a Vietnam War veteran who lands in a hellish dream in which his life streams
before him with terrifying and often surreal atmospheric touches. "From high
fever to ice bath, the movie careens through a succession of mood swings
intended to keep the audience hooked." (Janet Maslin)

The Mouse and the Motorcycle
1991. Strand VCI. $12.95. 42 minutes.

A mouse named Ralph races around the ramshackle Mountain View Inn on a toy
motorcycle on loan from Keith, a young guest at the hotel. When Keith gets sick,
Ralph evades mouse traps, a cat and capture by a teacher from Wichita to deliver
medicine. The ABC Kidtime adaptation of Beverly Cleary's novel won an Emmy and
the Peabody Award.

The Krays
1990. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD, $39.95. 1:59. CC. R.

Savage, fashionably dressed mama's boys, the Kray twins rule the London crime
world in the 1960's. Ronald and Reginald (played by the brothers Gary and Martin
Kemp) are brought up on tales of Jack the Ripper told by their mother Violet
(Billie Whitelaw). That sort of tutelage together with hard knocks in London's
East End produce a pair of gangsters with bizarre tastes in killing and love,
turning Peter Medak's film "spooky and transfixing." (Maslin)

Turner at the Tate
1990. Home Vision. $39.95. 55 minutes. In stores or call (800) 262-8600

A group of artists and scholars -- none of them identified but, observes Roberta
Smith of The New York Times, all well-informed and opinionated -- tour the J. M.
W. Turner wing at the Tate Gallery in London, rendering observations about the
artist's work. At one point the actor Leo McKern appears in a dramatized
vignette depicting Turner rather grandly bequeathing his work to the Tate. All
told, the painter didn't bequeath his finest -- "studio sweepings," one
commentator calls them -- but the examples on the walls are adequate to generate
lively discussion.

Palme d'Ors Past

"Barton Fink," the winner of this year's Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival,
has not been released in theaters in the United States and will not be on
videocassette for some time. But many of the past winners of the top award at
Cannes are available on video. They include:

M*A*S*H (which won in 1970), Robert Altman's classic set during the Korean War,
with Donald Sutherland, Elliott Gould, Sally Kellerman and Robert Duvall.
CBS/Fox. 1:56. PG.
THE CONVERSATION (1974), Francis Ford Coppola's film about a wire-tapper, with
Gene Hackman. Paramount. 1 hour, 53 minutes. PG.
TAXI DRIVER (1976), Martin Scorsese's film about a cabbie on a violent spree,
with Robert De Niro, Cybill Shepherd and Jodie Foster. RCA/Columbia. 1:53. R.
APOCALYPSE NOW (1979), Mr. Coppola's Vietnam epic, with Martin Sheen and Marlon
Brando. Paramount. 2:33. R.
ALL THAT JAZZ (1980), Bob Fosse's autobiographical film about a self-destructive
director and choreographer. CBS/Fox. 2:03. R.
MISSING (1982), Costa-Gavras's account of a father's search for his missing son
in Chile, with Jack Lemmon and Sissy Spacek. MCA/ Universal. 2:02. PG.
THE MISSION (1986), Roland Joffe's film about Jesuits in Brazil in the 18th
century, with Mr. De Niro and Jeremy Irons. Warner. 2:05. PG.
UNDER SATAN'S SUN (1987), Maurice Pialat's film about a country priest and a
woman who commits murder, with Gerard Depardieu. Connoisseur. 1:38. French with
English subtitles. No rating.
PELLE THE CONQUEROR (1988), Billie August's moving, stately story about about a
father and son who emigrate to Denmark to work on a farm, with Max von Sydow and
Pelle Hvenegaard. HBO. 2:30. PG-13.
SEX, LIES AND VIDEOTAPE (1989), Steven Soderberg's study of deceit and sexual
awakening, with James Spader, Andie McDowell and Laura San Giacomo.
RCA/Columbia. 1:40. R.
WILD AT HEART (1990), David Lynch's journey across the underside of America,
with Nicolas Cage and Laura Dern. Media. 2:05. R.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Anjelica Huston and Robert Duvall in "Lonesome Dove." (CBS);
Tim Robbins in "Jacob's Ladder." (Tri-Star Pictures)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 23, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
Clark Clifford's Confession

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A; Page 31; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 736 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Do you remember what Watergate was all about? It was about the intrusion by the
party in power into the rights of political challengers -- the Ins using their
power unfairly to block the Outs.

In his eye-popping memoirs, "Counsel to the President," Clark Clifford shows in
exquisite detail how Lyndon Johnson colluded with Moscow -- and abused the power
of our intelligence agencies -- to try to block Richard Nixon's challenge and
swing the 1968 election to the Democrats' Hubert Humphrey.

That revelation was not Mr. Clifford's intent, of course; on the contrary, this
Democrat, whose civilized partisanship I have long admired, charges the Nixon
campaign with "gross, even potentially illegal, interference with the security
affairs of the nation" by encouraging South Vietnam to avoid participating in a
Paris meeting central to a 1968 election-weekend stunt.

But he and collaborator Richard Holbrooke, to their credit, lay out the damning
facts about L.B.J.'s lastminute bombing halt and abortive peace conference
designed to attract dovish voters to Hubert Humphrey.

Three weeks before Election Day, writes Clifford, Moscow sent an urgent message
to Johnson: "if the U.S. stopped the bombing of North Vietnam, Hanoi would agree
to the participation of the Saigon government in the negotiations that would
follow immediately."

L.B.J. was suspicious of this sudden Communist turnabout, and Mr. Clifford, then
Defense Secretary, "remembered [Averell] Harriman's prediction that Moscow would
try to prevent a victory by Nixon, whom they still regarded as an
unreconstructed Cold Warrior."

But Moscow's interest in stopping Mr. Nixon paralleled the Democrats' interest.
L.B.J. agreed, on condition "that negotiations begin within 24 hours after the
cessation of the bombing" -- i.e., in time for Election Day.

The U.S. election results would have been reversed but for the refusal of South
Vietnam's President Thieu to attend the Paris photo opportunity. A Nixon
supporter, Anna Chennault, had told him this was a ploy to defeat Nixon, who
would be a more steadfast ally than Humphrey.

Under pressure from Moscow's Aleksei Kosygin and badgered by Clifford, L.B.J. --
though queasy at selling out the South Vietnamese to elect Humphrey -- announced
a last-minute bombing halt and peace conference. Artfully, Clifford masked South
Vietnam's absence in an L.B.J. statement hailing a conference at which Saigon
was "free to participate."

As a Nixon speechwriter, I saw that curious phrase through speechwriters' eyes:
why free to, not will? It meant that President Thieu had refused to play the
Democrats' game. While Bryce Harlow drafted a pious statement from Nixon, the
rest of us passed the word that L.B.J. "didn't have his ducks in a row." The
media reported that fact, and the Democrats' last-ditch attempt to manipulate
public opinion failed.

In castigating Mrs. Chennault for foiling the scheme, Mr. Clifford is forced to
reveal the basis of his suspicion of her: "the information had been derived from
extremely sensitive intelligence-gathering operations of the F.B.I., the C.I.A.,
and the National Security Agency; these included surveillance of the Ambassador
of our ally, and an American citizen with strong political ties to the
Republicans."

Recognizing that this was a startling admission of the abuse of government power
to defeat a political opponent, Mr. Clifford footnotes: "It should be remembered
that the public was considerably more innocent in such matters in the days
before the Watergate hearings . . ."

John Mitchell, Nixon's 1968 campaign manager, knew what Mrs. Chennault -- who
needed no guidance -- was doing. Later, as Attorney General, he learned from the
F.B.I. and C.I.A. exactly how the White House orchestrated N.S.A.'s
eavesdropping on Nixon's "Dragon Lady" and C.I.A.'s illegal surveillance of
national-security aide Richard Allen. Returning to manage the 1972 Nixon
campaign, Mitchell entrusted such unlawful intrusions to amateurs, for which he
was jailed.

Two days before he died in 1988, as I needled him over lunch for tapping my
phone, Mr. Mitchell replied: "I learned everything I knew about political
surveillance from L.B.J. in '68 -- except to leave it to the professionals."

Clark Clifford's memoirs confirm that. Watergate's crimes grew from seeds
planted in the power abuses of the Johnson Administration's "October surprise."

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 23, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Hoang Van Hoan, Vietnam Aide Who Defected to China, Dies at 86

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 21; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 351 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, May 22


Hoang Van Hoan, a founding member of the Vietnamese Communist Party who defected
to China in 1979, died in Beijing on Saturday, China's official press agency
reported today. He was 86 years old.

China's evening television news said Mr. Hoang had been hospitalized since
January with a lung infection.

Mr. Hoang's defection dramatized the divisions in the Vietnamese party in the
1970's over its growing reliance on Moscow and hostility to China, which had
aided the Vietnamese Communists in their long war against France and the United
States.

He Left 'With Sorrow'

Mr. Hoang was purged from his top party posts in 1976 for his pro-Chinese views,
but did not defect until after the brief Vietnamese-Chinese border war in early
1979. He left Vietnam for a medical checkup in Berlin, and disappeared on a
refueling stop in Pakistan.

He later appeared in Beijing, where he accused the Vietnamese Communist Party
Secretary, Le Duan, of being corrupt and dictatorial.

"I, a revolutionary, can no longer remain silent," he said at a news conference.
"I can no longer serve the people in Vietnam and had to leave my country with
bitterness and sorrow."

Along with Ho Chi Minh and others, Mr. Hoang helped found the Indochinese
Communist Party in 1930, and set up the Vietminh United Front to fight against
French colonial rule in 1941.

He was his nation's first Ambassador to China, from 1950 to 1957.

The Chinese television report described Mr. Hoang as "a respected old friend of
the Chinese people." It said the Chinese Communist Party's General Secretary,
Jiang Zemin, and other top officials had visited him in the hospital.

After his initial defection statements, Mr. Hoang went into a quiet retirement
in Beijing. The official press mentioned him only occasionally as meeting with
Chinese leaders.

Vietnam and China remain estranged, but talks are believed to be taking place in
secret. The main obstacle is Cambodia, which Vietnam invaded in 1978. It ousted
the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge and installed a Government that continues to
fight Chinese-backed Cambodian guerrillas.

NAME: Hoang Van Hoan

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hoang Van Hoan (Camera Press, 1976)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 24, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Council and the Sidewalk Cafe: Business as Usual

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 921 words


The New York City Council met yesterday in the unfamiliar glare of public
attention and in typical unruly fashion passed a few bills, gave a member a
medal for valor and approved a permit for a sidewalk cafe owned by its Speaker's
orthopedic surgeon.

Its ethics committee met in the Speaker's private office to review allegations
of impropriety against one member, in a meeting that its chief lawyer later said
was public (though the public was not invited in), then closed the door to hold
a meeting that the lawyer said was truly private.

It was all business as usual for the Council, which has faced unusual scrutiny
this week for its perquisites and peccadilloes as it struggles to grow into its
new powers as the city's legislative body after decades of ineptitude and
inaction.

Sometimes, It's Like a Small Town

The vote on the sidewalk cafe exemplified the interlocking interests that
permeate the Council and that sometimes make New York seem like a small town.
The Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, said he abstained because the cafe is owned by
his doctor. But the tale was even more tangled. At the center was Robert J.
Dryfoos, whose taxes and finances came under Federal investigation this week
after The New York Times reported that he had paid personal expenses from a
special $170,000 fund of public donations. Mr. Dryfoos cast the key vote that
elected Mr. Vallone the Council's leader five years ago, and Mr. Vallone has
appointed him to head important committees on zoning and state legislation.

Mr. Dryfoos, who represents the Upper East Side, had lobbied his colleagues
strongly on behalf of the cafe, which is in Greenwich Village -- far from his
district -- and which was strongly opposed by the local community board and
Council member, Carol Greitzer. The restaurant, Boswell's, is owned by Dr. R.
Raymond Kurzner, who lives in Mr. Dryfoos's district, at 35 Sutton Place.

Records show that Dr. Kurzner contributed $1,000 to Mr. Dryfoos's special fund,
the Seventh District Council Government Committee, which the Councilman said was
set up to support his official duties, but from which he used money to buy
shirts and ties. Mr. Dryfoos has denied wrongdoing, but if the fund was used for
personal expenses and the donors did business with the city, it might violate
the city's ethics regulations.

When the cafe came up for a vote yesterday, Mr. Vallone surprised Ms. Greitzer
by abstaining. Mr. Vallone's spokeswoman, Peg Breen, said later that he was
aware that Mr. Dryfoos had lobbied on Dr. Kurzner's behalf, but that he had
abstained "because this guy has operated on him and other members of his
family." She added, "It had nothing to do with Dryfoos." The permit for the cafe
was approved 28 to 3 with Mr. Vallone abstaining.

Records show that Mr. Vallone and the Council's political action committee,
which he controls, have received more than $2,000 in contributions from Dr.
Kurzner since 1985.

Dr. Kurzner's practice is in Jackson Heights, Queens. Mr. Vallone lives in
nearby Astoria. Boswell's is at 535 Hudson Street in Manhattan. State records
show that Dr. Kurzner owns 90 percent, with the rest held by Helen Brennan of
Glendale, Queens.

Apartment Tenants Annoyed

Dr. Kurzner's secretary and Ms. Brennan both said that he was unavailable for
comment and that he would not answer questions.

Arthur W. Strickler, chairman of Community Board 2, said the board had opposed
the permit for the cafe. He said the restaurant now uses a hallway for garbage,
annoying apartment tenants. Of the cafe, he said, "If they put out 50 chairs, it
makes the problems 50 times worse."

To the surprise of his colleagues, a haggard Mr. Dryfoos took his usual
front-row seat for yesterday's meeting, and made a point of working the room.

He told reporters before the meeting began, "I have a constituency to serve and
I intend to serve it." Mr. Dryfoos said that reports about his use of the fund
"will prove to be inaccurate" and that a column by Jimmy Breslin in New York
Newsday yesterday that suggested he might be suicidal was "cruel and
inaccurate."

A Medal to a Vietnam Veteran

Apart from the drama around Mr. Dryfoos, the meeting was typical, and so noisy
that the presiding officer, Archie Spigner of Queens, said it was "becoming
intolerable." The Council gave Memorial Day awards, including a gold medal to
its own Vietnam veteran, Jerome X. O'Donovan of Staten Island. Mr. Dryfoos, well
known for working his way into ceremonial photographs, stayed seated.

After the full Council meeting, the ethics committee met in Mr. Vallone's
office. When reporters reminded the Council's chief lawyer, Richard Weinberg,
that the state open-meetings law permits such private meetings, but requires
they be convened in public first, Mr. Weinberg said the committee had met
publicly, in the Speaker's office, before polling itself and closing the door.
That came as a surprise to reporters who had been told the entire meeting was
closed and waited outside.

The committee's chairwoman, Julia Harrison of Queens, said that the committee
hoped to interview Mr. Dryfoos about his finances on Wednesday, and that it
would "interview all necessary persons and examine any and all relevant
documents." Mr. Vallone, who sits on the committee, left City Hall and refused
to comment.

Two Council members, Sal F. Albanese of Brooklyn and Ronnie M. Eldridge of
Manhattan, called on Mr. Vallone to appoint an outside counsel to investigate
the allegations to "restore public trust."

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The City Council approved a permit for a sidewalk cafe owned by
a doctor who treated Speaker Peter F. Vallone, standing at left. At center,
turning around in his seat, was City Councilman Robert J. Dryfoos. (Neal
Boenzi/The New York Times) (pg. B3)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 24, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

TV Weekend

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 30; Column 6; Weekend Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 74 words


'Memorial: Letters From American Soldiers'
Channel 11
Tomorrow at 11:30 P.M.

The first part of this two-hour presentation will be HBO's award-winning "Dear
America: Letters Home From Vietnam." Now the director and co-producer Bill
Couturier has added a 20-minute postscript encompassing letters written by young
men and women in other battles, from World War I to the Persian Gulf. The
Memorial Day holiday could hardly be better served.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 25, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Allies Move to Ease Cold War Limits on Exports

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1502 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 24


The United States and its allies have decided to ease restrictions substantially
on the kinds of high-technology goods, like personal computers, that the West
can export to the Soviet Union and other nations considered security risks.

The Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls, known as Cocom,
agreed to cut in half the number of high-technology items that cannot be
exported to these countries without special licenses. It is the most sweeping
action yet in liberalizing high-technology trade with the Soviet Union, other
Communist countries and the members of the recently dissolved Warsaw Pact.

The countries involved include Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland, three
emerging democracies in Eastern Europe that have received strong public support
from the 17 members of Cocom. American officials also said Cocom would try to
simplify procedures for those three countries and grant exceptions when it was
clear that controlled items would have only civilian uses there and would not be
diverted to other countries on the list.

In addition to the Soviet Union, the controls also apply to Albania, Bulgaria,
Romania, China, Mongolia, North Korea and Vietnam.

Some Cocom members have expressed concern that the restrictions are directed
just at the former Soviet bloc and other Communist countries, and not at
developing countries, like Iraq, that might pose a military threat. Some Cocom
officials say that whether and how to extend the controls to the third world
will be a subject of future debates.

Many Restrictions Remain

Under the new rules agreed upon late Thursday in Paris after a year of often
tense talks, restrictions will be lifted on the export of almost all personal
computers, some semiconductor-manufacturing equipment and most civilian aircraft
and civilian aircraft engines.

Controls will remain on items like night-vision systems and supercomputers that
are considered essential to maintain the West's superiority in military
technology over the Soviet Union. Restrictions also continue on high-performance
fiber optics, some computer software systems, thermal-imaging equipment,
advanced machine tools, advanced semiconductor-manufacturing equipment and some
super-strong carbon fibers and composites.

Allan Wendt, head of the United States delegation to the Cocom talks, said here
today that the streamlined list fulfilled the goal of "building higher fences
around fewer items."

"The new list will provide stronger controls on truly strategic items while
freeing from control those items that are needed to modernize the economies of
the proscribed countries that are no longer considered militarily critical,"
said Mr. Wendt, who is the State Department's senior representative for
strategic technology policy.

American computer and telecommunications equipment makers said that while they
were generally pleased with the liberalization, they felt the changes did not go
far enough in two areas: computers and telecommunications equipment.

"When you view it relative to the political changes in Eastern Europe, we think
we had a right to expect more," said Eric L. Hirschhorn, a former Deputy
Assistant Commerce Secretary for export control who is now a Washington lawyer
representing some American computer makers.

Ugly Relic for Soviets

Soviet officials see the controls as an ugly relic of cold war distrust, while
Cocom officials say that despite the collapse of Communism such controls are
needed because hard-line anti-Western forces could still seize power in Moscow.

Cocom, which comprises Japan, Australia and all NATO nations except Iceland,
decided to reduce the list of restricted items in response to the disintegration
of the Soviet bloc and what Mr. Wendt called "the changing strategic situation."
Cocom members also moved to streamline the list because many of the items on it,
like personal computers, are readily available worldwide, making many of the
restrictions unenforcable.

Cocom was established in 1949 to restrict exports of civilian goods with
potential military uses to the Soviet Union and other Communist nations.

Last summer, Cocom members proposed a broad liberalization of the restrictions,
but the Soviet crackdown in the Baltic republics and the Persian Gulf war caused
the United States, Britain and some other nations to take a more cautious
approach to easing restrictions. But Germany and several large European
telecommunications companies that have a strong foothold in the East argued that
the United States, which was weak in those markets, wanted to keep the controls
far too restrictive in areas like fiber optics and telephone switching
equipment.

Critical to National Security

American officials said the gulf war underlined the importance of having, for
example, a superior night-vision system. Mr. Wendt said the new list, which
takes effect on Sept. 1, was intended "to maintain the existing significant gaps
between Western and Soviet-based military systems, gaps that were demonstrated
to be critical to our national security" in the gulf war.

The streamlined list ends controls on most optical sensors used in scientific
instruments and industrial equipment. The list reduces by 45 percent the number
of electronic components covered, and cuts by 50 percent the number of engines
covered. It is expected to result in a 70 percent drop in the number of
computer-export applications submitted to the Commerce Department.

Personal computers using microprocessors up to the level of the Intel
Corporation's i486 will be free of special licensing requirements under the new
rules. But work stations that use the more powerful reduced instruction set, or
RISC, computers will remain controlled, computer makers said.

Commerce Department officials said the licensing process would be speeded up,
with most export applications cleared within two weeks.

The new rules also restrict the ability of United States telecommunications
equipment makers to sell more advanced fiber-optic telephone equipment to the
Soviets. While American corporations have argued that the Soviet telephone
system must be modernized if the Soviet Union is to become a full economic
partner, American intelligence and military agencies have resisted the export of
the equipment the nation needs.

"The U.S., United Kingdom, Australia and Canada took a more conservative stance
in the negotiations," said Chris Padilla, manager for government relations for
the American Telephone and Telegraph Company. "The source for most of these
concerns in the United States was the intelligence community, particularly the
National Security Agency."

Up to Soviet Border

The core list of restrictions permit the installation of advanced fiber-optic
links up to the Soviet border. Currently, the most advanced commercial
fiber-optic links between large United States cities are 38 times faster than
the equipment used in Soviet telephone networks.

"It strikes me as ironic that Mongolia will be able to buy a more modern
telecommunications systems than the Soviet Union," Mr. Padilla said.

American officials said they fought hard against any major liberalization in
fiber optics. Such systems are harder for American intelligence agencies to tap
than conventional telecommunicatons systems.

"No one is trying to keep the Soviet Union in the Stone Age with regard to
telecommunications," Mr. Wendt said. "What the Soviet Union needs is good
old-fashioned telephones."

At their meeting, Cocom officials vowed to strengthen export-control procedures
on the smaller number of items that will be restricted. The meeting called for
all nations to adopt common standards for export controls by Jan. 1, forcing
those nations with more lenient procedures to tighten their controls.

Despite appeals from Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary, Cocom decided not to
lift all restrictions for those countries. Cocom officials said it was not
enough for them to have rules barring the re-export of sensitive goods to
nations that fall under Cocom restrictions.

Some Old Worries Remain

American officials said the three countries must show that they have effective
procedures to control the technologies before all controls are lifted. American
officials also expressed concern that some members of the intelligence agencies
of those former Communist countries might pass restricted goods on to the Soviet
Union.

"It's still cheaper to steal stuff than sink money into development," said
William N. Rudman, the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for trade security
policy.

Nonetheless, Cocom officials say they will give Poland, Czechoslovakia and
Hungary more favorable treatment than other restricted countries, especially
regarding telecommunications equipment.

The Cocom members said streamlining the export control system should not
undercut individual nations' efforts, outside the Cocom system, to control
exports that lead to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 25, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Handicapped Critique Of a 1972 Speech

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 276 words


To the Editor:

The letter by David Halberstam pronouncing judgment on a speech I made 19 years
ago at Newport, R.I. ["An Unwelcome Critic," May 18] is a textbook example of
his journalistic method.

Mr. Halberstam indicates that he was present in the audience when I delivered
the speech in question at the Naval War College in November 1972, but he was not
present. I remember that at the time I was surprised by Mr. Halberstam's
significant absence, and my memory on this point has been confirmed by Frances
FitzGerald, who was seated on the stage and took part in the subsequent
discussion.

Mr. Halberstam's botched reporting relies on accounts of the speech supplied by
several of his friends who heard at least some of what I said. He construes the
speech as an attack on those same friends and concludes that I ridiculed them in
order to amuse the military officers in the auditorium.

His conclusion is as false as it is ignorant. A summary of the speech published
in Defense Magazine in February of 1973 shows that I directed my criticism not
at specific individuals but toward a general habit of mind characteristic of
journalists who deem themselves keepers of the nation's conscience. The summary
further shows that the speech was as critical of the military as it was of the
press.

Mr. Halberstam apparently didn't read either the speech or the summary of its
principal argument. His friends presumably told him what he wanted to hear, and
his indifference to the facts allows him to shape his judgment with the scraps
of rumor and the rags of gossip.

LEWIS H. LAPHAM
Editor, Harper's Magazine
New York, May 22, 1991

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 26, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SUNDAY VIEW;
American Nightmare in a Family Restaurant

BYLINE: By David Richards

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1461 words


Armageddon comes to a family restaurant in Sam Shepard's first drama in six
years, "States of Shock" (at the American Place Theater).

But even though there's a red vinyl booth to one side of the stage, and a
middle-aged couple waiting to be served their clam chowder at a table on the
other side of the stage, you probably won't be fooled. You won't be fooled when
the waitress calls the establishment Danny's and recalls the days it was known
for the convivial clinking of coffee cups and the pretty pictures on the menu.

The family restaurant is really post-Vietnam America -- a place of violent
moods, blood lust and lousy service. The rampant militarism that has always
fueled our manifest destiny is merely on hold, waiting out "the stupid boredom
of peacetime" for the chance to swing into action once again. Whatever was good
about the nation is going, going, gone. By the end of this 75-minute,
intermissionless drama, the customers have begun to curl up in fetal position on
the floor, while a wounded veteran, with a hole in his chest the size of a pie
plate, prepares to take his vengeance on a bully known only as the Colonel.

We are in that special province of the drama that used to be called the morality
play, until the distinctions between good and evil grew fuzzy and the very
notion that a man's soul might be something worth fighting over was deemed
theatrically archaic. Still, Mr. Shepard's play doesn't make a whole lot of
sense on any other grounds. You could call it a nightmare, I suppose, which is
one way of acknowledging, if not forgiving, its meandering, murky ways. But if
you look at it as chronicling the battle for a nation's soul, there seems to be
some vague method to the playwright's madness.

This much is certain about "States of Shock." The Colonel (John Malkovich) has
brought Stubbs, the veteran of a recent but unspecified conflict, to the family
restaurant. Stubbs (Michael Wincott) is confined to a wheelchair bedecked with
tiny American flags. Sometimes he blows a shrill blast on the police whistle
around his neck, raises his shirt and exposes his wound, which was caused by a
missile tearing through his body. Standing behind him at the time was the
Colonel's son, who was killed outright by the projectile. To mark the
anniversary of that death, the Colonel wants to treat Stubbs to a fancy dessert.
Maybe a hot fudge sundae.

Meanwhile, the middle-aged couple, dressed all in white, complains about wasting
time (45 minutes and counting, at the play's start) waiting for their clam
chowder when they could be out "buying things." The waitress, for her part, has
trouble carrying dishes on a tray and walks very slowly.

The Colonel urges Stubbs to reconstruct the moment just before his son was
killed -- using toy soldiers in his knapsack and implements on the restaurant
table. "A catastrophe has to be examined from every possible angle," he
explains. Stubbs is reluctant. The Colonel insists. An ugly showdown would
appear to be in the offing.

Beyond such apparent facts, however, anything more I could tell you would be
pure speculation. Are we witnessing an episode in the eternal rebellion of sons
against their fathers? Or is a victim calling his aggressor to account? Are
these the two faces of American manhood -- the maimed and the maniacal? And for
that matter, will someone tell me why the Colonel can balance a coffee cup on
his head and the waitress can't?

Mr. Shepard's plays have always sprung deep from the subconscious. They
chronicle raw intincts and primitive urges, a sadness for what used to be and a
rage to despoil what remains. To expect hard and fast meanings from them is to
betray their elemental force. In his most stageworthy works ("Buried Child,"
say, or "Fool for Love"), the tensions suffice, binding the characters so
dynamically to one another that the need for explanations is temporarily
defused.

It's a little like coming on a fight in the street. You do not have to know who
the combatants are or what's brought them to blows to be transfixed by the row.
Something is clearly at stake. Only when the fury abates and the tensions
slacken do you feel the need to start asking questions and bring order to the
altercation. At "States of Shock" you'll have questions from the beginning. The
director Bill Hart can't get the theatrical voltage up high enough to still the
demands of the rational mind.

Mr. Malkovich -- his head close-shaven, his face sporting a stubble of whiskers
-- gives a curiously flaccid performance as the Colonel. Few actors are better
at portraying a certain kind of blurry, thick-tongued madness. His eyes wander
the walls oddly, his voice takes on an insistent nasal whine and you can't help
wondering what asylum he's inhabiting. But there's nothing sharp or steely about
his presence. This is the madness of the slovenly or the depraved, and in this
case it's too soft to drive "States of Shock." Think, by way of contrast, how
Stephen Lang's metallic craziness galvanized "The Speed of Darkness," Steve
Tesich's recently departed play, which also dealt, albeit more directly, with
the legacy of Vietnam.

Mr. Wincott doesn't have a steady bead on Stubbs and tends to get lost in the
role's ambiguities. The middle-aged couple (they could be Mommy and Daddy from
"The American Dream" by Edward Albee) are meant to be caricatures of vacuous
Middle America, I suspect. At any rate, they're played as such by Isa Thomas and
Steve Nelson, while Erica Gimpel, as the waitress, picks her way gingerly across
the floor as if it were also a minefield, which it is.

Periodically, two offstage percussionists beat out the sounds of thunder and
bombs, and the family restaurant is illuminated by flashes of atomic lightning.
But all the explosions, you can't help noticing, are taking place in the wings.
On stage, Stubbs is claiming to be the victim of friendly fire, while the
Colonel is screaming for rivers of blood. The middle-aged woman, served her
chowder at long last, salts it endlessly, while the middle-aged man masturbates
under a napkin. The waitress is soon pining for better days -- as who wouldn't
under the circumstances. And then they're all singing "Goodnight, Irene," the
cowboy's lament for the woman he'll see in his dreams, if he doesn't throw
himself in the river and drown first.

There is, it seems to me, entirely too much of the Rorschach test in this for a
drama's good. All too easily, Mr. Shepard has settled for shapes, not states, of
shock.

'Breaking Legs'

"Breaking Legs," a featherbrained comedy by Tom Dulack (Off Broadway at the
Promenade Theater), has three things going for it -- the magnificent mugs of
Vincent Gardenia, Philip Bosco and Victor Argo.

Mr. Gardenia's face -- two pin-dots for eyes, a hooked nose and a disapproving
mouth wrapped in folds of flesh -- seems to be reacting to the omnipresent
stench of skunk. Mr. Bosco's -- with its great sloping forehead and its
deferential chin -- bears the imprint of the mole, blinking dumbly in the
sunlight after a long winter's slumber, while Mr. Argo's frozen deadpan suggests
that he has just come from the dentist and the Novocain hasn't had a chance to
wear off.

The actors have been cast as Mafia kingpins who have decided to expand
operations beyond their New England town and invest in a Broadway play. The play
is, apparently, an arty affair, written by a local university professor, who at
first welcomes the investment, then, when he realizes the company he's keeping,
starts sweating profusely. For most of the evening, the comedy has to struggle
simply to keep up with your average TV sitcom. Buffalo, Italian food and "Cats"
come in for a predictable ribbing, as do the Medicis -- Carlo and Jimmy of
Worcester, Mass. On the other hand, the first-act curtain consists of the
university professor inducing an orgasm in the daughter of one of the thugs by
massaging her feet. So all's not TV.

The best of "Breaking Legs" has to do with the Mafiosi pronouncing themselves on
Broadway. Wisely, they recognize the necessity for a great title (like "Pajama
Games" or "Gypsies") and a forceful producer (like Daniel Merrick). But they
also respect the theater for the great institution it is. Just look at the
reverential glow given off by Mr. Bosco, as he recalls the time he saw "Ettle
Merman . . . a very great actress . . . in 'The Desert Song.' " O.K., the line
isn't that funny. But the awe-struck face sure is.

Even Larry Storch, in a cameo appearance as a rat in the hot seat, contributes
some memorable features -- a nose sharp enough to serve as a letter opener, and
a pair of eyes that, when he squints, disappear completely, leaving only
wrinkles behind.

Pusses like these deserve a Mount Rushmore of their own.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Michael Wincott and John Malkovich in Sam Shepard's "States of
Shock"--Are these the two faces of American manhood, the maimed and the
maniacal? (Martha Holmes/"States of Shock") (pg. 5); Philip Bosco and Vincent
Gardenia in Tom Dulack's comedy "Breaking Legs"--godfathers who show some
respect for theater (Peter Cunningham/"Breaking Legs") (pg. 20)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 26, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Best and Brightest

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 715 words


U.S. servicemen and women who fought and died in the Persian Gulf earned back
honor for those who served and fell in Vietnam. Don't ask me exactly how. There
is no real link of honor between the two wars. Nor should there be. Yet there
is.

The feeling is somehow connected to the resurrection of professionalism. Vietnam
left military professionals with a deep inferiority complex. They had fought an
ultimately unwinnable war and conducted it in ways they themselves regret.

Vietnam was not their war. They did not ask for it. It was a political war,
ignited by the false assumption that the North Vietnamese were agents of a
Sino-Soviet monolith bent on toppling Southeast Asia as the first of a row of
worldwide dominoes. But American soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines had to
fight there, and die there. Some 57,605 were killed.

Most fought gallantly and with dedication. That is the truth. I remember a
letter in 1966 from a lieutenant colonel, a West Pointer who shared graduate
school chores with me. He was commanding an air cavalry battalion, and he wrote
with great pride about the bravery of his young men and with pessimistic awe
about the nationalism that inspired the Vietnamese enemy soldiers.

But the war -- with its unfocused political goals, the doubts back home and the
corruptions of our South Vietnamese allies -- infested the military with a
profound cynicism. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara compounded the cynicism
with his drive for numerical truth, with his demands for objective measures like
body counts. Military leaders made up the numbers and passed them along. They
rotated most commanders every six months, before jobs were learned, just to
punch career tickets. They wasted lives, American and Vietnamese.

How ironic that this cynicism flourished in the Kennedy-Johnson era of fiery
idealism. How stunning that the military restored itself in the me-first years
of the Reagan Administration.

The men who actually did the fighting in Vietnam led the way back. They were
smart, sensitive, educated, dedicated and filled with anger and shame. I knew
many of them well from my Vietnam years in the Pentagon, and later in the State
Department. And as David Halberstam and Neil Sheehan and others who chronicled
the Vietnam years recognized, many of these men-in-arms, and not their
Washington masters, were the best and the brightest.

Edward "Shy" Meyer, a brigade commander in Vietnam, became Army Chief of Staff
in 1979 and declared war on what was killing his troops -- race conflicts and
drugs. Al Gray, who led marines in Vietnam, later became Marine Commandant. He
took his charges out of running suits and sneakers, put them back in full gear
and reminded them that their business was to fight wars.

They and most of their comrades-in-arms would be the last to glorify the war
against Iraq. The chortling and chest-thumping comes mainly from fawning
politicians who decline to notice that the war pitted a first-rate military
power against a third-rate upstart who feared even to fight back.

I regret only that the military didn't have the confidence to let the press do
its job. The truly confident do not fear witnesses.

None of this, however, undermines the principal point that the U.S. military
conducted the gulf war with the highest degree of professionalism. They moved
541,425 people with arms into place within months, ready to fight, a feat that
not even the most efficient corporations could match. The equipment worked, or
they made it work. They didn't waste lives, and they made Iraq fight the war on
American terms. These are the marks of fine generalship.

It plain feels good to see such a high degree of professionalism in the service
of a just cause. The rebounding of the military is also good for the country.
For so much of our history, the military has represented the best of American
egalitarianism and meritocracy, and it has been way ahead of our society in
confronting racism and gender discrimination.

Bernard "Mick" Trainor, former Marine battalion commander in Vietnam and now a
retired general teaching at Harvard, reflected on all this and the bonds to
Vietnam as we strolled along the Charles River. "You know," he said, "I've never
gone to the Vietnam War Memorial. Now I can."

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 26, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Region;
A Lesson in Beating Gun Control to the Draw

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 900 words

DATELINE: TRENTON


QUESTION: When is an assault rifle not an assault rifle?

Answer: When the gun lobby says it is a sporting gun.

Or so it would seem from the debate in the New Jersey State House last week, as
lawmakers, wary of the gun lobby, approved and sent to an angry Gov. Jim Florio
a bill that ostensibly bans "assault firearms." The Governor is likely to veto
it, but an override is possible.

The bill, which passed Thursday 48 to 25, is a watered-down version of a much
tougher bill that passed last year at the Governor's urging. The National Rifle
Association reacted by threatening to unseat anyone who failed to back this
year's substitute.

Most Americans overwhelmingly support gun control, and more than 90 percent back
the Brady Bill, a measure mandating a seven-day waiting period for buying a
handgun that was approved in the United States House of Representatives but has
yet to be voted on in the Senate. Yet the gun lobby still makes up in fervor and
technical expertise what it lacks in numbers. Besides, how many Americans know a
Ruger Mini-14 from a .223 Daewoo?

The law passed in New Jersey last year banned the sale and possession of assault
firearms and decreed that such weapons could no longer be sold and that anyone
who owned one would have to sell it outside New Jersey, surrender it to the
police or disable it by removing the firing pin.

This year's substitute bill -- which Richard Manning, a lobbyist for the N.R.A.,
said he wasn't all that crazy about either -- bans future sales of assault
weapons barring court permission, but allows present owners to keep and register
them. The new bill also eliminates the general definition of an assault firearm,
which would have enabled the Attorney General to prohibit new guns if they fit
the description. The bill passed by the Legislature this week names specific
weapons as being illegal; critics say the sale of a weapon with the same
capabilities but a different model number would be legal.

The new bill also exempted several weapons that were prohibited in last year's
law: the M-14, the M-1 carbine type, the Colt AR-15 and the Ruger Mini-14. The
argument for excluding them was their use in organized target shooting or
hunting.

That the bill exempts these particular weapons speaks both to the power of the
gun lobby and to a kind of gun illiteracy among the public. The Ruger Mini-14
was not named in the 1990 bill because hunters used it. Yet it is a high-powered
assault weapon.

The carbine and the M-14 are not merely military-type assault weapons. They are
Army weapons. According to Jack Killorin, spokesman for the Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco and Firearms, the M-14, in its original Army-issue configuration, is
banned under virtually all circumstances since it is technically a machine gun.
Semi-automatic weapons fire each time the trigger is pulled, automatically
reloading; machine guns continue firing as long as the trigger is held back.
Both the M-14 and the M-1 carbine were removed from the list of banned weapons
in response to the argument that "civilian" semi-automatic versions are
available, and that both weapons are used, in any case, in organized shooting
competitions.

The AR-15, which the N.R.A. maintains is also a hunting rifle, is the civilian
version of the M-16, which American soldiers carried through much of Vietnam and
in the Persian Gulf. Both the M-16 and the AR-15 fire an identical,
high-velocity bullet, the major difference being that the former can fire
automatically, while the latter fires one round with each pull of the trigger,
automatically reloading and cocking. A barrage of three or four shots a second
is not out of the question.

More interesting is the straight-stock Ruger Mini-14, exempted from both the
original and the pending assault weapons list because it is also a hunting gun.

"I personally saw to it that the Ruger was taken off the list," said Mr.
Manning, who still fumes at the idea that anyone would consider the Mini-14 in
the same league as, say, the AK-47, which is the semi-automatic assault rifle
Patrick Purdy used in 1989 to spray a schoolyard in Stockton, Calif., killing
five children.

Gun dealers say the Ruger is the best-selling high-powered, semi-automatic rifle
in the country. The Mini-14 derives its name from the M-14, the assault rifle
the American military used from the Korean conflict through much of the Vietnam
war.

Is it an assault weapon?

"Absolutely," says Mr. Killorin, although he adds diplomatically, "that is not
to say that it cannot also have an identifiable sporting use."

It is the weapon Gordon Kahl, an anti-Semitic neo-Nazi, used to kill two Federal
marshals in North Dakota and a deputy sheriff in Arkansas in 1984. It is also
the weapon Mordechai Levy, the extremist leader of the Jewish Defense
Organization, used to lace the streets of lower Manhattan in 1989, wounding a
69-year-old man.

When the Bush Administration banned imported assault rifles in 1989, sales of
domestic weapons soared, and Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady told a House
subcommittee that 17 such weapons were similar to the imports. On the list was
the AR-15 and the Ruger.

Both, along with the Uzi, are also on a list of assault weapons published by the
National Coalition to Ban Handguns, which described them as "designed to kill
large numbers of human beings quickly and efficiently."

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: M-1 carbine, AR-15, Ruger Mini-14 (John Sotomayor/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 27, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

War Ends for Reservists but Their Duty Doesn't

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1259 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., May 23


For 320 members of the Marine Corps Brigade Service Support Group-2, and for
more than 100,000 other reservists and their families, the war is over but the
job is not.

In one of the paradoxes of the Persian Gulf war, most of the active duty forces
are home but a disproportionate number of reservists are still in the gulf or on
active duty in the United States. The situation is compounding the frustrations
felt by many reservists and their families.

"My feeling is that most of the troops are back; it's time to let them do the
job and let the reserves come home," said Deborah Harvin by telephone from
Charleston, S.C., where she lives with her two children while her husband, Ray,
serves as a major in the Marine Corps Reserves stationed here. "He's gung-ho,
100 percent Marine, but we're going to have to talk when he gets home. He won't
recognize the walls from the torture I've put them through."

There has been mounting pressure from Congress to hasten the deactivation of
reservists. About 100,000 of the 228,500 reservists called up for the Persian
Gulf war remain on duty, including 36,000 still stationed in the gulf. Of the
roughly 311,500 regular troops also sent to the gulf, all but 49,000 have left
the region.

Instability Delays Return

Military officials say they are trying to bring all the troops home as quickly
as possible but that because of continuing uncertainty over the situation in
Kuwait and Iraq they cannot give a date by which they will all return.

The real pressures, though, are coming at home, where families that were often
ill-prepared for an extended call-up are watching Memorial Day pass and
wondering if they will be together by July 4.

"I guess I'm upset as a mother in one aspect and a taxpayer in another, but I'm
really, really tired of it," said B. J. Van Atta of Houston, whose son, J. D.
Van Atta, is a Naval reservist still on duty in the gulf. "I'm really angry. We
have since August lived on a Ping-Pong table of not knowing what's happening
when or where. In time of war, O.K., I understand that. But it's over now."

Military officials say the number of reservists remaining on duty is so high
because reservists are in many of the support, mechanical and transport roles
still needed. Some specialities like water purification and civil affairs tasks
like repatriation are handled almost entirely by reservists, officials say.

Support Jobs Still Needed

"Most of the service-type operations, as opposed to combat, are in the
Reserves," said Maj. Doug Hart, a National Guard spokesman. "So the support
areas now needed are largely jobs that are held by reservists."

For example, BSSG-2, headquartered in Atlanta, specializes in shipping,
transport and supply operations, moving "beans, Band-Aids and bullets."

The unit, which has deactivated about half its members, has been able to send
home the reservists with the most pressing personal or financial needs. The unit
expects to be deactivated on June 15.

Major Harvin, port commander for loading at Camp Lejeune, understands his wife's
frustrations but is comfortable with the role his unit continues to play. His
biggest disappointment was that the unit was not sent to the gulf.

Welcomes the Testing

"It's been tough emotionally, particularly on my wife," he said. "But I've been
a Marine since 1975, and one of the things you grow up thinking about is having
an opportunity to test your skills."

For many younger reservists without family obligations, like 23-year-old
Corporal John Davenport of San Diego or 22-year-old Lee Wethersby of Millen,
Ga., the continued duty poses no major hardship. And some reservists say it is
just part of the job.

"The Marine Corps Reserves never told anyone this was just going to be for
weekends," said Master Gunnery Sgt. W. C. Reynolds, of Morrow, Ga., who retires
after 30 years in the military in November. "I think for anyone who joins the
Reserves, it ought to be clear that as long as there's no draft, you have to be
prepared to be called up."

But around the country thousands of reservists' families are facing continuing
financial and personal hardships.

For Mrs. Harvin it is the emotional burden of keeping her job and playing mother
and father to a 7-year-old son and a 4-year-old daughter. "My son wants to play
baseball, but Mom's not a pitcher and she's not a batter," she said. "There are
just a lot of things you expect your husband to do, and he's not there."

Short of Money and Morale

Many spouses of reservists say they are stretched financially and emotionally as
far as they can stretch. Jo Beadling of Carver, Mass., said her truck is
breaking down, the toaster went out after her three children's Pop-Tarts caught
fire and the family is being slowly bankrupted by telephone calls with her
husband in Saudi Arabia.

"I don't buy anything we don't have to have," she said. "I go to the local
consignment shop for my clothes when I have to have something, and we eat out
maybe twice a month to Burger King or for a pizza. I need a vacation
desperately."

Mrs. Beadling, at least, has been told her husband is expected back next week.
Many other families still have no idea when they will be reunited. Many say
their spouses in the Persian Gulf are bored and frustrated and increasingly
unhappy as the 110 degree summer heat takes hold.

Deborah Yoho, a high school principal in Columbia, S.C., whose husband Master
Sgt. Ralph Yoho was activated Dec. 6 with the Air National Guard, says she fears
the reservists have been forgotten.

"The most maddening thing of all is that nobody seems to care except spouses,
our families and our friends," she wrote in a letter to The State, the Columbia
newspaper.

In a telephone interview she added: "Ralph is there and the temperature is 120
degrees, with no particular end in sight, and his morale concerns me
tremendously. My husband is 45, and he's a Vietnam vet, and he's been through
this before. Every time I read about how this experience is healing our Vietnam
wounds I turn purple because for us it's bringing it all up again."

Jo Ann Calcaterra of Howell, Mich., has similar frustrations about her son
Michael, an Army Reserve communications specialist. She said she got upset when
a local store owner, saying the war was over, objected to her putting "welcome
home" signs in local store windows.

'It's Not Over'

"I just looked at him; I was speechless," she said. "I was hurt, then I was
angry. I told him, 'I have a son over there, and it's not over until they're all
home.' But this is everybody's attitude. People act like our children are not
over there, that everybody's home."

Still, for many the end is finally in sight.

Last week, Frances Calvani of Norwell, Mass., whose husband Jim is a Sgt. First
Class in the Massachusetts National Guard, sounded on the verge of tears.

"Not knowing when he is coming home is devastating," she said. "This is worse
for me than when he was in Vietnam. The financial part is awful. With two in
college, I don't know how we will afford to send them back in the fall. I'm
going from day to day. I feel like I might be on the street one of these days."

She just got word he will be home next week, and she is planning both a joyous
celebration and a long talk about her husband's desire to finish out 30 years of
military duty and reach retirement.

"He's got another two years left for 30, and he said he really want to go for
it," she said. "I told him, 'We'll talk about that when you come home.' "

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Pressure is mounting in Congress to hasten the deactivation of
reservists. Because of his unit's mission, Maj. Ray Harvin remains on active
duty in Marine Corps Reserve in North Carolina. (Jamie Moncrief/The New York
Times Regional Newspaper Group); Describing the problems of being both a mother
and father to her children while her husband is on active duty, Deborah Harvin
said, "My son wants to play baseball, but Mom's not a pitcher and she's not a
batter." (Wade Spees for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 27, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Largest Airline Disasters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 417 words



March 27, 1977 -- 582 killed in the ground collision of two Boeing 747's
operated by Pan American and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines at the airport in Tenerife
in the Canary Islands.

Aug. 12, 1985 -- 520 killed when a Japan Air Lines Boeing 747 crashed into a
mountain on a domestic flight.

March 3, 1974 -- 346 killed when a Turkish Airlines DC-10 crashed 26 miles
northeast of Paris.

June 23, 1985 -- 329 killed when an Air India Boeing 747 crashed off the coast
of Ireland.

Aug. 19, 1980 -- 301 killed in a fiery emergency landing of a Saudi Arabian
L-1011 jet at the airport in Riyadh.

July 3, 1988 -- 290 killed when an Iran Air A300 Airbus is shot down over the
Persian Gulf by the American warship Vincennes after being mistaken for an
attacking plane.

May 25, 1979 -- 275 killed when an American Airlines DC-10 crashed on takeoff in
Chicago.

Sept. 1, 1983 -- 269 killed when a Korean Air Lines 747 was shot down by a
Soviet fighter after flying through Soviet airspace near Sakhalin Island.

Nov. 28, 1979 -- 257 killed when an Air New Zealand DC-10 taking tourists to the
South Pole struck a mountain in Antarctica.

Dec. 12, 1985 -- 256 killed when a chartered Arrow Air DC-8 carrying members of
the 101st Airborne Division crashed on takeoff at Gander, Newfoundland.

Jan. 1, 1978 -- 213 killed when an Air India 747 en route to Dubai crashed less
than two minutes after taking off from Bombay.

Dec. 4, 1974 -- 191 killed when a chartered Dutch DC-8 returning Indonesian
Muslims from Saudi Arabia went down in Sri Lanka.

Aug. 3, 1975 -- 188 killed when a chartered Moroccan Boeing 707 crashed near
Agadir, Morocco.

May 9, 1987 -- 183 killed when a Polish LOT airliner crashed near Warsaw.

Nov. 15, 1978 -- 183 killed when a chartered Icelandic Airlines DC-8 crashed
short of an airport in Colombo, Sri Lanka.

Nov. 27, 1983 -- 183 killed when an Avianca Boeing 747 crashed near Barajas
Airport in Madrid.

Dec. 1, 1981 -- 174 killed when a Yugoslav DC-9 crashed into a mountain in
Corsica.

Aug. 17, 1979 -- 173 killed when two Soviet Aeroflot jetliners collided over the
Ukraine.

April 4, 1975 -- 172 killed when a United States Air Force Galaxy C-58 crashed
near Saigon after takeoff with a load of Vietnamese orphans.

Sept. 19, 1989 -- 171 killed when a bomb explodes aboard a French Union des
Transport Aeriens DC-10 over the Sahara on a flight from Chad to France.

June 7, 1989 -- 168 killed when a Suriname Airways DC-8 crashed in the jungle
near Paramaribo.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 27, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Reconciliation Day

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 284 words


On an April day in 1866, four young Mississippi women went to a local cemetery
to lay flowers on the graves of those lost in the War Between the States. First
they decorated the graves of the Confederate soldiers who had been their friends
and relatives. Next they walked over to the small plot in which were buried men
who had been not only strangers but enemies. They decorated the graves of those
40 Union soldiers, too.

From the beginning, then, Memorial Day has been as much about reconciliation as
commemoration. But it has been many years since old men in threadbare gray and
blue uniforms paraded down the nation's main streets, and most Americans may
have forgotten that this day honors, above all, healing.

If the United States has never known another Civil War, it has experienced
countless skirmishes -- inevitable, perhaps, in a vast land that is home to so
various a multitude. This country's people may come from anywhere, many of them
with little more than a change of clothes, and all of them with a lot of
baggage. Ethnic histories. Religious histories. And very often, bad memories.

As a result Americans do not speak with one voice. But there is one great habit
all Americans could hold in common: listening. Never have we had a better time
to learn how. We are not now bitterly divided by a war in Vietnam; and if we do
not all agree about every facet of the Persian Gulf crisis, we do about
supporting the troops we sent there.

It is an era, in short, of rare calm creating a rare opportunity to mobilize the
center against social wrongs and domestic ills. Memorial Day is a time to honor
those who fought; Reconciliation Day is a time to honor what they fought for.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 28, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

On Memorial Day, a Pause to Remember the Fallen

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, at
a wreath-laying ceremony at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington. In the
New York area, a host of parades and festivals were held. Page B1. (Associated
Press)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 28, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Find No Home Here in Their Fathers' Land

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1409 words

DATELINE: WESTMINSTER, Calif., May 26


After two years of heavy migration to the United States, more and more abandoned
Vietnamese children of American servicemen have retreated here to the refugee
community called Little Saigon, the final stop in a sad journey in which they
have discovered that they are neither truly Vietnamese nor truly American.

With the blue eyes or the black skin of their fathers but with the language and
upbringing of the land of their mothers, many of these new immigrants, who are
now young adults, have been unable to find a niche in the cities and towns of
America. Now, some are finding from the Vietnamese in this city, about 40 miles
southwest of downtown Los Angeles, the same rejection that first drove them from
Vietnam.

"This is their last hope, and nobody has welcomed them here, either," said Dr.
Jean Carlin, a psychiatrist who has found a high level of depression among these
Amerasian offspring of servicemen. "In the end it seems they really don't belong
anywhere."

Officials involved in the resettlement process point out that there are many
success stories among the Amerasians. But their larger story is one of rejection
and disillusionment. Though many of them guardedly deny it, Dr. Carlin said,
almost all the Amerasians have come to the United States not only in search of a
fatherland but also of their fathers.

Some bring with them only a first name or a photograph, others an address and a
history of unanswered letters. But resettlement workers say almost none now
succeed in their search.

It was not until most of the Amerasians were already young adults that the
United States set up a mechanism to welcome its Vietnamese children. Since the
Amerasian Homecoming Act took effect in March 1989, more than 12,000 Amerasians
have entered the country, three times as many as had arrived over the previous
14 years since the fall of Saigon in 1975.

Pam Lewis, a spokeswoman for the Bureau of Refugee Programs in the State
Department, said about 10,000 Amerasians and their Vietnamese relatives were
being interviewed each month in Vietnam under the program.

Ms. Lewis said that the interviews might be completed by next summer and that as
many as 60,000 to 80,000 people could enter the United States under the
Homecoming Act by the end of next year. Of these, she said, about one in four
would be Amerasian and the others would be relatives accompanying them.

As the years have passed, the average age of the Amerasians has risen to 20,
about the age of many of their fathers at the time of their birth. Some now have
their own children, and under immigration rules that until recently forced them
to choose between bringing a mother or a spouse, some also left behind their own
Amerasian offspring, the grandchildren of Americans who served in Vietnam.

"These children are doubly orphaned," said Dr. Mark C. Johnson, a psychologist
at Dartmouth who participated in the most complete study of the Amerasians. "Not
only did their fathers not want them, but until now the country of their fathers
didn't either."

Mary Payne Nguyen, who directs a Government-financed social services center here
for Amerasians, said: "They grew up in Vietnam thinking that they were Americans
and that all their problems were because of that. They get here believing that
they are Americans and everything is going to be O.K. and then -- surprise --
they don't even speak the language."

One recent arrival at the center, Nguyen The My, 19 years old, said that he had
always been confused about his identity but that now he was more uncertain than
ever.

"In Vietnam, when they shouted behind my back or when they taunted me --
half-breed, half-breed -- I began to think that maybe I am not really
Vietnamese. Maybe I am more American," he said. "I thought that some parts of me
must be American, though I don't know what that means."

He said he felt more comfortable in the United States, where he could lose
himself in the racial mix, but he said, "I'm not sure whether I am becoming more
American or more Vietnamese."

Amerasians who arrive under the Homecoming Act are sent to scores of sites,
selected cities and towns around the country. Although no count has been made,
officials in the program say a growing number have begun to migrate to the
Vietnamese community here.

Mrs. Nguyen said about 600 Amerasians had registered for programs at her center.
About 40 percent of them had recently arrived from other parts of the country,
she said.

Again, Ostracism

Le Kim Dinh, a writer who lives here, said Vietnamese residents in this country
often ostracized the Amerasian arrivals just as they did in Vietnam.

"The other day in a Vietnamese supermarket I saw a Vietnamese woman who looked
like a peasant with an Amerasian daughter who looked strikingly Caucasian," he
said. "Everyone in the supermarket, the customers, the manager, the cashiers,
all stopped and stared at her. They were staring -- it was horrible -- at the
poor girl. And she kept looking at the ground, like looking for a place to hide,
but there was no place to hide."

Lam Minh Hung, an unemployed 23-year-old Amerasian who has been here for two
years, said: "We have experienced the same isolation here that we experienced in
Vietnam. Among Vietnamese-Americans, if the discrimination in Vietnam was 100,
the discrimination here is about 50."

Resettlement workers say that here, as in Vietnam, it is the children of black
servicemen who suffer the worst discrimination.

Nguyen Thi Phuong and Ton Nu Minh Phung, both 19, whose fathers were black men,
were given up by their families when they were small girls to be cared for by a
Buddhist nun.

They were raised with the knowledge that there was no place for them in
Vietnamese society. And with litle schooling, few skills and almost no
understanding of English, they have found themselves bewildered by an even more
alien culture in America.

Selling a Living Passport

In a very direct brand of rejection, some Amerasian children were sold in
Vietnam to other families as a form of living passport to the United States.
Once here, the counterfeit family, having obtained entry to the country,
sometimes compounded the rejection by abandoning its Amerasian child.

One of these is Nguyen Dinh Dai, 19, who now lives with the faint hope that his
true mother might join him from Vietnam, or that he might find his American
father, whose name he thinks is Bill.

Like others who have dealt with Amerasians, Mrs. Nguyen said that while some
were energetic and creative, their hardships had often resulted in troubled
behavior that contributes to their rejection.

"I have to say that Amerasians in general are a difficult bunch," said Mrs.
Nguyen, who has adopted 12 Amerasian children herself. "They're impolite.
They're impatient. They're impetuous. They're demanding. They're pushy. They're
easily angered. They're defensive. They get into fights easily. They haven't
really had any good sense of moral values taught to them."

Telling a similar story in more academic language, a 1989 study by Dr. Johnson
and Dr. J. Kirk Felsman of the psychiatry department at Dartmouth Medical School
found Amerasians to be "at high risk for serious problems in long-term
adaptation," given backgrounds that commonly included the loss of one or both
parents, poverty, discrimination and little education.

Problems of New Arrivals

"The majority are virtually illiterate in Vietnamese and arrive with no
transferable job skills," the study found. Among its sample of 259 Amerasians,
13 percent had no formal education, as against 2 percent of full-blooded
Vietnamese refugees. Eighty-five percent had less than nine years of schooling.

One of these is Bang Truc Giang, 23, who until her arrival here two years ago
was one of the toughened Amerasians who gathered on the former Tu Do Street in
Saigon, now Ho Chi Minh City, selling peanuts and besieging foreign visitors
with pleas for visas to the United States.

Now living with relatives in the Los Angeles suburb of El Monte, she works at a
garment factory while she studies to be a beautician. But she still speaks
almost no English, and her life remains focused within a Vietnamese community.

Miss Giang said she did not know who her American father was, and she seemed to
have limited knowledge about the country that is her new home. Still she said
firmly, "This is the land of my father, so it is my land."

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Many abandoned Vietnamese children of American servicemen are
entering the United States under the Amerasian Homecoming Act. By the end of
next year, as many as 80,000 people may enter. One such immigrant is Bang Truc
Giang, who is studying to be a beautician.; "In Vietnam, when they shouted
behind my back or when they taunted me -- half-breed, half- breed -- I began to
think that maybe I am not really Vietnamese" said Nguyen The My. (Photographs by
Seth Mydans/The New York Times) (pg. A16)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 28, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

A Day Glowing With Warmth and Pride

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1169 words


Ebullient with victory in the Persian Gulf and the end of a half-century of cold
war, people across the New York metropolitan area paused on a sumptuous Memorial
Day yesterday to remember the nation's fallen warriors and to reflect again on
the lessons of Gettysburg, the Argonne, Tarawa and Khe Sanh.

Across the region, people marked the long holiday weekend with an American
medley of parades, music festivals, barrages of fireworks, battle re-enactments
and air shows featuring wasplike jet fighters and gracefully lumbering B-17's
out of the 1940's.

But the traditional start of summer was also a time for solemnity, and thousands
observed it with wreath-laying ceremonies in cemetery greenswards where flags
caught the breeze and the silence was broken only by mournful strains of "Taps"
from solitary bugles, by the crack of rifle salutes and the buzzing of insects
on a hot, slow afternoon.

"People paid a high price for what we have today," Navy Lieut. Robert Wetzel, a
prisoner of war in Iraq for 40 days, told a crowd in Metuchen, N.J., where he
was grand marshal of a flag-waving hometown parade. "We need to remember those
missing in action and those who died and those who carry on the fight for
freedom."

Nearby, Cheryl Santana, 32 years old, surveyed a scene out of Norman Rockwell:
the passing troops, children with balloons and melting ice cream cones, men and
women beaming proudly. "This is a little piece of America today," she said. "Our
hearts go out to each and every person from the past, the present and those who
may have to serve in the future."

There was an old-fashioned quality to what used to be called Decoration Day in
1991. Coney Island drew enormous crowds to its roller-coaster rides and carnival
sideshows, and there were hot dogs, pizzas, fried clams and coolers filled with
beer and soda everywhere on the beach and boardwalk.

It was warm and hazy across much of the region and the rest of the country, one
of those gentle days of late spring when the long summer lay ahead, shimmering
like a cool green mirage.

For many, the Memorial Day weekend was a time to relax. Millions flocked to
thundering ocean beaches, to lakes and other cool retreats. But others found
refuge in city parks, backyard hammocks or picnics in leafy glades far from the
crowded ballparks and the maddening expressways.

In many communities, there were special salutes to the veterans of the Persian
Gulf, readings of Lincoln's Get tysburg Address and speeches about freedom and
America.

The day was marked in countless ways, but it all seemed to come down to a few
central ideas: that people sometimes had to die for liberty, that a country was
only as good as the ideas it espoused, that heroes were sometimes quite ordinary
people who did what they had to do.

"I won't exaggerate, I won't brag," Joseph Vogel, a 79-year-old veteran of World
War II, said as he watched New York City's Memorial Day parade on Manhattan's
Upper West Side. "I entered as a private and I left very private. I entered with
no medals and I left with no medals. But nevertheless, I did my duty."

The parade, which moved up Broadway and Riverside Drive to the Soldiers' and
Sailors' Monument at 89th Street, was cheered by thin but enthusiastic crowds.
George Bajenica, 91, who fought in the Russian Army in World War I and the
United States Army in World War II, leaned on his cane and scowled his
disappointment at the turnout.

'To Meet Your Combat Buddies'

"There are too few people, not enough music," he said. "When they need you, it's
'Come on!' And then they turn their backs. It's dangerous. If your brother
sacrifices his life for your country, then show up!"

Earl Struthers, a 60-year-old Korean War veteran, said he marched every year "to
honor my dead soldiers, my dead colleagues."

So did Larry Lawrence, who is a Vietnam veteran. "You see the tears in my eyes,
don't you?" he said. "Once a year you get the chance to meet your combat
buddies. Once a year we come together."

In Prospect Park in Brooklyn, some 300 black veterans from various wars gathered
for the third straight year for a barbecue sponsored by Black Veterans for
Social Justice, a social service agency financed by the state to help veterans
with housing and jobs.

The idea, said Philip Jones, a 36-year-old Vietnam veteran who is the group's
chairman, is "to get the veterans together, to mourn those who didn't come back
and to embrace ourselves, the ones who did come back."

Elsewhere in the park, people played volleyball, little girls jumped rope,
families were spread out on blankets on the grass near the lake and Robert
Nelson, 25, of East New York, had brought his 1-year-old son, Robert Jr., on his
first picnic.

For almost 20 years, Mr. Nelson explained, his family had come to the park for a
Memorial Day picnic under the same large oak tree north of the lake. This year's
outing was special because his brother Herbert, who is in the Air Force, had
come safely through the gulf war and was stationed in England. "We're going to
take a lot of pictures and send them to him," he said.

At Coney Island, the beach and amusement areas were packed, despite a misty haze
that touched the top of the parachute jump and the Ferris wheel. The cacophony
was a kind of New York music: blaring radios, banging bullets in a shooting
gallery, the screams of riders on the Cyclone and barkers summoning the
credulous to see the illustrated man and someone who hammered nails into his
head.

"I was scared," said 5-year-old Laura Ball as she wobbled out of a haunted house
called Dante's Inferno. "I don't like going in dark places."

And under the boardwalk, David Rapaport, a 56-year-old biology teacher, was out
with his metal detector, searching for jewelry, coins and subway tokens. "There
are so many people out here," he said, looking out at the vast throngs on the
beach. "I figure somebody's got to drop something."

On Sunday, nearly a half-million people turned out at McGuire Air Force Base in
southern New Jersey for the base's 44th annual air show, a breathtaking display
of loops, rolls, sunbursts, formation flying and other maneuvers by scores of
modern and antique aircraft. Other air shows were held around the country
yesterday.

Amid all the hoopla, however, there were quieter moments that brought people
together in the bittersweet spirit of a day of remembrance. At the Church of the
Holy Child Jesus in Richmond Hill, Queens, families greeted each other with
smiles and tears.

Among them, Hilda Ortiz, of Richmond Hill, and Teresa Rivera of the South Bronx,
locked arms like sisters as they emerged from a service on Sunday. They were the
mothers of Army Sgt. Pat Bouvier Ortiz and Marine Capt. Manuel Rivera, who were
killed in the Persian Gulf war.

"It's kind of sad to meet people this way, but it also gives us our strength,"
said Mrs. Ortiz.

"It's very sad, but beautiful," said Mrs. Rivera. "But it isn't over yet --
until every one of our servicemen is home."

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: At Cypress Hills National Cemetery in Brooklyn, Wilbur Dugal
visited the grave of his grandfather, Sgt. James Dugal, a bugler in the Civil
War. Sergeant Dugal sounded recall at Appomattox Court House when Lee
surrendered to Grant. (Vic DeLucia/The New York Times); At Coney Island, the
tail of a mounted police officer's horse proved an irresistible target for a
diminutive dog. (Dith Pran/The New York Times) (pg. B1); The Memorial Day parade
in Manhattan yesterday ended with a ceremony at the Soldiers' and Sailors'
Monument in Riverside Park.; Joseph Vogel, a 79-year-old World War II veteran,
taking part in the ceremony at the Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument. (Photographs
by Jack Manning/The New York Times) (pg. B8)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 28, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Jack Weinstein: Creative U.S. Judge Who Disdains Robe and High Bench

BYLINE: By ARNOLD H. LUBASCH

SECTION: Section B; Page 5; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1270 words


When Judge Jack B. Weinstein holds hearings in his Federal courtroom in
Brooklyn, he does not sit at the judge's bench wearing the traditional black
robe. Instead he wears a business suit and sits with the parties around a
conference table.

"I think people ought to feel this is their courthouse," the 69-year-old judge
said in a recent interview in his chambers in Federal District Court. "This is
their courthouse, their justice, their system."

The high bench, the robes, they are an impediment to that sense," he said, then
added with a hearty laugh, "But most people don't agree with me."

Bucking courtroom custom is just the most visible way in which Judge Weinstein
has established a reputation as one of the most independent and innovative
Federal judges in the country.

2 Measures of Performance

Lawyers variously say that he is brilliant and creative, energetic and
compassionate, that his rulings blend scholarship with pragmatism and that as an
activist judge, he uses the law to resolve problems.

But some also say that he can be too tough, that he can be impatient and that he
sometimes pressures lawyers to settle complex litigation.

The chief Federal prosecutor in Brooklyn, United States Attorney Andrew J.
Maloney, called Judge Weinstein "one of the brightest, most innovative jurists
in the country." But Mr. Maloney added, "He marches to his own drummer, and
because of that, he can sometimes give you conniptions."

Handling difficult cases has become Judge Weinstein's hallmark. He issued a
decision last Thursday approving the revision of a trust fund to compensate
thousands of people with claims of injuries from asbestos made by the Manville
Corporation.

Progress Amid Complexity

Last month he completed a trial in another asbestos case that awarded $7.6
million to 11 plaintiffs in long, complex litigation about workers who became
sick after being exposed to asbestos dust in the Brooklyn Navy Yard. The judge
consolidated hundreds of complaints in the case, prodded most of the litigants
to settle and took the rest of the cases to trial.

Several years ago Judge Weinstein forged a huge settlement in which chemical
companies put $180 million into a fund to compensate Vietnam veterans with
claims of injuries from exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange. Payments and
appeals under the plan are continuing.

Judge Weinstein also produced another settlement in a major case, calling on the
Long Island Lighting Company to reduce future rate increases by $390 million and
paving the way to close the Shoreham nuclear plant.

The judge appointed a Washington lawyer, Kenneth R. Feinberg, to help mediate
settlements in the Shoreham, Agent Orange and asbestos cases. The lawyer regards
Judge Weinstein as "the best trial judge in America."

"He does not have the lowest reversal rate, because he is very creative and
takes chances," Mr. Feinberg observed, alluding to the fact that higher courts
have reversed him more often than one might expect for a judge of his stature.

Protective of the Underdog

Asked about his judicial philosophy, Judge Weinstein said:

"To the extent that I have an influence on the course of the law, I prefer that
the law be protective of those who otherwise would be without the power to
protect themselves. That sounds very preachy, doesn't it?"

A Baltimore lawyer for thousands of asbestos plaintiffs, Peter G. Angelos, said
he recently disagreed with the judge about a proposed settlement. But he added
that the judge was brilliant, courteous and "impatient with the ways of the
judicial system" in his desire to cut through the thickets of legal
technicalities.

"He probably would have been a more interesting and effective United States
Senator from New York," the lawyer said.

Judge Weinstein, an imposing figure at 6 feet 2 inches tall and 190 pounds,
presides over jury trials from the bench, but even then he prefers to wear just
a suit, leaving his judicial robe for ceremonial occasions. He sits at the
conference table with defendants when he sentences them. In an interview he
said, "I find it very difficult to incarcerate people, even though I know it's
necessary."

A Love of the Job

Sitting in his comfortable sixth-floor chambers overlooking a small park toward
the Brooklyn Bridge, Judge Weinstein expressed love for his work, saying he
could hardly wait to get up each morning to go to the courthouse, where he
usually arrives shortly after 7 A.M.

He also teaches at the Columbia and Brooklyn Law Schools, often inviting
students to visit his courtroom for a firsthand view of the law in action. He
has written multi-volume books on the rules of evidence in the Federal courts
and civil practice in New York State.

"One of the great things that this country has given to the world is our legal
system, a unique attempt to bring everybody equally before the law," he said.

Judge Weinstein was among a group of American judges who left Friday for the
Soviet Union to provide advice on improving the Soviet legal system.

Educated During Depression

He was born in Wichita, Kans., on Aug. 10, 1921, but his family soon moved to
Brooklyn, where he grew up. He attended Brooklyn College during the Depression,
going to classes at night and working on the docks for a truck company during
the day.

In World War II he joined the Navy and attended his college graduation in
uniform. He was a lieutenant on a submarine in the Pacific, taking part in naval
battles and the sinking of a Japanese cruiser.

While at sea, he read "The Common Law" by Oliver Wendell Holmes, a book that
pointed him to a law career. He graduated from Columbia Law School in 1948 and
served as a clerk to Judge Stanley H. Fuld of the New York State Court of
Appeals.

Judge Weinstein worked for private law firms for two years, then eagerly
accepted an invitation to teach at Columbia Law School in 1952 and became a full
professor in 1956.

"The opportunity to be with brilliant legal minds and learn more about the law
was something I just couldn't forgo," he recalled. "For a young kid brought up
in relative poverty, it was like dropping into heaven."

Service in Government

In 1963 a former classmate recommended him for an opening as the County Attorney
for Nassau County. He held the post until 1965 under County Executive Eugene H.
Nickerson, who is now a fellow judge with next-door chambers. They often
exchange views about cases.

On April 15, 1967, acting on Senator Robert F. Kennedy's recommendation,
President Lyndon B. Johnson appointed Judge Weinstein to the Federal Court for
the Eastern District of New York. The judge began his duties on May 1. He served
as the district's chief judge from 1980 to 1988, when he stepped down to allow
Judge Thomas C. Platt to take the post because, he said, Judge Platt "deserved
it."

Speaking of Judge Weinstein, Chief Judge Platt described him as one of the most
"active and energetic district judges in the circuit all the years that I've
been here, right down to today."

Judge Weinstein and his wife, the former Evelyn Horowitz, who is a psychiatric
social worker, live in Great Neck, L.I. They have three grown sons.  Although
widely regarded as a liberal, he said, "I'm very conservative with respect to
family values and people accepting responsibility for their acts."

As he entered his 25th year as a Federal judge this month, he made it clear that
he had no intention of retiring. "My children want me to retire," he said, "but
they don't realize how much fun I'm having."

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Judge Jack B. Weinstein, who has established a reputation as one
of the most independent and innovative Federal judges in the country, in his
chambers at Federal District Court in Brooklyn. (John Sotomayor/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

War's Memories Eased At Military Graduation

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 672 words

DATELINE: COLORADO SPRINGS, May 29


In the final days of the Vietnam War, a South Vietnamese military commander,
Quyen Bui, embraced his wife and two sons, ages 3 and 4, and hustled them onto a
plane bound for safety in the United States.

Not long afterward, Mr. Bui was captured and imprisoned. He spent the next 16
years enduring torture and "re-education" in a Communist Government camp, where
he could only anguish and dream about his family.

Last week, the Vietnamese Government finally allowed Mr. Bui to leave for the
United States. And today, he watched proudly as his eldest son, Quang, now 21,
graduated with honors from the Air Force Academy here.

"All my time in the camps," Mr. Bui, slender and white-haired, told reporters on
Saturday, "I think of my sons and my wife."

Father and Sons Reunited

In a room at a Colorado Springs motel on Friday, the father and sons were
reunited. The younger son, Tuong, is a sophomore at the academy.

The first moments together were a bit tense and formal, said the eldest son.
"Then the emotions from the years welled up," he said. "I lost it."

President Bush, who delivered the commencement address to the new Air Force
officers today, met with Mr. Bui, a highly decorated commander, and offered the
gratitude of the United States. "Congratulations and welcome to the United
States at long last," the President said. "We just hope you are very happy
here."

For Americans, the traumas and tragedies of the Vietnam War will never be
erased. But for the Vietnamese troops who fought alongside the Americans, the
loss of the war meant the loss of a nation. And for Mr. Bui, the loss was even
more grave.

He lost the treasured years of watching his little boys grow into young men. And
he lost his wife.

Mai Que Tran Bui had no reason to hope her husband would ever escape. In Saigon,
she had lived in luxury with servants. In the Bronx, and later in San Jose,
Calif., she supported her sons by working behind a counter at McDonald's. Eleven
years after the separation from her husband, she remarried.

"It bothered him deeply of course, it would any man," said Noboru Masouka, a
retired Air Force colonel who traveled to Vietnam in efforts to gain Mr. Bui's
release.

Mr. Bui, 54 years old, talked of the pride that his sons would "choose the same
career that I did." Both of the boys were valedictorians at a high school in San
Jose.

"Their mother did very, very good," he said.

Sunrise Ceremony

Quang Bui formally became an officer in a ceremony just after sunrise today,
with his mother and father standing at his side.

He finished 32d in a class of 969, and was awarded the Guggenheim Fellowship at
Columbia University. He said he would study structural dynamics and hoped
someday to work on the design of spacecraft.

Mr. Bui, who is a cousin to Bui Diem, a former South Vietnam ambassador to the
United States, will be living for a time with a relative in Irvine, Calif. He
has not decided what kind of work to pursue in the United States. He speaks five
languages.

Mr. Masouka, who worked as a liaison officer for the Air Force Academy in San
Jose, met the boys while they were in high school and helped them gain admission
to the academy.

'Truly Oustanding Boys,

"These are truly outstanding boys," said Mr. Masouka, the son of Japanese
immigrants.

Determined to help, Mr. Masouka went to Vietnam last year and won permission to
meet with Mr. Bui. "I didn't tell them I was a military man," he said. "I just
acted like I was a tourist."

He took along a video camera, and filmed Mr. Bui, so the boys could see their
father.

Mr. Masouka said the release of Mr. Bui was aided by Representative Norman Y.
Mineta of California, Representative Stephen Solarz of New York, and President
Bush. Details of the discussions that led to Mr. Bui's release have not been
disclosed.

Mr. Masouka met Mr. Bui at the airport in San Francisco last Thursday. Mr. Bui
left Vietnam with $10 in his pocket, and a diagram of the family tree, going
back 10 generations.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Quyen Bui, center, after being reunited with his sons, Tuong
Bui, left, and Quang Bui, and his former wife, Mai Que Tran Bui. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1127 words



INTERNATIONAL A3-19

A plan to ban nuclear weapons in the Middle East was unveiled by President Bush.
The plan is a compromise measure between his pledge to curb the region's arms
race and the political pressures frustrating American diplomacy in the area.
Page A1

Argentina, acceding to U.S., ends missile program A9

Saddam Hussein again is in control of much of southern Iraq, but the uprising of
the Shiite Muslim majority and his brief moment of vulnerability have not been
forgotten by him or them. A1

Teheran says hostages' ordeal might end soon A7

Allies to close last Kurdish camp in Turkey A6

Thousands protested in Ethiopia against the United States role in negotiations
that they say are leading to the partition of the country among rival guerrilla
groups. A10

Ethiopian rebel faction is to govern separately A10

Man in the News: Meles Zenawi A10

Ethiopian officials flown into Israel A11

The Congress Party's new leader, succeeding the assassinated Rajiv Gandhi, was
chosen. He is P. V. Narasimha Rao, a self-effacing party loyalist. A3

New doubts on uniting two Koreas D1

Students commemorate those killed at Tiananmen Square A8

Kunming Journal: China's disabled get helping hand A4

Soviet plans for political reform and economic change were presented to the
Administration, but the White House said that Moscow would have to make concrete
steps before American aid would be considered. A12

Soviets propose foreign-owned businesses A13

News analysis: NATO's plan for radical military changes in response to a sharply
reduced Soviet threat also forestalls moves by the European Community to develop
an independent defense potential. A3

Pope names 22 Cardinals A18

Policy on women hits Vatican snag A18

NATIONAL A20-23, B9-12

A gene affecting mental retardation was discovered, a significant advance in
understanding not only a mental defect but also the genes that help fashion
human intelligence. A1

A survey of Venus was completed by the Magellan space probe, producing detailed
images of a surface composed of gigantic lava flows and thousands of cracks and
craters, scientists said. B11

Rare fish called evolutionary link to human race B11

Secondhand smoke assailed in report A22

Air frequencies would be auctioned by the Government under an Administration
plan to profit from the extremely valuable licenses. Most Government licenses
are, at present, given away free. A1

Corporate profits in the first quarter of 1991 fell markedly less than in the
two preceding quarters, the Commerce Department disclosed, in another sign that
the recession may be ending. D1

Iran-contra prosecutors now face what some legal experts say is an impossible
task, following the Supreme Court's refusal to consider whether to reinstate the
criminal convictions against Oliver North. B9

House Democrats hone rights bill to gain some more votes B12

Beaten motorist is arrested again B12

A second police trial watched in Los Angeles B12

Barring of AIDS victims to continue for now A23

The black political base in Chicago is still struggling to recover from the loss
of power and unity that followed the death of Mayor Harold Washington four years
ago. Presently, none of Chicago's three citywide elective offices are held by
blacks. A20

Even winners worry at Kentucky's weak vote A20

After three terms in Senate, Garn of Utah is leaving B10

Vietnam's memories eased at military graduation A20

REGIONAL B1-8

City Councilman Robert Dryfoos stepped aside under pressure as chairman of two
committees. At the same time, the Council's ethics panel referred an
investigation of his finances to the city's Conflicts of Interest Board. A1

Orthodox Jews upset over districting plan B4

News analysis: The budget plan worked out by the Legislature has major
differences from Governor Cuomo's proposal, but most of these were settled a
month ago, with little accomplished since.  A1

New York at Work: Minding the city's purse strings B1

A change in health insurance rules for small companies is being sought by
Governor Cuomo which would require insurers to charge the same rate for each
individual or group that is covered. B1

Inmates ended the rebellion at New York State's toughest prison. After giving 15
minutes of television interviews complaining about poor food and other prison
conditions, they released three guards they had taken hostage.  A1

Cuomo's newest challenge: managing budget and prisons B2

Two are held after an attempt to sell their baby, police say B3

Self-defense at issue in Chinatown slaying B7

Tompkins Square Park's future remains hostage to seemingly irreconcilable
political interests. Some neighborhood groups want the park closed. Others
insist that it remain a refuge for the downtrodden.  B1

The dream of being a ballerina is one to which 8-year-old Shara Overton, who
lives in a homeless shelter, holds fast. An arts program led to her getting a
scholarship for a class at the New York Theater Ballet School. B1

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

Sports B13-19

Baseball: Mets sweep Cubs B13

Sanderson shuts out Red Sox B15

Yanks' Kelly goes to schools against Clemens B15

Hershiser takes the mound B15

Basketball: Lakers, Blazers look for signs of victory B17

Knicks and Riley still talking B17

Column: Berkow on Phil Cavarretta B13

Football: The rivalry: Knights vs. Monarchs B17

Golf: Trevino gets around B16

Rating who's tops B16

Tennis: Becker overcomes 2-set deficit B13

Patrick McEnroe emerging B19

Connors wins in five sets B19

The Home Section

The house that Jack built and built and built and . . .  C1

Where stepparents are understood C1

A Gardener' World C1

Parent & Child C2

Veneer repairs an amateur can tackle C5

Behind the faded glory, a home for sculptures C6

Garden is a theater in London exhibit C10

Storage box: catchall's new life as eye-catcher C12

Arts/Entertainment

A Menotti ultimatum for Spoleto C13

Tony producers under TV pressure C13

Theater: Goodspeed's "Most Happy Fella" C13

Dance: New York City Ballet C13

Word and Image: Home Video C17

Novel with a mortal Jesus C18

Boston news program canceled C20

Obituaries D20

H. Struve Hensel, ex-Assistant Secretary of Defense

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A24

The true Oliver North outrage

Necessary race-norming

Doing better than "Sprungs"

Letters A24

William Safire: The wigwam casino A25

David Boaz: The big flaw in school reform A25

James Reston: A pitch for Washington baseball A25

Avner Cohen, Marvin Miller: Defusing the nuclear Mideast A25

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Televised Coverage Would End Executions

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 395 words


To the Editor:

Anthony Lewis, in "Their Brutal Mirth" (column, May 20), believes that the First
Amendment does not require television access to executions. Such access, he
states, would "further coarsen our society and increase its already dangerous
level of insensitivity." An appealing rationale, yet one that is contrary to
Supreme Court First Amendment decisions and would hinder informed debate about
the real problem: state-sponsored executions.

The Court has broadened First Amendment protections over the last century
despite several deviations. The First Amendment has been held to protect that
which many consider obscene, anti-American and speech that expresses hatred of
other ethnic and racial groups -- items of expression that surely have a
coarsening and desensitizing effect on citizens. Underlying this approach is the
belief that a kinder, gentler society is not to be brought about through
suppression of speech or expression.

Moreover, televised coverage will not trivialize executions. Whatever the
motives of the press or the prisons that allow such coverage, it would seem that
the real message to emerge would be the savage inhumanity of an execution. The
press would allow citizens to be fully informed about exactly what an execution
entails. Those who lightheartedly joke about frying 'em may be given pause to
think.

Televised coverage would serve as proof to those who are ambivalent about the
death penalty that state-sponsored executions should be relegated to the past.

Televised coverage of disturbing and often revolting issues brings about change,
sometimes for the better. It is said that one reason for the strong anti-Vietnam
War sentiment was footage of soldiers returning in body bags. A fully informed
public is better able to exercise control over political processes. Justice
Lewis F. Powell Jr. wrote in the case of Saxbe v. Washington Post that the press
"acts as an agent of the public at large." He continued, "It is the means by
which the people receive that free flow of information and ideas essential to
intelligent self-government."

This country has, not without furor, tolerated and lived through repugnant words
and images. To restrain televised coverage in this instance is to hinder what
Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes referred to as the "ultimate good."

DAVID WILKES
Boston, May 21, 1991

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Hanover Gets Expert In Corporate Finance

BYLINE: By MICHAEL QUINT

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 432 words


Robert C. O'Brien, an expert in the financing of corporate acquisitions, is
leaving Bankers Trust to accept a similar job at Manufacturers Hanover in
mid-June, he said yesterday.

At the Bankers Trust Company, Mr. O'Brien was part of a seven-member management
committee overseeing global corporate finance. (He is not among the dozens of
corporate finance specialists Bankers Trust has cut from its staff recently.) At
Manufacturers Hanover, Mr. O'Brien, 47, will be a managing director in charge of
acquisition finance, as well as other corporate lending business with energy and
media companies, where he has extensive contacts.

Mark Solow, who heads the global banking group at Manufacturers Hanover, said,
"I've been competing head to head with Bob for at least six years now, and he
clearly is one of the best bankers in the marketplace today." Mr. Solow added
that Mr. O'Brien "is one of those rare guys who has a very strong following
among businesses, as well as experience as an administrator."

Mr. O'Brien said his primary role had been as "an outside man" working with
large corporate customers to arrange bank loans and other financing. "But I've
also been on the management committee, a strategic planner and delegated
responsibility to younger people." Early in his career, he was head of Bankers
Trust's retail banking, which it has since eliminated, as well as chief
administrator for the bank's securities trading.

Both Manufacturers Hanover and Bankers Trust were among the handful of leading
banks in advising and lending for corporate takeovers, during the 1980's, and
both have been forced to cut back their staff in that area as business has
slowed the past two years. But Mr. Solow and Mr. O'Brien agreed that the
remaining opportunities could be a good business.

"The restructuring of corporate balance sheets continues nationally and
globally," Mr. O'Brien said, "and there are a lot of deals done in the 1980's
that require fixing." With bankers unable to lend all that their corporate
clients would like and the "junk bond" market less vibrant than in the 1980's,
he said, "the challenge for banks is to find the pools of capital that exist"
and bring them to clients.

Mr. O'Brien graduated from Wagner College in 1966 and joined Bankers Trust in
1969 after serving in the Army, where he was a first lieutenant and infantry
platoon leader in Vietnam. While at Bankers Trust, he attended the Graduate
School of Financial Management at Williams College in 1978.

He lives in Rockville Centre, L.I., with his wife, Patricia, and three
daughters.

NAME: Robert C. O'Brien

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert C. O'Brien, Manufacturers Hanover Trust

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 31, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Marines Fear Glory of War Will Give Way to Old Stigma

BYLINE: By CHRIS HEDGES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1367 words

DATELINE: CAMP PENDLETON, Calif., May 24


The enlisted marines returning from the Persian Gulf have seen their social
status rocket. Rounds of drinks are bought by strangers, signs of welcome adorn
the stores, and homecoming parades have been thronged by cheering spectators.

But underneath the euphoria of victory these men, many from blue-collar
families, remain aware that common soldiering is not always so highly prized in
American society. They remember too well the hotels that once turned them away,
fearing that unruly men might damage property; the car dealers who refused to
give them financing, and the snubs of better-heeled classmates in high school
who went on to college.

Sensing Glory Will Fade

"My parents didn't have money and I wanted to make something of myself," said
Sgt. James W. Ohlstrom, who worked in a pizza parlor in Highland, Ind., before
joining the Marines. "I didn't live in a military area and people would look at
the recruiters funny when they came down the hall. They used to call me Mr.
Marine, but I didn't have nowhere else to go and nothing else to do."

Now, with the war over, being a marine is giving these young men more than a
sense of purpose; this has been a time of glory. But they suspect it will not
last.

"When all this glory is over, it will be back to the same old stuff," said Lance
Cpl. Roger E. Griffith, who has spent six years in the Marine Corps.

Over a period of two months in the gulf and a week at Camp Pendleton, dozens of
enlisted men -- most from the First Battalion, First Marine Division, which was
one of the first units into Kuwait -- discussed their feelings about their lives
in the Corps. They repeatedly contrasted the widespread support they received
during and after the war with their previous, bitter experiences in civilian
society in peacetime.

Many said they were treated better as visitors to foreign countries during their
frequent cruises in Navy vessels, including Thailand and the Philippines, than
they had been in their own before the war.

Disdain toward enlisted men and women is not a new phenomenon. Even in World War
II, property owners around San Diego and Camp Pendleton posted signs warning
"dogs and sailors" to stay off the grass.

Marine Corps infantrymen, known to one another as "grunts" or as "jar heads" for
their closely shorn hair, may have one of the most thankless tasks in the armed
forces.

Even in peacetime, infantrymen spend long periods in the field. An array of
officers tell them where to go and what to do. They are paid about $1,000 a
month, and in many wars, infantrymen suffer high casualty rates.

The stigma of being an enlisted man burns deep in many marines. They have little
love for their officers and even less affection for civilians.

"These civilians see us and they think we are jar heads who should stay away
from their daughters," said Marlin L. Reeves, a 21-year-old lance corporal from
Odessa, Tex.

Some marines say they believe this attitude still lurks behind some of the
effusive welcomes they have received. And while many said they were deeply moved
by their reception, they added that they believed the public would eventually
turn its admiration somewhere else.

Although the aptitudes and the economic profiles of enlisted marines have risen
since the end of the Vietnam War, there is still a perception in the
all-volunteer force, and perhaps in society as a whole, that this is a job for
the sons and daughters of blue-collar families. The loss of many blue-collar
jobs has, indeed, meant that many young men and women of modest means have fewer
opportunities than their parents.

"We are reaching a point in society where some people feel the only choice they
have is the military because of the economic and social systems," said the Rev.
Harold E. Palmer Jr., a United Methodist chaplain at Pendleton.

Enthusiasm and Guilt

Many enlisted men say they believe that some of the current enthusiasm for the
military springs from guilt among members of the upper middle class who did not
have to send their sons and daughters in large numbers to fight in the gulf.

The feeling is not new; in his poem "Tommy," about the plight of the British
common soldier, Kipling wrote: "For it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' 'Chuck
'im out, the brute!'/ But it's 'Savior of 'is country' when the guns begin to
shoot."

"These people felt guilty," said Cpl. Michael J. Champagne of Iberia, La. "They
didn't have to do nothing and their kids weren't involved."

"The military is left for us poor boys," said Lance Cpl. Joseph E. Smyth, 21, of
Puma, Ariz., "and all those rich college kids out there know that."

But the marines are not blind to their own shortcomings. Many readily
acknowledged that the stigma was rooted in the roughhouse image of enlisted
military that has grown up in communities around bases.

"Marines are rowdy by nature," Corporal Griffith said. "We have to be. Compare
our job to the Navy or Army. We take the jobs no one else will take."

Young enlisted men here often travel to Oceanside and other towns around Camp
Pendleton in groups. They are instantly recognizable by their military haircuts
and swagger. The arms of many are adorned with USMC tattoos and their cheeks
filled with chewing tobacco.

Weekend liberty often consists of seven or eight marines pitching in to rent a
cheap hotel room, where they guzzle beer and watch cable television movies.

Formulas for Trouble

"Any group of young men in any organization can create trouble when they go
out," said Lieut. Col. Michael O. Fallon, commander of the First Battalion
during its deployment in the gulf. "You see it among fraternity members or gangs
in the inner city."

"If you are trying to build a team on the base, you can't say the minute they
are off duty and off base they can't build a team," said Colonel Fallon, whose
battalion was instrumental in repelling an Iraqi counterattack in Kuwait.

And battalion commanders contend that behavior has improved in the last decade
with the quality of recruits, most of whom have completed high school.

"I have been in hotels that won't rent to military," said Lieut. James M.
Bright, whose platoon took out 33 Iraqi vehicles, "although lots of time it is
our own fault because the military goes into a place, parties and tears things
up."

While many marines admit they are sometimes rough, they also say they believe in
their calling. They are hurt when they think the world fails to recognize what
they have accomplished and what it means to be a marine.

A few years ago Sgt. Rene Reyna, 31, of Mission, Tex., dated a woman who was
attending Oklahoma University. He had spent eight years in the Marines,
cloistered in the hermetic world of the military, rising through the ranks.

"I thought I was one of God's chosen few," he said.

But when he showed up on campus for his first visit, he was stunned by his
reception. "They equated me like a common laborer," he said of the students. "It
made me feel very insignificant. It was very disheartening. My whole world was
shaken up."

Many marines say the condescension they feel from outsiders serves to isolate
young marines.

"The average soldier feels isolated from civilian society, but not by choice,"
said a Marine Corps chaplain who requested anonymity. "These soldiers want to be
accepted for what they do because they believe very strongly in the ideals
behind what they do."

Many marines said it was not just their profession that was misunderstood, but
the nature of war itself. They said the parades and celebration, coupled with
the sanitized news reports, had failed to convey the sordid reality of war.

The carnage suffered by Iraqi forces in the first few hours of armed clashes,
some said, was enough to turn stomachs.

"I don't think the American public has a clue as to how terrible the war was,"
said Lieutenant Bright. "They watch war movies, or these documentaries, but they
don't sense the confusion, the fear. They don't see their buddies get shot. It
is all so ordered and clean on television. They don't know even 2 percent of it.
It will never be easy for us who were there to wage war. It is a terrible thing
to have to do."

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The First Battalion of the First Marine Division, one of the
first units to arrive in Kuwait, is back at Camp Pendleton, Calif., where new
officers were initiated recently with a bootful of beer. (pg. A1); A welcome in
San Diego given to marines returning from the Persian Gulf was representative of
the general euphoria over the American military effort, but many marines are not
impressed. "When all this glory is over, it will be back to the same old stuff,"
said one returning marine. (pg. A14) (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 31, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Sports of The Times;
Glory Days Make Cameo In the Bronx

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section B; Page 9; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 745 words


THE uniform still has the stylish vertical stripes. The cap still has the "N"
intertwined with the "Y." And Bob Sheppard's voice still booms majestically
through the Bronx.

But for the new breed of players, the ones who have come along in the last year
or two, there was the distinct possibility that they could play for the Yankees
without ever really playing for the Yankees, if you get the distinction.

They could serve their time in a yawning stadium, feeling a franchise hit
bottom, watching managers come and go, watching fans just go and go, without
ever knowing what it was like for Ruth and Gehrig and DiMaggio and Mantle and
Ford and Munson and Jackson when the Stadium came alive.

Perhaps these new Yankees feel like tourists visiting a temple in Egypt or an
amphitheater in the old Roman empire or a giant Cham Dynasty statue in Vietnam,
only able to wonder what it was like when the warriors and the high priests and
the performers and the people were in their glory years. Or perhaps they just
try to keep their eye on the ball, which is hard enough, without getting
nostalgic for something they have never known.

Now they have a glimmer, these new people named Hall and Barfield and Meulens
and Maas. They perform in the open-air museum at 161st Street and River Avenue
and they feel the stadium awaken, they hear the people stir. And it is not an
apparition, not some sound-and-light show, not some pageant, not some Disneyfied
sendup of reality.

"This is the most fun I've had since I came here," said Jesse Barfield, who came
to the Yankees early in the 1989 season and has seen the club disintegrate ever
since.

"You say, 'So this is what it's like,' " said Hensley Meulens, who made cameo
appearances in 1989 and 1990.

It used to be like this. These Yankees have won six of their last seven games,
often with powerful shots over fences, into grandstands, into bleachers, late in
the game. When this happens, when the Yankees look like themselves, Yankee
Stadium becomes like nothing else in baseball.

Yes, Wrigley Field and Fenway Park are intimate icons of architecture. Yes,
Dodger Stadium is clean and perfect on a cool L.A. night. Yes, Shea Stadium is a
nuthouse. But Yankee Stadium is a cathedral of baseball, sweeping conservative
dignity in its asymmetrical curves, a repository of memories of the home team's
winning with one big flex of somebody's muscles.

On a warm summer night when the new breed is winning, you can also sense Tony
Lazzeri, Old Reliable Tommy Henrich, Yogi, Chris Chambliss, all beating up on
the team in the gray road uniforms.

This is a kinder, gentler time at Yankee Stadium. The principal owner can not
come around anymore, glowering and fussing and threatening every employee in the
house. So people go about their business. The ushers use common sense. The
videotapes between innings seem quieter (love the subway-car race). The fans are
having fun because Mel Hall has been whacking home runs in the ninth inning.

"This is my third year here, and let me tell you, it's something," Hall said, in
his high-pitched musical cadence. "I remember when I played in Cleveland, we won
10 straight and one Saturday we had 77,000 people in the place and I couldn't
believe it.

"I always wondered what it would be like being a Yankee, playing with guys like
Winfield and Mattingly, all the big studs. And let me tell you, everything is
magnified. New York fans are rowdy. You get 30,000 people here, it's like a war.
You come to the ball park. If you can't get pumped here, you never can."

The players are not talking about slugging their way to a division title. They
are merely talking about winning a series here, a series there, staying out of
last place. They like the feeling of being real Yankees.

"It's fun coming to the park, knowing you're not in last place," Maas said.
"Knowing you have a chance to knock off a team in your own division. You hear
people talking about the Yankees and they're not saying, 'What's wrong with you
guys?' "

Maas went to college at Berkeley, a few stops away from the Oakland Coliseum on
the BART line. He said: "Some people hate the A's because they win too much.
When other people hate you, they know how good you are. People used to hate the
Yankees."

There has been no point in hating the Yankees recently. But when the new breed
is hitting home runs, they wake up the echoes of what it was like to be a
Yankee, when the Yankees were the Yankees.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jesse Barfield (Barton Silverman)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 1, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Ethel Payne, 79, Dies; Was a Correspondent

SECTION: Section 1; Page 34; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 180 words


Ethel Payne, regarded as the nation's pre-eminent black female journalist, was
found dead Thursday in her Washington apartment. She was 79 years old.

Miss Payne apparently died of natural causes on Tuesday and was discovered two
days later, said her sister, Avis Johnson of San Diego.

Miss Payne joined The Chicago Defender in 1951 as political correspondent. Based
in Washington, she reported from practically every major country except the
Soviet Union and Australia. She was the only black correspondent at the 1956
Bandung conference in Indonesia and covered the Nigerian civil war and the
Vietnam War. From 1972 to 1978 she did commentaries on CBS radio.

She interviewed heads of state, and entertained Vice President and Mrs. Richard
M. Nixon in her Washington home.

Miss Payne, often referred to as "the first lady of the black press," was
inducted into the District of Columbia Women's Hall of Fame in 1988. She won
awards from the Chicago Council on Foreign Affairs and the National Association
of Black Journalists.

She is survived by her sister.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 2, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Great Dark Way: Slowly, The Lights Are Dimming On Broadway

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 4; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2755 words


How does one begin to dramatize the alarm that is spreading over the Broadway
community as it stuffs itself into evening clothes to present the Tony Awards
tonight? Well, for starters, consider the fact that the nominees, who will be
honored on CBS starting at 9 P.M., do not represent the best of the 1990-91
season -- they represent all of the 1990-91 season. Nearly every production seen
on Broadway since this time last year has been nominated for something. The
question raised by this award ceremony is not "How good do you have to be to get
a nomination?" but "How bad do you have to be not to get a nomination?"

The answer to that question for musicals is: hit rock bottom, and keep going.
Every musical of the season, from a bus-and-truck "Peter Pan" to "Shogun: The
Musical" to "Oh, Kay!" is in contention somewhere on the ballot. Among the
season's plays, only "Zoya's Apartment," "Stand-Up Tragedy," "The Big Love,"
"Taking Steps" and "Mule Bone" failed to be cited for so much as best sound
design. (Actually, best sound design is not a category, but it should be, if
only to encourage producers to make their shows audible rather than merely
loud.)

Given the bleak terrain, it's amazing that there are so many gifted nominees;
some of those associated with short-lived productions, such as Jennifer Tipton
(a lighting design nominee for "La Bete") and Kathryn Erbe (best supporting
actress for "The Speed of Darkness"), might merit their slots even if the
competition were stiffer. It is not the fault of artists in the theater that the
Tony field is such a sparse one this year. I do fault the Tony nominators,
however, for spoiling tonight's fun by shunning one putative nominee, Nicol
Williamson, whose erratic performance as John Barrymore's ghost in "I Hate
Hamlet" became the stuff of newspaper headlines once he took to verbally and
physically harassing a fellow actor in mid-performance. Had this star been
nominated and then won, his words of thanks might have been the most anticipated
televised oration since the Checkers speech.

A graver omission than Mr. Williamson from the Tony nominees this year is, like
every year, the entirety of Off Broadway. This is why the most exciting play by
a young writer this season, the Playwrights Horizons' production of "The
Substance of Fire" by Jon Robin Baitz, and its brilliant star, Ron Rifkin, will
go unacknowledged tonight, even though this wit-infused drama about the
Holocaust's oblique fallout on a New York book publisher, his family and his
city seems to give many who see it new hope about the theater as a forum for
adult emotions and ideas.

Also absent tonight will be such riveting Off Broadway performers as Eileen
Atkins ("A Room of One's Own"), Spalding Gray ("Monster in a Box"), and Richard
Venture and Tony Goldwyn ("The Sum of Us").

The most fascinating revivals of the season -- Michael Greif's production of
Sophie Treadwell's 1928 "Machinal," Richard Sabellico's revivification of the
1962 Jerome Weidman-Harold Rome musical "I Can Get It for You Wholesale" --
won't be mentioned tonight. Nor will two of the best new musicals, the William
Finn-James Lapine "Falsettoland" and John Kander and Fred Ebb's "And the World
Goes 'Round," or such vital plays as "The Good Times Are Killing Me" by Lynda
Barry, "The American Plan" by Richard Greenberg and "Absent Friends" by Alan
Ayckbourn, not to mention the actors and production teams that made them sing.
Had the most dazzling play of the season, John Guare's "Six Degrees of
Separation," not capitalized on the Tony Awards' one sleight of gerrymandering
by moving from the ineligible Mitzi Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center to the
eligible Vivian Beaumont Theater upstairs in the same building, it, too, would
be off the ballot tonight.

Perhaps it's silly to expect justice from the Broadway establishment, which
regards the Tonys as a two-hour network television commercial for its own
products and is not about to give up two minutes of air time to competing
attractions. (There is a magnanimous Tony for the outstanding regional theater,
which, by definition, is safely out of town.) But if Broadway producers had any
instinct for public relations -- or at least for self-preservation, let alone
survival -- they would realize that the inclusion of Off Broadway productions
would bolster the national image of the entire New York theater, Broadway
included, by presenting the city's theatrical world as a hive of creativity
serving many tastes and pocketbooks. By restricting its focus to Broadway, the
Tony Awards show instead sends a dreadful message that keeps new audiences,
particularly young audiences, away. The Tonys this year will confirm the
impression, not always accurate, that New York is exclusively the province of
overproduced, overpriced musicals and boulevard plays that are aimed at wealthy
tourists of limited attention span and advancing age.

Broadway is still capable of better fare: last season at this time, for
instance, the best-play nominees (all transfers from Off Broadway or resident
theaters) included "The Piano Lesson,""Prelude to a Kiss" and the winner, "The
Grapes of Wrath." The best musical, "City of Angels," was a satire that gave the
audience credit for verbal and visual imagination.

This season's ceremony, by contrast, may well be dominated by Neil Simon's "Lost
in Yonkers" and the musical "The Will Rogers Follies," which, whatever their
virtues (and they both have some), are escapist fare pitched at theatergoers
nostalgic for the 1930's and 1940's. "Lost in Yonkers" contains several
confrontations that passionately dramatize the pain of a miserable childhood,
then takes it all back with an upbeat ending that tells the audience that all
wounds do heal. "The Will Rogers Follies" goes a step further by bringing its
title character (beguilingly reincarnated as Keith Carradine) back from the dead
to give a speech that miraculously brings the Depression to an end. How fleeting
on Broadway was the spirit of "The Grapes of Wrath"!

Maybe the dominance of fluff this season was inevitable, given that the
recession has deepened during the last year. The fallout can be felt on
Broadway, where tickets for most, if not all, of the Tony nominees are readily
available and frequently discounted, and Off Broadway, where the crunch in
public and private financial support for the arts is having a devastating
impact. In such hard times, Off Broadway remembers its artistic mission -- no
one can accuse such artistic directors as Joseph Papp (the Public Theater),
Lynne Meadow (the Manhattan Theater Club) or Andre Bishop (Playwrights Horizons)
of coddling their subscribers this season -- but Broadway loses its head. By
Labor Day, if not before, "Lost in Yonkers" may be the sole dramatic attraction
on a Broadway stage, period, and there are few prospects in sight to keep it
company next season.

The economic downturn has not only depleted the ranks of producers, investors
and ticket buyers who make the commercial theater a going concern, but it has
also brought Broadway's leadership vacuum into sharp relief. There cannot be a
healthy Broadway without the full involvement of the Shubert Organization, for
it has the deepest pockets and owns nearly half the theaters. Yet the Shuberts,
who kept Broadway afloat during the Depression and have in recent seasons
underwritten the commercial transfers of many important Off Broadway
productions, have ceased for the time being to be an active sponsor of Broadway
plays. None of the Tony best-play nominees this season was a Shubert production
or appeared in a Shubert house, and the flagship non-musical playhouses of the
Shubert empire on 45th Street were mostly dark all season. The rival
Nederlanders, though serving as landlords to three of the best-play nominees,
have not done much more for Broadway than they have done so far for the New York
Yankees. The third and smallest theater owner, Jujamcyn, has more actively
promoted new American playwriting, but with only 5 of the 38 Tony-eligible
Broadway theaters, two of them occupied by holdover musicals from last season,
it could have at most an incidental impact on the larger scene.

To pick up some of the slack in play production, the League of American
Producers and Theater Owners, the same Broadway trade organization that
administers the Tony Awards, joined with the unions this season to activate the
Broadway Alliance, a special arrangement by which dark Broadway dramatic houses
are turned over to serious plays produced at discount budgets for a discount
ticket price. The two plays to appear under this plan, Steve Tesich's "Speed of
Darkness," now closed, and Timberlake Wertenbaker's "Our Country's Good," a Tony
nominee for best play, are solid works, but audiences have not been large, as if
theatergoers feared that the bargain tickets signaled a rum deal.

In this depression atmosphere, it may not help the Broadway Alliance that its
first two offerings deal with subjects (the Vietnam War, the early history of
Australia as a penal colony) that sound worthy and depressing (even if the plays
are not necessarily grim). It hasn't helped, either, that the productions of
both plays, each of which originated in resident theaters beyond New York, did
not have the consistency of acting and staging necessary to meet the high
standards of audiences who have also seen "Six Degrees of Separation" and "The
Substance of Fire."

Musicals, being potential cash cows, do continue to engage the interest of
Broadway theater owners and producers, and if none of the four nominees tonight
is likely to prove a classic of the genre, the four added together would make
one completely satisfying show: "Once on This Island" has the freshest score,
"Miss Saigon" the most stirring performances (by Jonathan Pryce and Lea
Salonga), "Will Rogers" the most eye-filling stagecraft (by Tommy Tune and his
designers) and "The Secret Garden" the most literate intentions. But all four
productions may be more interesting as symptoms of Broadway's current state and
harbingers of its future than they are as examples of musical theater.

"Miss Saigon," the show that aroused the season's most violent opinions pro and
con well before it opened -- and continues to, especially among those who have
not seen it -- may prove to be the last British musical of the "Cats" era, if it
can be called British in the first place. (Its producer is British, but its
authors are French and American and its models are "South Pacific" and "West
Side Story.") Though it is a hit so far, its immediate predecessor among West
End imports, Andrew Lloyd Webber's "Aspects of Love," was the most costly flop
in Broadway history, and there is no new English megamusical in London to follow
"Miss Saigon" to Broadway.

There is not likely to be one anytime soon. The West End has its own recession
drying up the pipeline, and American public opinion may have finally begun to
turn on these imported extravaganzas. (Certainly New York opinion has: the
running gag about "Cats" in "Six Degrees" was the most widely quoted of the
season.) While "Miss Saigon" is easily the most intimate and the most gripping
of its English peers -- or so it is to someone like myself, who still is baffled
by the general enthusiasm for "The Phantom of the Opera" -- it has angered many
for reasons generally extrinsic to the show itself. The repeated threats by its
producer, Cameron Mackintosh, to cancel the New York opening, the
record-breaking $100 top ticket price, the much hyped advance sale and on-stage
helicopter effect (the show's most gratuitous and unconvincing concession to
Lloyd Webberism) have made "Miss Saigon" a symbol of decadence and buccaneering
foreign wealth at a time of American patriotism, belt-tightening and economic
xenophobia.

Curiously enough, the intense early controversy about "Miss Saigon," prompted
last summer by the Actors' Equity attempt to deny Mr. Pryce, a white Welshman,
the right to repeat his London performance in a nominally Eurasian role, was
forgotten by much of the theater community by the time the show actually opened,
some pickets notwithstanding. "The Will Rogers Follies," a musical that wraps
itself in the flag and lectures the audience about its responsibilities to the
homeless, opened without a single black face in its cast, but so far not a
discouraging word has been heard from Actors' Equity or anyone else.

Like "Miss Saigon," "Will Rogers" seems the end of a line, albeit an American
one. It has the feel of a last hurrah by a show-biz old guard that is
contemporaneous in age and taste with the benefit-and-theater-party crowd to
which the show presumably means to cater. At the production's sporadic best, Mr.
Tune's staging recalls the vaudeville sequences one associates with the classic
M-G-M movies ("Singin' in the Rain" and "The Band Wagon") written by the
musical's distinguished lyricists, Betty Comden and Adolph Green. At its worst,
this show is a ponderous mixture of synthetic corn and old-fashioned sexism of a
sort that has passed out of the pop culture mainstream everywhere except
Broadway, television included.

"Miss Saigon" and "The Will Rogers Follies" are thought to be the two chief
contenders for the best musical Tony. While they could be regarded as political
opposites -- one resurrects a war the United States lost, the other embraces the
boosterism that followed an American military victory in Iraq -- they both
represent the Broadway commercial powers that be. "Miss Saigon" stands for Mr.
Mackintosh and the Shuberts, in whose theater the show plays. "Will Rogers" is
at a Nederlander house, and its creators are the remnants of the American
musical-comedy aristocracy that the Brits shoved aside in the "Cats" era. Is it
cynical to wonder if the victor may be the production with the fewest enemies?

Should either "Once on This Island" or "The Secret Garden" win the best-musical
Tony, consider it a palace revolution. Though "Once on This Island" was
presented on Broadway by the Shuberts, it was produced by Playwrights Horizons,
whose artistic leader, Andre Bishop, will succeed Gregory Mosher as artistic
director at Lincoln Center Theater next year. The authors of "Once on This
Island," Lynn Ahrens and Stephen Flaherty, are relative newcomers to the
theater, and hugely promising ones, though their show, with its simple appeal to
the emotions and its slick repackaging of ethnic culture, is, like "Miss
Saigon," in the mode of Rodgers and Hammerstein's "Oriental" period.

"The Secret Garden," an adaptation of Frances Hodgson Burnett's book, represents
the small Jujamcyn chain, and it is in the style of the other Broadway musicals,
"Big River" (from Mark Twain) and "Into the Woods" (from the Grimms), in which
the Jujamcyn chief executive, Rocco Landesman, and the designer and producer
Heidi Landesman have been involved: it is an adult treatment of classic and
weighty children's literature. Indeed, "The Secret Garden," a dark and
introspective show, sometimes suggests a Stephen Sondheim musical without
Sondheim; its structure, cast and songs recall both "Into the Woods" and "Sunday
in the Park With George."

The trouble with "The Secret Garden" is its busyness, as if everyone connected
with it was thinking too hard -- it is overdirected, overwritten, overpopulated
and overdesigned. But since its opening, the show's creators have been stripping
away some of the clutter and, like the other Jujamcyn musicals, it could find a
sustaining audience, smaller but perhaps broader and younger, than those at the
usual Broadway musicals.

What these Tony nominees have in common is that they are all greeted with
partial or full standing ovations virtually every night. I did not see a musical
on Broadway this season, the flops included, that failed to receive a standing
ovation, whether at a press preview or a regular performance, and the same was
true of most of the plays. Does this phenomenon mean that the Broadway audience
is desperate to convince itself that its ticket money was well spent? Or does it
mean that all the shows were fabulous? The truth is probably somewhere in
between, but it is the business of the Tony Awards to uphold the latter point of
view. There can be no ovations in dark houses, however, and the Tony Awards seem
almost beside the point at a time when no one on Broadway seems to have a clue
as to what will fill its vacant stages after tonight's cheering has stopped.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Above, marquees of two theaters that are currently empty (The
New York Times); at left, just before curtain time at "Miss Saigon" (Michele V.
Agins/The New York Times) (pg. 1); Ron Rifkin and Sarah Jessica Parker in "The
Substance of Fire"--Because Off Broadway is excluded from the Tonys, the
season's most exciting work by a young playwright will not be a contender
tonight (Peter Cunningham/Playwrights Horizons); Stockard Channing and John
Cunningham in "Six Degrees of Separation"--The most dazzling play of the 1990-91
theatrical year is on the ballot only because of a sleight of gerrymandering.
(Brigitte Lacombe/"Six Degrees of Separation") (pg. 28)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 2, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam

SECTION: Section 5; Page 12; Column 5; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 222 words


To the Editor: I just returned from a trip to Vietnam. I spent large amounts of
time on the streets and in the markets talking to ordinary people while
unaccompanied by a guide. I never had "little hands digging around" my person,
as Steven Erlanger said (Travel, April 28).

There are many Americans with less adventurous stomachs than Mr. Erlanger who
would be delighted to stay at the "modern but soulless" Saigon Floating Hotel
(actually controlled by the Pritzkers of Hyatt fame, not the Australian
operators). This hotel has safe Western food and amenities, including a disco
that is a great deal busier than the Superstar near the airport. Everything is
new (including the air-conditioning and pool).

The highpoint of my trip was the infamous tunnels of Cu Chi. You can tour these
tiny manmade caves, which many Viet Cong fought from and lived in for many
years. For a fee, we were allowed to fire the United States M-16, the Russian
AK-47 and Chinese carbine rifles. The guides were former Viet Cong who had lived
and fought there.

Arranging the tour was a snap. You can write or call Deitheim Travel in Bangkok
from the United States. I have arranged travel with them to other countries in
Southeast Asia. You need to be in Bangkok about two business days before going
to Vietnam.

WILLIAM R. POWER
Chicago

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 2, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam

SECTION: Section 5; Page 12; Column 6; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 196 words


To the Editor: I take pleasure in noting that Steven Erlanger found that many of
my haunts when I was in in Saigon in 1962 and '63 still deserved mention.

As for hotels, when I arrived in autumn 1962, Mr. Erlanger's current favorite,
the Majestic, was a transient officers' quarters where one spent a few days
awaiting a Bachelor Officers Quarters assignment. In my grade of major and being
assigned for duty to Military Assistance Advisory Command, headquartered in
Cholon, I went initially to that part of the city, living in the Buis B.O.Q.
with mess facilities in the adjacent 5 Oceans. Within a couple of months, a
promotion to lieutenant colonel rated me a transfer uptown to the Rex, which,
just as described, had a roof terrace whence I took many a picture.

The photographs with the article include the pedicabs and velos (motor bikes) of
my day, and there is mention of Japanese limousines and vans for tourist use,
but the scene has undergone a major change, indeed, if there are no more small
blue-and-white Renault cabs. There were an estimated 6,000 of them, and they
were the mainstay of our off-duty travels.

ROLFE L. HILLMAN
Arlington, Va.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 2, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam

SECTION: Section 5; Page 12; Column 6; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 79 words


To the Editor: In the box with the article on Vietnam, I was surprised not to
see listed among tour sponsors of Southeast Asian trips Wings of the World, 653
Mount Pleasant Road, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4S 2N2. The members of the group
with whom I traveled were truly pleased with the Wings preparation,
arrangements, guides in individual cities, the food, the sightseeing, the
transportation and the fees -- all very satisfactory.

CORINNE K. FLEMINGS
Pittsburgh

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 2, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

He Was No Jack Kennedy

BYLINE: By Robert Dallek;  Robert Dallek is a professor of history at the
University of California, Los Angeles. His book "Lone Star Rising: Lyndon
Johnson and His Times, 1908-1960" will be published in August.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1150 words



A QUESTION OF CHARACTER
A Life of John F. Kennedy.
By Thomas C. Reeves.
Illustrated. 510 pp. New York:
The Free Press. $24.95.

What are we to believe about John F. Kennedy? Was he the shining intellectual
who, in the words of Arthur Schlesinger Jr., "gave his country back to its best
self" and "transformed the American spirit"? Or was he the self-indulgent
womanizer, the opportunist and scoundrel portrayed in so many recent exposes of
the Kennedys?

In "A Question of Character," Thomas C. Reeves, a professor of history at the
University of Wisconsin, Parkside, and the author of biographies of President
Chester A. Arthur and Senator Joseph McCarthy, comes down emphatically on the
side of the iconoclasts. Mr. Reeves's Kennedy is a compulsive womanizer, a liar,
a bully, an amphetamine addict -- a ruthless, lazy, corrupt, self-indulgent
hypocrite. He was America's first successful television politician. Television
magnified his surface attributes -- his good looks, warmth and humor -- and
helped turn him into a national hero leading the country on to a new frontier.

The Kennedy in "A Question of Character" was, like his father, Joseph Kennedy, a
man of bad character. He was the product of an emotionally impoverished
childhood. He suffered from an "inability to love or express feelings." He grew
up "hostile . . . toward marriage and the family. Women were at best sex
objects." Chasing women became "a career." His Navy heroics on PT 109 during
World War II were the invention of publicists. He was not a particularly good
commander and, Mr. Reeves says, his poor judgment contributed to the sinking of
his boat and the death of two crewmen.

Though Kennedy emphatically denied it throughout his life, his father played the
decisive part in pushing him into politics. He was a lazy Congressman, Mr.
Reeves says, who spent much of his time seducing secretaries and airline
hostesses. His father had to manage his finances; he surrounded himself with
obsequious friends, whom he bullied, and he showed no interest in any political
issue. When he ran for the Senate in 1952, his only concern was winning: "Jack,
like his father and his brother [Robert], was without any guiding intellectual,
philosophical, or moral vision in his pursuit of office. Politics, like life,
was about winning, and little else."

Spurred by his father's ambition to run for President, he pulled out all the
stops to win. His successful campaign in 1960, Mr. Reeves writes, "involved the
cynical manipulation of issues, unrestrained spending, vote fraud, the Mafia,
ceaseless adultery, and dishonesty about Kennedy's intellectual achievements and
physical condition."

Mr. Reeves's portrait of Kennedy as President is no less scathing. In the White
House, his bad character played a major part in making him a poor President. He
had little interest in domestic affairs, made a number of bad judicial
appointments, demonstrated cautious opportunism in dealing with pressing civil
rights questions and fouled up royally in dealing with the Bay of Pigs invasion
and escalating American involvement in Vietnam. Whatever his superficial
attributes, as President, Kennedy "was pragmatic to the point of amorality; his
sole standard seemed to be political expediency. . . . Jack's character . . .
lacked a moral center, a reference point that went beyond self-aggrandizement."
Mr. Reeves believes that if Kennedy had lived and won a second term, his lechery
and dealings with Mafia figures might have become public knowledge and led to
his impeachment.

What are we to make of Mr. Reeves's case against Kennedy? Does he add anything
to the revisionist attack on his character? Not in the least. His allegations
are almost exclusively drawn from books and articles that have appeared in the
last 30 years; nothing here can be described as research in primary sources. For
all Mr. Reeves knows, the allegations about Kennedy's unethical behavior are
largely or partly fiction. It is, of course, possible that much of what Mr.
Reeves records is true. There has been so much written about Kennedy's
womanizing, for example, that there seems more here than just the imaginings of
scandalmongers eager for a best seller. But Mr. Reeves does nothing to help us
discriminate between fact and fiction. At best, his book is a summing up of
revisionist assertions about Kennedy's character flaws.

And do we learn anything about Kennedy's White House term from Mr. Reeves? Not
that I can detect. The 170 pages he devotes to the Presidency in this 500-page
book break no new ground. But then his research -- aside from some oral
histories and an occasional interview -- was too limited to expand our
knowledge. With some justification, he complains about the limits on what
researchers can get at in the Kennedy records. But Mr. Reeves would do well to
read Irving Bernstein's recent book, "Promises Kept," to see what a skillful
historian can achieve by studying the available manuscripts in the John F.
Kennedy Library.

In fairness to Mr. Reeves, one has to acknowledge that his purpose was less to
find new materials than to say something about the impact of character on
political leadership. "Good character," he writes, "is an essential framework
for the complex mixture of qualities that make an outstanding President and a
model leader for a democratic people." And "the real Kennedy -- as opposed to
the celebrated hero espoused by the Kennedy family, the media, and the Camelot
School -- lacked greatness in large part because he lacked the qualities
inherent in good character."

Mr. Reeves's point -- that a President's behavior can demean the Presidency and
lower respect for the nation's highest office -- is well taken. Nor can one
justify Presidential transgressions by acknowledging that American politics has
not been notable for its saints. Still, a good character has never guaranteed
Presidential greatness, just as a flawed character has not precluded it. Were it
otherwise, Herbert Hoover and Jimmy Carter would stand in the front rank of
American Presidents and Lyndon Johnson's domestic achievements would be
impossible to explain.

Indeed, even Mr. Reeves admits that success in resolving the Cuban missile
crisis "is ultimately attributable to [Kennedy's] leadership." His behavior
"revealed a deeper concern for the nation and the world than many who knew him
well might have suspected." Mr. Reeves believes that "a growing maturity" made
the difference in Kennedy's achievement. Perhaps. But it seems more convincing
to believe that his better side was there all along and that Mr. Reeves's
portrait is too fixed on Kennedy's failings to give us the full man.

Since Mr. Reeves's book advances our understanding of neither Kennedy as a man
and as President nor the role of character in public affairs, it will do little
more than give satisfaction to Kennedy haters.

NAME: John F. Kennedy

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 3, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Ali: A Victim of His Road to Renown

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1015 words



Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times
By Thomas Hauser
Illustrated. 544 pages. Simon & Schuster. $24.95.

Boxing, let us agree, is a nasty, brutish activity whose point is to attack the
very source of civilization, the human brain. So it does not speak well of us
that the man we have made the most famous in the world won his celebrity by
boxing. Yet what is most immediately distinctive about him now is the damage he
suffered as a result of having his brain attacked.

Yes, suffered as a direct result. In a statement quoted in Thomas Hauser's
"Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times," Dr. Stanley Fahn, a neurologist at
Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, says that at the time he examined Muhammad
Ali in 1984, "he requested that I not state publicly what in my view was the
cause of his Parkinsonism." The doctor defines the disease as "a neurological
condition with several key features," among them tremor, slowness of movement
and rigidity of muscles, including those used in speech.

For the book, Dr. Fahn continues, "he's asked that I speak freely and completely
, so I'll tell you my diagnosis that it was a post-traumatic Parkinsonism due to
injuries from fighting. . . . My assumption is that his physical condition
resulted from repeated blows to the head over time."

Nor is it uplifting that the very best parts of this oral biography are the ones
that take the reader back to the fights themselves. All the same, whatever it is
that's captivating about the fight game, this book, even though highly uneven,
does manage to convey it.


There have been nearly a dozen books about Muhammad Ali written to date, the
best of them being "The Fight," by Norman Mailer, Jose Torres's "Sting Like a
Bee," Wilfrid Sheed's "Muhammad Ali," and Mr. Ali's autobiography, "The
Greatest," written with the help of Richard Durham. Each of these books is
limited in its way, the limitation of the autobiography being perhaps that Mr.
Ali didn't read it until after it was published, or so Mr. Hauser asserts in the
present book.

Mr. Hauser's book, on the other hand, is unlimited, which isn't always a good
thing. The author has compiled statements from scores of people, ranging from
Presidents Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy Carter to the model Cheryl Tiegs, and from
Mr. Ali's several wives and many children to Mr. Ali himself, who cooperated
fully. Some of the speakers go on and on, not always informatively.

James A. Michener, for instance, compares the subject to "the great mother
mastodon I described in 'Alaska,' " which seems an original notion if not
precisely apt to this supremely graceful athlete. Others blather so endlessly
about Mr. Ali's love of people, his devoutness as a Muslim and his endless
capacity to give of himself that one begins to long for an ax murderer to appear
on the scene, or at the very least the boxing promoter Don King, about whom no
one in this book has anything but a nasty word to say and who is one of only
three people who refused to be interviewed for this project. (The other two are
Mr. Ali's ex-wife Veronica and John Ali, former national secretary of the Nation
of Islam.)


There's a way to cut and edit oral history so the words fairly jump off the page
and tell a story. But Mr. Hauser, a New York City lawyer with seven novels and
six nonfiction works to his credit, including "Missing," seems to have used far
too much paste and not nearly enough scissors.  Too many of his words simply lie
there inertly, forming impenetrable forests.

Still, you never know what you're going to find in their darkest midsts.  One
speaker recounts that while on tour with Mr. Ali in Denmark he told the boxer
the story of Hamlet. Mr. Ali listened rapt and then exclaimed, "Man, did
Shakespeare make all that up?" And Maryum Ali, one of the fighter's daughters,
remarks how just as the smell of alcohol in a doctor's office makes her anxious
because she knows an injection is coming, the sound of Howard Cosell's voice
made her nervous because it signaled the onset of one of her father's ring
bouts.

But the best sections of the book bring back the incredible excitement of his
greatest contests, of which there were probably four: the first one with Sonny
Liston, the first and third ones with Joe Frazier, and the thrilling game of
"rope-a-dope" that Mr. Ali played against George Foreman in Zaire.

After reading about them, you understand a little better the extent to which Mr.
Ali simply blew his opponents' minds. Sonny Liston, for instance, grew to
believe that Cassius Clay, as Mr. Ali was known when they fought, was simply
crazy. So he came to fear him, which may be why Mr. Liston succumbed to the
famous phantom punch in their second fight, at Lewiston, Me.


How good was Muhammad Ali as a boxer? The consensus of thoughtful experts in
these pages holds that he was up there with Jack Johnson and Joe Louis at the
very pinnacle of the game. But what is tantalizing is the widely held view that
he had not yet reached his peak when he had to stop fighting because of his
refusal to be inducted into the Army in 1967, and that he was a little past his
prime when he eventually returned to the ring in 1970. In short, we never got to
see Muhammad Ali at his best.

How significant was he to American culture in his time? There is a great deal of
froth in these pages about how as a nonconformist black man who fought for his
people and protested the Vietnam War, he single-handedly changed the
consciousness of his age.

But witnesses tend to gush when they make this case. Of all the commentators,
Wilfrid Sheed makes most sense when he says: "I think he was basically an
entertainer. Without him, I don't think society would be significantly different
today. He was more a symbol than a doer . . . Also, I'd have to say that if
Muhammad Ali never existed, life certainly would have been duller."

The only thing missing in this is the tragic irony of Muhammad Ali's life. For a
while, he made us believe that a human being could lift himself into the air.
Then suddenly he became a crushing reminder that one can't after all.

NAME: Muhammad Ali

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas Hauser (Ellen Wallop/Simon & Schuster)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 4, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
A Brief Reprieve for 'China Beach': Seven New Episodes, Then the End

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 583 words


"China Beach" disappeared from ABC 's schedule several months ago, very probably
the victim of the patriotic boosterism encouraged during the hostilities in the
Persian Gulf. When the country is perking with Stormin' Norman, who needs
reminders of a downer like Vietnam? In any event, "China Beach" returns tonight
at 10 with the first of seven episodes that are being broadcast for the first
time. Fans have been waging a letter-writing campaign to get them shown. Their
victory is limited. The widely acclaimed series is not on the ABC schedule for
next season.

The show returns in fine form, slipping seamlessly between two different time
periods. It's 1983 and Colleen McMurphy (Dana Delany) is in Portland, Ore., to
be maid of honor at a wedding. A perceptive guy named Joe (Adam Arkin)
introduces himself as the band's drummer but later also turns out to be the best
man. As the wedding preparations proceed, McMurphy has flashbacks to 1969 and
her China Beach friends in Vietnam. An amateur production of "My Fair Lady" is
being mounted, its familiar songs taking on new meanings as various romances ebb
and flow.

Maj. Lila Garreau (Concetta Tomei) has decided to marry Sarge Pepper (Troy
Evans), having discovered the basic sweetness and decency lurking beneath his
big-lug personality. And McMurphy, facing the end of her tour of duty, begins
wondering about the future of her affair with Dr. Richard (Robert Picardo). The
situation is complicated when McMurphy is shoved out of the competition for
playing Eliza Doolittle by a young woman named Gloria (Kathy Molter), who sings
beautifully and wastes no time in snuggling up to Dr. Richard who, of course, is
playing Henry Higgins. Gloria is casual about the passing dalliance and is
puzzled by McMurphy's disapproving and "parochial" attitude. "I'm a
parochial-school graduate," McMurphy mutters.

Before the episode's end, the character of McMurphy is explored on several
levels. In Vietnam, she has to confront the unsettling truth about her
relationship with Dr. Richard, even as he passionately sings, looking directly
at her from the stage, "I've Grown Accustomed to Her Face." And years later in
Portland, she listens more with sadness than anger while the best man pinpoints
her as being in Alcoholics Anonymous but "still fun at parties."

The concluding moments turn unfortunately soppy, but the piece as a whole
reflects the uncanny ability of "China Beach" to pack an impressive amount of
dramatic colorings into less than 50 minutes. In coming weeks, stories will
cover everything from McMurphy's rehabilitation in Montana in 1977, with the
help of Dodger (Jeff Kober), to the efforts of K. C. (Marg Helgenberger) to get
her daughter out of Vietnam during the fall of Saigon. The series ends,
appropriately, with a reunion of the EVAC company in Washington as they visit
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.

A splendid repertory cast, sensitive scripts, intelligent productions -- "China
Beach" can make its exit with pride.

China Beach

Created by John Sacret Young and William Broyles Jr.; Mr. Broyles, executive
consultant; Mr. Young, executive producer; a Sacret Production in association
with Warner Brothers Television. At 10 tonight on ABC.Coleen McMurphy . . . Dana
DelanyBoonie . . . Brian WimmerBeckett . . . Michael BoatmanK.C. . . . Marg
HelgenbergerLila . . . Concetta TomeiDr. Richard . . . Robert PicardoDodger . .
. Jeff KoberJeff Hyers . . . Ned VaughnPvt. Frankie Bunsen . . . Nancy Giles

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dana Delany (ABC)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
The Old Trickster

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 29; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 702 words


Richard Nixon is up to his old tricks again -- totally distorting the views of
his opponents for the good of America and world peace.

This time he descends from Mount New Jersey to warn against two groups dealing
with Soviet policy. One is "U.S. policy makers" who "separate the issue of
economic reform from broader political and strategic questions." The other he
variously defines as "many analysts" and "some" (read the Grand Bargainers) who
urge "the West to foot the bill -- to the tune of $100 billion or more -- to
help Moscow" do the right thing.


It is great to have the Old Trickster unlimbering the magic that served him so
well for so long. Like old times, Mr. Nixon positions himself by misdefining the
alternatives as goofy extremes, and as usual the media play along.

Remember the Nixon choices for Vietnam: nuclear war or traitorous surrender or
his "middle" course (which turned out to be a U.S. withdrawal agreement he
probably could have made three years earlier). Recall the Nixon choices for
Soviet policy: nuclear confrontation or unilateral U.S. concessions or his
version of detente (which turned out to be deals with Moscow in return for no
demonstrable Soviet restraint). When his policies failed, he did what any great
statesman would do -- blamed his critics.

Writing in The Washington Post on Sunday, Mr. Nixon warned as follows: "Many
[U.S. policy makers] tend to see the economic salvation of the other nuclear
superpower as an end in itself, but in fact our key strategic interest does not
lie in saving the Kremlin economically."

Maybe "many" policy makers privately tell Mr. Nixon how stupid they are. But I
have never heard or read a statement by any Bush Administration official
committing the sin just described. Bush aides (and even Democrats) share Mr.
Nixon's goal of "dismantling . . . the Communist Soviet system."

The Old Trickster also worries that Mikhail Gorbachev's recent swing toward
reform "has been uncritically accepted as an irreversible . . ." Notice the
suave use of the passive to obscure whom he's talking about.

I wonder where Mr. Nixon overheard that one. Bush aides and most Soviet policy
experts either question Mr. Gorbachev's motives or merely hope that events are
pushing him toward reforms.

Mr. Nixon is equally adroit at misrepresenting the Grand Bargain approach, that
is, a proposed Western plan for aiding Moscow to promote reforms. "It would
require a great leap of faith," he writes, "to offer the Soviet Union massive
assistance in exchange for a verbal promise from Gorbachev that he will adopt
more radical reforms."

There the Old Trickster goes again. The fact is that the Russians and Americans
working on the Grand Bargain project at Harvard require that Western aid be
doled out in stages and made absolutely conditional on Soviet deeds, not words.

Their conditions for aid, some explicit and some understood, read much like Mr.
Nixon's: replacement of Communist functionaries with reformers, democratization
and decentralization, privatization of the economy, massive reduction in
military spending, arms treaties to further reduce forces and curtailment of
support for Cuba and Afghanistan.

Administration officials will use credits and trade to push Moscow in these
directions ad hoc and piecemeal. But they want the Soviets to finance their own
recovery with their own wealth. Seems reasonable.

Grand Bargainers argue, however, that more is needed given Soviet problems and
Western stakes. Their point is that Communist leaders will not make the
necessary hard choices unless they know in advance that significant Western help
awaits their good performance -- and that they cannot succeed without
substantial aid. The aid can come from ample savings in Western defense budgets
after Soviet force reductions.

As for the Old Trickster's own policy suggestions, they are, well, elusive.
Maybe you had to be there.

Whatever, he and Administration officials are unrealistic to think the Soviets
can remodel themselves as we wish without something like a grand bargain. If
this idea is to be rejected, it ought to be nixed for what it is and not for
what Mr. Nixon or other tricksters say it is.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Tape Shows Nixon Feared Hoover

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1240 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 4


Richard M. Nixon chose in 1971 not to remove J. Edgar Hoover as head of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation in part because he feared that Mr. Hoover would
"bring down the temple" by releasing damaging information about him, according
to newly released transcripts of the former President's White House
tape-recorded conversations.

The transcripts, made public today by the National Archives, show that Mr. Nixon
based that judgment on an unflattering psychological profile of Mr. Hoover that
had been prepared by G. Gordon Liddy, a former F.B.I. agent who was then on the
White House staff.

Mr. Liddy later helped plan the June 1972 break-in at the Democratic National
Committee headquarters in the Watergate office complex that led to Mr. Nixon's
resignation in August 1974. Mr. Liddy was convicted of related burglary and
conspiracy charges in the aftermath of the scandal.

No Hint of What Nixon Feared

The transcripts do not disclose what Mr. Nixon suspected that Mr. Hoover might
disclose should he be forced to quit. Mr. Hoover died in office in May 1972.

The new tapes, like the last batch released in 1980, depict a caustic and
occasionally brutal President, who sometimes bears scant resemblance to his
current image as an author and a counselor to world leaders.

Mr. Nixon makes infrequent and carefully planned public appearances. He visited
Moscow this spring to advise and encourage the embattled Soviet President,
Mikhail S. Gorbachev, and his analysis of the Soviet situation recently appeared
in the opinion pages of The Washington Post, once among the harshest critics of
his Presidency.

The transcripts released today, covering about 60 hours of conversation, are
among 4,000 hours of material that Mr. Nixon secretly taped while President from
1969 to 1974, using concealed recording devices in the White House, the
adjoining Executive Office Building and at the Presidential retreat in Camp
David, Md.

Searching for New Insights

Reporters combed through copies of the voluminous transcripts today looking for
new insights into the Nixon years. The conversations about Mr. Hoover, for
example, were first noted by The Associated Press.

The former President's remarks embellish existing public accounts of Mr. Nixon's
discussions about removing Mr. Hoover, a cunning and politically powerful F.B.I.
chief who later was shown to have accumulated files of potentially ruinous
material on selected politicians and public figures.

At the time, Mr. Hoover was under mounting attack because of revelations that
the bureau had conducted extensive surveillance of Vietnam War protesters.

On Oct. 8, 1971, Mr. Nixon told Attorney General John N. Mitchell that "my view
is he oughta resign while he's on top, before he becomes an issue," adding, "The
least of it is he's too old."

"He's getting senile, actually," Mr. Mitchell said of Mr. Hoover.

Mr. Nixon responded, "He should get the hell out of there."

He said later in the conversation: "I think we've got to avoid the situation
where he could leave with a blast. I don't think he will."

But on Oct. 25, after Mr. Nixon read Mr. Liddy's memorandum, his view had
changed. Calling Mr. Liddy's analysis of Mr. Hoover "tremendously perceptive,"
Mr. Nixon said it made "a stronger case for not doing something on Hoover than
doing something."

"We may have on our hands here a man who will pull down the temple with him,
including me," Mr. Nixon said.

Mr. Nixon has maintained that he installed the taping system to maintain a
thorough record of his Administration. As an April 25, 1973, conversation
released today showed, the President had no inkling as the Watergate scandal
unraveled about him that the system would prove his undoing.

"I always wondered about that taping equipment but I'm damn glad we have it,
aren't you?" Mr. Nixon said to H. R. Haldeman, his chief of staff. "It's helpful
because while it has some things in there that, ah, we prefer we wouldn't have
said, we also have some things in there that we know . . . were pretty good, I
mean."

In that discussion, Mr. Nixon concluded that private discussions of the
Watergate affair recorded to that date would not significantly damage him
politically should they become public.

Concern About Watergate

The President expressed concern about a conversation the previous month with his
White House counsel, John W. Dean 3d, in which Mr. Dean had warned him that the
Watergate burglars were demanding "hush money" to conceal the White House's role
in the break-in, but Mr. Nixon added that the tape offered no evidence that he
had approved such a payment.

" 'This is wrong,' and, ah, 'blackmail,' and 'how much is this gonna cost,' and
so forth and so on,' " Mr. Nixon said, recounting his own statements in the talk
with Mr. Dean. "Then, on the other hand, I said, 'Well, we could get that, but
how would you handle it.' "

Mr. Haldeman replied: "If that all comes out, it's, it's another hard thing to
explain but I think it's explainable."

Mr. Nixon appears to have overlooked the so-called "smoking gun" tape of nearly
a year earlier, in which he agreed on June 23, 1972, to ask the Central
Intelligence Agency to block an F.B.I. investigation of the Watergate burglary.

That conversation and a second discussion on March 22, 1973 -- in which Mr.
Nixon told Attorney General Mitchell that he wanted his aides to stonewall it,
plead the Fifth Amendment, cover up or anything else" -- are widely regarded as
the evidence that ended Mr. Nixon's Presidency.

Tapes Led to Impeachment

All the tapes released today were obtained under subpoena by the Watergate
special prosecutor in 1974 after a legal battle that went to the Supreme Court.
They provided evidence that led the House Judiciary Committee to begin Mr.
Nixon's impeachment, and they secured criminal convictions of his two top White
House advisers, Mr. Haldeman and John D. Ehrlichman, and of Mr. Mitchell.

All but about 28 hours of the conversations had already been released during the
Watergate trials, Congressional hearings or the impeachment proceedings. Among
other information, those conversations revealed a criminal conspiracy to cover
up the Watergate burglary and other abuses of power by Mr. Nixon and his staff.

News agencies reviewing the new transcripts today found no such bombshells,
presumably because investigators released the most explosive material years ago.
Parts of some conversations released in full for the first time today had
already appeared in books or press accounts.

National Archives experts are cataloging and transcribing thousands of hours of
remaining conversations, which will be released over time, but years will pass
before all become public, the archives' spokeswoman, Jill D. Brett, said today.

The 1974 law governing the release of the tapes and other Nixon papers orders
that they be made public "at the earliest reasonable date." In fact, legal
battles and required reviews of the material by Mr. Nixon and other figures of
his Administration have repeatedly delayed the process, Ms. Brett said.

Mr. Nixon did not contest the release of the latest transcripts, she said. Mr.
Nixon's lawyer has previously said his client would not contest the release of
transcripts relating to the Watergate affair.

The tapes can be heard and the transcripts read at the National Archives' Nixon
Project offices in Alexandria, Va., a Washington suburb.

NAME: Richard M. Nixon

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard M. Nixon, whose conversations on tapes he secretly
recorded while President were made public yesterday by the National Archives.
(Eddie Hausner/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Sports of The Times;
The Champ Takes a Bus Into Past

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 785 words

DATELINE: DEER LAKE, Pa.


HE dozed for much of the ride, sitting in the next-to-last seat of the chartered
bus. Around him, his old friends and his old riders gabbed away, telling stories
of the past and present. For most of this bus ride, Muhammad Ali was the most
tranquil of passengers, but he was also the reason 50 people were riding from
New York on a cool spring morning.

They were taking a bus ride down memory lane, also known as Interstate 78,
toward his old training camp, for a day in the country, amidst memories, most of
them expressed by others.

Finally he woke up, or rather, he was awakened by his old friend, Howard
Bingham, tickling his ear with a wisp of paper. Some of us would wake up in
anger at being tickled, but Ali woke up smiling, his face breaking into a puffy
smile that was still pretty after all these years.

"Where'd you learn that trick?" somebody asked. The companion-photographer of a
thousand trips nodded toward the champion. This was Ali's old trick, flicking
the ears of sleeping passengers. But he can take it in return. Now he was awake,
vaguely interested in the chatter around him, people talking of books and
politics and what they did last weekend. The champ listened or did not listen.
His smile was tender.

"Hard to believe it's 10 years since my last fight," he said, referring to the
loss to Trevor Berbick at the end of 1981.

Hard to believe this slow-moving, slow-talking man ever fought. Hard to believe
he ever danced in the ring and strutted in the boulevards of thousands of towns,
boxing and talking, floating like a butterfly, stinging like a bee.

"There's little kids who weren't born when I was champ," Ali said, his speech
becoming more distinct as he saw a camera or two in the aisle of the bus. "They
see me, they say, 'Ali! Ali! Ali!' "

The writers and the camera crews were on this jaunt as part of the publication
of a new biography, "Muhammad Ali," written by Thomas Hauser with the
cooperation of Ali and published by Simon & Schuster.

The book is a massive collection of research and anecdotes and opinions about
Ali, woven together carefully by the author. Because of his stake in the book,
Ali encouraged all of the people in his life to talk openly about him. Almost
all of them, including several old companions on the bus, talked about his
strengths and his weaknesses, his philandering or his cruelty to Joe Frazier,
but they also talked of how he galvanized the pride of blacks and Muslims and
also the young and old who protested the war in Vietnam.

What also comes through in the book is Ali's physical deterioration. He allowed
his doctors to discuss the condition called Parkinson's Syndrome, motor damage
attributed to trauma.

Let's see. Was it the time he bumped his head on the dashboard? Or was it the
time he stumbled over his suitcase in the dark? Or maybe it was 20 years of
boxing.

Whatever. The doctors note that Ali is in relatively good shape, except for the
motor damage, and he is portrayed as being pretty much the Ali he used to be --
that is, observant, mystical, compassionate, behind the slow motion, the slurred
speech, the puffy face.

The smile became even prettier as the bus pulled off the main highway and
climbed a steep hill to the camp, a dozen log cabins, now leased to a private
charity.

The bus was greeted by Muslim supporters, and Ali shook hands, talking of racial
tolerance, walking around the camp in the clear sunlight, remembering when he
had trained here.

One sad part of the pilgrimage is that Bundini Brown, Ali's foil and
cheerleader, died a few years ago, and recently Lana Shabazz and Harold Conrad
passed away. Conrad was the publicist who had the unenviable task of meeting
Belinda Ali at the Manila Airport after she had gotten word that her husband was
escorting Veronica Porche to receptions with President Marcos. Shabazz was the
cook and conscience of the Ali entourage, who never stopped warning Ali to eat
his vegetables and behave himself.

But that is history. Yesterday, Ali was accompanied by his fourth wife, Lonnie,
a bright and gentle woman with a couple of college degrees who is, his friends
all say, the best thing that could have happened to him in his old age, at 49.

For a few moments, the years rolled away. Photographers led Ali to the large
boulders with names like Louis and Frazier painted on them. They posed him atop
the boulder with the name Sonny Liston painted on it. Instinctively, he cocked
his fists and crouched menacingly over the boulder, the way he did that night
when Liston refused to fight, and the young champion shouted "Get up, you
chump." The boulder, too, stayed down, and Ali raised his fists triumphantly,
still champion of his own world.

NAME: Muhammad Ali

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Muhammad Ali (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 6, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

5 Publishers Are Seeking Schwarzkopf's Autobiography

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 361 words


Five publishing houses -- Bantam, HarperCollins, Alfred A. Knopf, William Morrow
& Company and Random House -- have each bid $2.5 million to $5 million for the
life story of Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, sources in the publishing business
have said. The amounts bid depend on the rights the publishers seek. But even
those amounts are likely to rise, since the "finalists," as one publisher in the
running called the five houses, are reworking their bids to resubmit by
tomorrow.

The wide difference in bids results from the fact that General Schwarzkopf's
agent, Marvin Josephson, invited three types of bids, for world rights,
English-language rights (which includes the United Kingdom and Australia) or
North American rights.

The $5 million bids, reportedly from Bantam, Knopf and Random House, are for
world rights, which would allow the winning publishing house to sell the rights
to foreign publishers.

While the amount paid for total world rights does not often exceed North
American rights on a big book, because of the size of the United States market
alone, it sometimes happens. One example is "Scarlett: The Sequel to Margaret
Mitchell's Gone With the Wind," by Alexandra Ripley, for which Warner Books paid
$5 million for North American rights and for which foreign publishers have since
paid slightly more. HarperCollins and Morrow bid for lesser rights, sources
said.

Predicting an Acceptance

Mr. Josephson would not discuss the amount of the bids, but said General
Schwarzkopf, who met with the publishers last weekend, would probably accept an
offer "fairly soon."

General Schwarzkopf plans to retire in August, Mr. Josephson said, and he will
not begin work on the book until he is a civilian. "Even when he was in New York
this past weekend to meet the publishers," the agent said, "he took leave of the
Army for Saturday and Sunday."

Though the Schwarzkopf book is to recount the general's military career, "It's
not going to be a military history," Mr. Josephson said. The book will have a
section describing the transformation of the United States military from the
Vietnam War to the Persian Gulf war, he added.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 6, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Sara Vogan, 43, Dies; Novelist and Teacher

SECTION: Section D; Page 25; Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 141 words


Sara Vogan, a novelist and teacher of creative writing, was found dead on May 17
at her home in San Francisco.  She was 43 years old.

The cause of Ms. Vogan's death has not yet been determined, pending toxicology
reports, the coroner's office in San Francisco said.

As a novelist, Ms. Vogan was best known for her portrayal of troubled people and
their relationships. Her characters ranged from Vietnam War veterans to people
with AIDS. Her most recent novel, "Blueprints," was published last year by
Bantam Books. She was also the author of "Loss of Flight" (1989), "Scenes From
the Homefront" (1987), which is a collection of her short stories, and "In
Shelly's Leg" (1981).

Ms. Vogan, who was a member of the Bay Area Writers Workshop, taught creative
writing at the University of Oregon.

There are no immediate survivors.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 12, 1991, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

An obituary on Thursday about Sara Vogan, a novelist and teacher of creative
writing, omitted her survivors. They are her parents, James and Bette Vogan, of
Sun City, Fla.; a brother, Ritch Vogan, of Atlanta, and two sisters, Sheryl
Haber, of Pittsburgh, and Jamie Gillie, of Los Angeles.


TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Plan for Boat People Cheers Hong Kong

BYLINE: By SHERYL WuDUNN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 683 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, June 6


When the boat people from Vietnam started pouring in again in recent months, the
prospects for resolving a problem that had haunted this territory for years
seemed grim. But a more accommodating attitude by the United States has now
given Hong Kong hope that it will not always be burdened by unwanted refugees.

The United States Government agreed on Wednesday to back the "non-voluntary"
return of boat people to special camps in Vietnam, as long as the camps were
managed by an international organization like the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. That was a breakthrough because the United States has
always opposed forcible repatriation of the boat people.

Partly because of the United States view, Vietnamese refugees in Hong Kong
normally have not been sent back to Vietnam against their will. The number of
refugees is rising daily, and many have no realistic hope of resettlement in the
West. Many people in Hong Kong favor forcing the boat people to go home just as
illegal immigrants in China are forced to go back.

American officials still say the proposal does not violate their position,
mainly because they contend the centers in Vietnam, as envisioned, would be
distinct from the Vietnam Government. Nonetheless, the new backing could mean
that Hong Kong's more than 50,000 asylum seekers, who are unlikely to be given
refugee status, could be returned to Vietnam.

'A Positive Step'



"We welcome this as a positive step toward resolving this very difficult problem
we've faced for 16 years," said Clinton E. Leeks, refugee coordinator for the
Hong Kong government. "It's not a solution in itself, but it is a step toward
achieving one."

The proposal, jointly sponsored by the United States, Britain and Hong Kong,
must be presented to the Vietnam Government, and it is not clear what the
reaction will be. Vietnam has consistently maintained that it will not accept
Vietnamese people who are returned against their will. But it has also hinted it
might be responsive to the idea of being host to internationally run camps, a
refugee official said.

So far this year, 9,345 Vietnamese have sailed illegally into Hong Kong, nearly
a third more than the number that arrived in all of last year. In May, 5,116
Vietnamese escaped to Hong Kong, and so far 748 new asylum seekers have arrived
in June. At that rate, this year may see more than 20,000 Vietnamese fleeing to
Hong Kong.

All asylum seekers arriving here are taken to camps where they are interviewed
and screened for refugee status. The process is long, and in the meantime the
Hong Kong government spends millions of dollars housing, feeding and caring for
them. More than 58,000 Vietnamese -- fewer than 7,000 of whom have been accepted
as legitimate political refugees -- now live in crowded, makeshift, often
squalid camps.

Extent of Force Is Unclear

But the majority of escapees from Vietnam appear not to be eluding persecution,
but simply to be searching for a better life, say refugee officials from Hong
Kong and the United States. But they have refused to go back under the existing
voluntary repatriation scheme, and that suggests they will resist the new
proposal.

"Why would they go back to a holding center in Vietnam instead of being detained
in Hong Kong?" Kingsley H. Y. Sit, a Hong Kong legislator, said.

Officials always speak of "voluntary" or "non-voluntary" repatriation, and it is
unclear to what extent force will now be used. One official said it remained to
be discussed whether the Vietnamese people would be dragged onto planes or boats
to go home.

One reason for the inflow cited by refugee officials is a proposal by
Representative Robert K. Dornan, a California Republican. He suggested in a
letter to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d in mid-March that Vietnamese
refugees be resettled in Kuwait to help rebuild the country.

Although American officials immediately rejected the suggestion, Mr. Dornan's
plan was carried over Vietnamese-language Voice of America, and the prospects of
being resettled in Kuwait spread like fire through Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WHY LOVE A PARADE?;
The Things We Celebrate

SECTION: Section A; Page 34; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 479 words


The grunts knew the weight of every item they carried as they slogged on patrol
through the jungles of Vietnam. But as Tim O'Brien wrote in his book of stories,
"The Things They Carried," they also bore more terrible weight:

For the most part they carried themselves with poise, a kind of dignity. Now and
then, however, there were times of panic, when they squealed or . . . flopped
around on the earth and fired their weapons blindly and cringed and sobbed and
begged for the noise to stop and went wild and made stupid promises to
themselves and to God and to their mothers and fathers, hoping not to die.

For many Vietnam veterans, those patrols were the closest they got to parades.
They came home to an America too bitter to give even its gratitude. Even now,
angry voices rail against the gulf homecomings as shameful celebrations of
militarism. Seattle has canceled its parade, and elsewhere, people twist
uncomfortably at the anticlimax; the lack of proportion; the political
coloration.

Yet there are things to celebrate here, proper gratitude to express and justice
to be done -- to two generations of young Americans.

Four days: That's all the ground war lasted in Iraq. It was followed by
spontaneous joy across the country. Parades 100 days later seem inescapably
stale. And to veterans of four years of grinding combat in World War II, so much
fuss for four days seems wildly out of scale. Nor has this war turned out as
unambiguously, what with the frantic flight of Kurds by the million, the death
of Iraqis by the tens of thousands and the horror of hundreds of burning oil
wells in Kuwait.

The same queasiness arises in response to simplistic sentiments celebrating
America "standing tall." When the pre-eminent power in the world, supported by
the world, defeats a third-rate power, only bullies can brag. And yet there will
be much to honor when the troops march in Washington tomorrow, through the paper
blizzard in New York Monday and in 300 communities later.

Many people will celebrate precisely that the U.S. did not behave like a bully
in Iraq but fought only with international support, against brutal aggression
and threats to vital energy interests. Others will celebrate the training and
proficiency of America's fighting forces, and the excellence of their vaunted
high-tech weapons.

All Americans owe honor and gratitude, above all, to the 266 who died in the
gulf -- and the thousands of others ready to sacrifice their lives had it not,
thankfully, ended so quickly.

And embedded in that gratitude, another reason resonates: the need, finally, to
make up for the surly silence and scorn Vietnam veterans found on their return.

"A true war story is never about war," Tim O'Brien wrote. ". . . It's about love
and memory. It's about sorrow. It's about sisters who never write back and
people who never listen."


LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

EDITORIAL NOTEBOOK;
TV Executions: Trite Overnight

BYLINE: By BRENT STAPLES

SECTION: Section A; Page 34; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 537 words


The California public television station that sued for the right to film the
state's executions used practical First Amendment arguments to make its case.
But the station, KQED of San Francisco, turned to myth for the claim that
television images of state-inflicted death would have more value than words
alone.

Broadcast images are disposable. The more dramatic they are, the more they are
shown, the quicker their impact is exhausted. The first gas chamber death would
shock. The third would be familiar. A dozen times, and it would be no more
compelling than wallpaper. The film of Los Angeles policemen bludgeoning a
helpless victim will transform itself in just this way.

America's disaffection with Vietnam ("the television war") is frequently cited
as proof that visual images can persuade all by themselves. Susan Sontag
punctures this claim in "On Photography," her essay on pictures in modern
intellectual life. Ms. Sontag writes that American misgivings about the war
preceded the visual images and induced journalists to seek the disturbing
pictures.

Ms. Sontag argues convincingly that photographs have no moral effect unless the
prevailing politics has made the events themselves abhorrent. Without the
relevant politics, she writes, pictures from even "the slaughter-bench of
history" will slip by in the stream of disposable images, increasing tolerance
for horror as they pass.

Inflated claims about the power of pictures have been with us since Louis
Daguerre invented and popularized his method of photography in mid-19th-century
France. In a prospectus sent to potential backers, he contended that a portrait
in daguerreotype was no less than a copy of the self itself -- a pitch that
could be read to say that written descriptions were no longer necessary.

Writers were famously disimpressed. Baudelaire scorned photography as cheap
sleight of hand that encouraged contempt for history. Proust found pictures
superficial compared with the images in his head. Henry James captured the
essence of the writers' complaint when he spoke of the "fatal futility of Fact."
Raw facts were a skeleton; writers provided flesh, form and breath.

The poems of Baudelaire and the novels of Proust and James still claim enormous
readership. The photographs that seemed for a moment to threaten them have
disappeared into the ash heaps of time. The writers have won, though the victory
is tenuous. Illiteracy flourishes. Nonreaders turn to television because they
have no choice.

KQED is right to insist on First Amendment protection for its cameras. But the
station is naive to suggest that broadcast executions would be anything more
than background noise after a few exposures. The claim that the camera is the
true and only perfect witness is as fallacious today as it was in the 19th
century. The irony is that KQED's glib picture chauvinism is cloaked in an
appeal to the Constitution, one of the more robust examples of written language
that we have.

When KQED and the state go at it in a San Francisco courtroom today, the two
sides will duel in mere words, too. Pictures can be astounding. But when
reasoning is the task at hand, it's the thousand words, not the picture, that
carry the day.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 8, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

About New York

BYLINE: By By Douglas Martin

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 790 words


Luis Ibarra Weber is one of around 100 homeless veterans expected to march in
Monday's parade. He feels comradeship with the returning warriors, pride,
gratitude and something darker.

"I am very jealous," he said. "Nothing against the guys, but the enemy we
fought, fought back."

Mr. Weber complains that Korean War veterans never received anything like this
civic outpouring. The slight, 58-year-old man remembers the butchery of Pork
Chop Hill, considering those who died there "very lucky." Each night, he sees
men he killed standing at the foot of his bed, staring.

Mr. Weber has never really recovered from the breakdown he suffered after Pork
Chop Hill, one that put him in and out of mental hospitals for years. He has
repeatedly been offered the benefits coming from being classified as a totally
disabled veteran, but has just as repeatedly turned them down. He wants an
apology from the United States Government instead.

But there is, ultimately, nothing for which Uncle Sam can apologize. Mr. Weber
joined the military, his country went to war and he did the gruesome things
combat soldiers have to do. War, more than love, is never having to say you're
sorry.

These days, Mr. Weber lives with 400 other men at the Salvation Army Borden
Avenue Veterans Residence in Long Island City, Queens. After the Army, he
followed a slippery downhill path to homelessness, something that has happened
to some veterans since the Revolutionary War.

Fully a third of today's homeless men in New York City are thought to be
veterans. Though it is clearly wrong to blame the military for the plight of
many, there still somehow seems a broken promise -- the intangible agreement
that service will be rewarded.

"Once you take your uniform off, the country seems to forget you," said Alfred
Peck, director of the residence.

That is a depressingly easy statement to document: during the Reagan years, even
as military spending spiraled upward, the Veterans Administration budget was
repeatedly cut. Now, Mr. Peck -- who won a Purple Heart in Vietnam -- charges
that the military is racing to de-activate reservists before they become
eligible for benefits.

So far, Mr. Peck says only two veterans of the Persion Gulf war have turned up
at the shelter. One of the reservists returned to find that his parents, with
whom he shared an apartment, were gone, leaving no word. He has already found
another home. The other is doing well at the shelter, having landed a job as a
parking lot attendant.

But over time, Mr. Peck is certain that some of Monday's heroes will shuffle
through the front door of the nondescript building that was once a tie factory.
They will sign contracts promising to follow rules and pursue needed therapy,
and will sleep in open dormitories. And, as many have done before, some will
patch up tattered lives and be guided toward a real future.

Even though the war was so short, Mr. Peck fears many will battle the same
post-traumatic stress disorder first diagnosed in Vietnam veterans. Symptoms
include flashbacks, rage and guilt. He suspects just wearing protective suits
against poison gas was traumatic, and wonders about the psychological effect of
pushing Iraqi bodies around with bulldozers as part of the cleanup.

The veterans in the shelter carry many emotions in their psychological duffle
bags. Most are pleased that Gulf war returnees are being honored, though some
are too shy to march. Not a few consider military service the best time of their
lives. Others blame the service for all their problems.

Some question the presence in the parade of tanks and other military hardware.
Many harbor powerful worries about the victorious veterans after the tumult and
shouting die.

"The Government is finally making an attempt to do something right," said Jerry
Saunders, a sniper in Vietnam who says he has "been working on hitting bottom"
since his wife died in 1984.

"They're coming home more like heroes than criminals, and that's good for them,"
said George Morris, who isn't sure why he ended up living in a homeless shelter.

"I don't feel there's too much of anything out there for them," said Carlton
Garrett, who lost all memory of eight months of his life after his patrol boat
exploded on the Mekong River. "What's going to happen in September?"

"The Army takes your youth and after that, they don't need you no more," said
Frank Jones, who served three hitches because he could find no jobs at home.

"They gonna get the shaft," said Winston Burnette, a Vietnam-era veteran.

Mr. Weber, for all his bitterness, prays that things might be kinder for
America's newest war veterans. "Take care of these guys," he said fervently. "I
don't want them to go through the same stuff."

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 8, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Extravaganza On Mall Hails Troops Today

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 465 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 7


Swarms of attack helicopters, jets and missiles nested today along the milelong
Mall, where hundreds of thousands of people protested the Vietnam War 20 years
ago, as this city primped for a Desert Storm celebratory parade that may set
local records for size and cost.

The festivities are expected to attract 600,000 to 1.4 million spectators and
will have cost at least $12 million when they end with a bang, on Saturday
evening, with a huge fireworks display, organizers said.

The Pentagon said today that it would pay about $7 million of the bill.
Government contractors, Middle Eastern governments and other concerns that
benefit from the publicity and political glamour have already given $4.5 million
and are expected to provide another $700,000, according to the Desert Storm
Homecoming Foundation, which is organizing the event.

The foundation represents 20 major veterans' organizations that banded together
in April to prepare a national celebration for American troops returning from
the Persian Gulf.

Bush to Review Troops

On Saturday, after a morning wreath-laying ceremony at Arlington National
Cemetery, President Bush and 250 dignitaries will watch from a bulletproof
reviewing stand as bands play, 8,800 troops strut down Constitution Avenue and
80 military aircraft zoom overhead.

Today, the armed services and the Coast Guard converted the grassy Mall into a
sprawling military staging area secured by Persian Gulf veterans, bedecked in
sand-colored camouflage, who touted their armor to agog tourists and office
workers.

Beneath banners proclaiming the Festival of American Folklife, a Smithsonian
Institution exhibit whose Mall preparations were pre-empted by the parade, sat
batteries of Patriot missiles from Fort Bliss, Tex., Air Force jets from South
Carolina, and sleek Apache, Chinook and Cobra helicopters from several branches
of the military.

To the dismay of the Secret Service, Mr. Bush paid an impromptu visit to the
site this morning, stepping out of his motorcade on the way to the White House
to gander at an exhibit of a combat engineering vehicle. He was immediately
mobbed by onlookers.

"It's good for America," the President said of the events.

While the crowds on the Mall seemed to agree, there was some dissent. Antiwar
groups planned demonstrations today at Lafayette Square, across from the White
House, and elsewhere to protest what they called a "celebration of death" in
Iraq.

In Washington, the Rev. Jesse Jackson criticized the celebration in a speech to
the Rainbow Coalition, his political lobby, saying the Gulf war was fought
"basically with public-school children" and foreign technology. "It's right to
love the troops," he said, "but the moral way is to love the troops when they
are no longer troops."

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Spectators gathered around a Harrier jump jet on the Mall, which
was converted into a military staging area in preparation for the parade. (Darcy
Padilla for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 8, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Reporter Was There

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 125 words


To the Editor:

We were participants in the media seminar on Vietnam at the Naval War College in
Newport, R.I., in November 1972. Lewis Lapham (letter, May 25) has disputed
David Halberstam's recollection (letter, May 18) of Mr. Lapham's remarks and
demeanor at the seminar and claimed Mr. Halberstam was not present.

Mr. Halberstam was. We both recall that Mr. Lapham referred to the reporters in
Vietnam as "magpies" and advised the officers in the audience not to take the
press too seriously, as their competence was minimal. David Halberstam is
perfectly correct in his description of Lewis Lapham's mocking remarks and his
ingratiating demeanor on the day in question.

SEYMOUR M. HERSH
GLORIA EMERSON
Washington, May 29, 1991

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART VIEW;
In Two Cities, Asian Art Comes Out of the Cellar

BYLINE: By John Russell

SECTION: Section 2; Page 31; Column 3; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1763 words


There is a fantasy, widespread in almost every developed nation, that beneath
every major museum there are cellars packed with masterpieces that no one gets
to see.

Though usually without substance, this fantasy has lately turned out to be true
of two very considerable museums. One of them is the Musee Guimet in Paris,
which, for more than 100 years, has been a flagship for the study of Asian art
at the highest level. The other is a major miscellaneous museum, the Walters Art
Gallery in Baltimore, which in relation to its available spaces has always been
almost unmanageably rich in Chinese and Japanese art.

In April the Guimet opened a stately new annex at 19 Avenue d'Iena, just a few
yards down the road from 6 Place d'Iena, where the museum itself has stood since
1889. Last month the Walters opened a new annex for Chinese and Japanese art in
a Greek Revival town house at No. 1 Mount Vernon Place in Baltimore. Built in
1850 and admired then and since as an emblem of "the chastest Corinthian style,"
the house is now linked by a walkway to the existing Walters Gallery.

In both cases, virtually all the art on view has been in storage for many years.
The two annexes also have it in common that they occupy town houses built with a
purely domestic purpose. From that point onwards, they could not be more
different.

The Guimet annex has a sharp single focus. Devoted to the Buddhist pantheon as
it was envisioned in China and Japan, it is the "museum of religion" that its
founder, Emile Guimet (1836-1918), always longed for. The tone throughout is
august. At every turn, figures of divine or near-divine status confront us.
(Looking at the twinned white foxes that guarded Inari, divinity of the rice
fields, we can believe that they too have supernatural power.) In the Guimet
annex, there is hardly a glance at day-to-day life on earth, with its pleasures
and its pains.

Monkish thoughts and monkish manners are very much at home in the Guimet annex,
and we can understand the delight and the awe with which it was studied last
month by the group of high-level holy men who came expressly from Japan to see
it. Somewhere along the tour we almost expect to meet the high-minded figure of
Emile Guimet himself in his custom-built morning coat, with its black silk
facings and the scarlet rosette of his Legion of Honor.

In the Walters annex, where the curator in charge, Hiram W. Woodward Jr., is now
able to display roughly one in seven of 6,500 available objects, there is no
such single focus. The tone is that of a gifted raconteur who never lets a story
go on too long. Religion, though given its due, is by no means at center stage.
The pleasures of the house, the table, the wine beaker, the taking of tea, the
incense game, the armory of cosmetics, the scrolled paintings and the sixfold
painted screen -- all have their place.

From one floor to the next at the Walters, we are whisked along through more
than 3,000 years. From the Bronze Age in China in the 12th century B.C. to the
virtuosic perversions of Japanese craftsmanship just before 1914, we are kept
keenly alert. Buddhism is there -- how could it not be? -- and it is represented
at the outset by a superb head of the Buddha, made in Mathura in northern India,
around the second century A.D. From China, under the Sui or T'ang dynasty in the
seventh century, there is a carved wooden figure of the Buddha, lacquered and
painted, that is apparently the oldest piece of its kind to have survived.

And then in 1979 a local collector, Alexander B. Griswold, gave the Walters the
two seated figures of Buddha, made in Thailand in the 14th and 15th centuries,
that might almost be mistaken for honored guests from the Guimet Museum. They
are installed facing east, by the way, so that the early sun shines on them
directly, just as it did through the eastern entrance door of the temples for
which they were made.

But the Walters annex is basically a wide-ranging, digestible miscellany that
was put together by a father and son, William and Henry Walters. Whereas Guimet
made the 23-day journey by sea to Japan in a state of ever greater exaltation,
father and son in the Walters family liked to buy in bulk from international
exhibitions. In London, Vienna, Philadelphia, St. Louis, San Francisco and at
the Louisiana Purchase exhibition of 1904, one or both of them were active.

In his first 22 years as a collector William Walters bought around 4,100 Chinese
and Japanese objects. He didn't stop, either, and Henry was to be every bit as
acquisitive.

As a result, there is something for every conceivable taste. There is a
wonderfully peremptory head (China, T'ang dynasty) of one of the four heavenly
kings who lived halfway up the mountain in the center of our world and guarded
the four directions of space.

But the Rabelaisian figure of the elephant-headed Hindu god Ganesh is also
welcomed. So are the four reclusive statesmen who figure in a hand-scrolled
painting that dates from the Ming dynasty in China. There is the celebrated
"peach bloom vase" from the early 18th century that William Walters bought for a
record price at auction in New York in 1886.

There are teapots, vases and a sixfold Japanese screen of the Edo period. At one
point the visitor is reminded of the effect upon the Japanese porcelain industry
in 1659 of an order from the Dutch East India Company for 69,858 pieces. As for
the worldly and luxurious art of porcelain as it reached apotheosis during the
Ch'ing dynasty in China in the first years of the 18th century, it would be hard
to improve upon the vases in the Walters annex.

Equally, the Chinese porcelains in their French 18th-century gilt-bronze mounts
are in the secular domain what the Guimet annex is in the domain of divinity --
among the best and the finest. Elsewhere as we draw nearer to our own century,
it has to be said that the Japanese contribution eventually goes steeply
downhill.

In a display that is so rich in great sculptures from the past, there should be
no room for the pseudo-Western wooden figure of a schoolgirl, dated 1914, that
was bought from the Panama-Pacific show in San Francisco in 1915. As for the
minutely naturalistic reliefs that were carved with manic and yearlong
persistence into the noble form of the elephant tusk, they should be written off
as an insult to the elephant.

What is needed at that point in the tour is for the raging Japanese lion of the
13th or 14th century -- one of the high points of the tour -- to breathe fire
upon those who made, and those who bought, the objects in question.

Throughout, objects no matter how heterogeneous are displayed with a light hand,
a refusal to overload and a technological finesse so perfect as to escape
notice. In what other museum is the flecked white linen of the backgrounds, here
and there, matched exactly by the flecked white paper of the labels?

Yet what we are asked to admire is not the ingenuity of the two staff members,
Dina Picken and Wayne Johnson, who had these ideas and carried them out. It is
the art itself, perfectly shown and visible without effort, when need be, from
no matter what angle. These are people who can show us an everyday ear pick and
make it look like the most beautiful thing we have ever seen.

In Baltimore, as in Paris, we are presented with what is virtually a new museum
of a high order. How is it possible, the visitor may ask, that work of this
quality should have been in storage for 50, 60 or 70 years?

As to that, the two annexes have nothing in common. After the death of Emile
Guimet in 1918, the museum that bore his name took on a new character. What he
had bought, cherished and given was gradually put into store.

This is not because it was thought to be inferior. (Andre Malraux was astounded
by the collection when, as French Minister of Culture, he saw it in storage in
1953.) Two quite other reasons lay behind it. One was that the idea of a museum
of religion was out of favor in the anticlerical atmosphere of Third Republican
France. In the 1920's and 1930's, few people shared Guimet's belief that the
industrial proletariat would be exalted and purified by contact with the
Buddhist pantheon.

The second reason was that those were the glory years of French archeological
missions. Finds from Cambodia, Vietnam, Java, Thailand, Laos, Nepal, Tibet,
Afghanistan, Korea and Central Asia were allocated to the Guimet, which in 1945
became the National Museum of Asian Art. As for India, China and Japan, they
were represented in an all-inclusive way that had not been a part of Emile
Guimet's ambitions. Something had to go, and that something was Guimet's
original ambition.

That it is now back in place is owed above all to Bernard Frank, professor at
the College de France, to Jean-Francois Jarrige, director of the Musee Guimet
since 1987, and to Jack Lang, the French minister of culture. Mr. Frank put the
case for the art in question as an indispensable element in the history of
humankind. Mr. Jarrige put the case for its primordial role in the Guimet's
collections. No. 19 Avenue d'Iena was on the market. Mr. Lang came. He saw. And
he said, "Go ahead." In this way amends were made to Emile Guimet.

The Walters Art Gallery has been getting bigger and better for quite some years,
but nothing like the present concentration of Chinese and Japanese objects had
been possible before. In the lifetime of the two donors, the Asian collections
were badly lighted, badly shown, and massed as if at a tag sale in almost
laughable conditions of crowding and irrationality.

As happened with the Musee Guimet, the perfect house came on the market. An
integral part of one of the most distinguished townscapes in the United States,
it stood only a few paces from the existing Walters Gallery. Two local
philanthropists, Mr. and Mrs. William Hackerman, bought the house, which now
bears their name, and gave it to the city. When the mayor of Baltimore asked for
ideas as to its future use, the Walters proposal carried the day.

It was the happiest of outcomes. The art was already there. The museum knew
exactly what to do with it. In room after room, the objects dance a duet with a
mid-19th-century interior that has been coaxed back to something like its
original self. As a large and eager public moves unhurriedly and with evident
pleasure from space to space, it is clear that under its present director,
Robert Bergman, the Walters Art Gallery has moved up one more notch in the
hierarchy of American museums.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A seventh-century stone head of a "heavenly king," from the
T'ang dynasty (Walters Art Gallery) (pg. 31); detail of a monkey on a
late-19th-century Japanese vase carved from an elephant tusk--an insult to the
elephant (Walters Art Gallery); a Japanese wooden lion of the 13th or 14th
century--a high point at the Walters annex (Walters Art Gallery)


                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
Bidding Adieu to the Classic French Film

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 15; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2164 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Three American film critics, stopping off here after the Cannes International
Film Festival, rushed first not to the Louvre, the Musee d'Orsay or the Pompidou
Center, but to a tiny movie theater in the Rue Champollion near the Sorbonne.
The attraction: "Hellzapoppin," the manic 1941 film adaptation of the Ole
Olsen-Chic Johnson Broadway show. Their explanation: you can't find
"Hellzapoppin" at home.

Paris is still Paris, the greatest moviegoing city in the world, where lost
movies are found even when you're not looking for them.  In this one week, Paris
theaters are offering more than 350 different films, everything from "Alexander
Nevsky" and "Salo, or the 120 Days of Sodom" to "Hairspray," "The Rules of the
Game" and retrospectives devoted to, among others, the Central Asian cinema of
the Soviet Union and Gerard Philippe.

Movie theater admissions, which plummeted in the 1980's, have started to climb
back. Though the market is still dominated by Hollywood, there has been an
increase in the number of French films being released.

Times seem good, but they aren't the good old days. The film world is in the
midst of radical, quite heady changes, many of them originating here.

While queues are forming for the new Catherine Deneuve vehicle, "La Reine
Blanche" ("The White Queen"), and Oliver Stone's "Doors," Claude Berri, the
French director and producer, might be at his house in the Rue de Lille talking
business on the telephone with Spike Lee in the United States.  Warner Brothers,
it is said, is not happy with the size of the budget Mr. Lee wants for his
"Malcolm X." That extra money could be found in France.

At the same time Mr. Stone, now shooting "JFK" in America, could be conferring
with Arnon Milchan, who is producing "JFK" with the help of a large chunk of
French financing.

Movies have always been less a native folk art than a business, and how the
business goes dictates the shape of the folk art. As more French money goes into
films aimed at the international market, the character of French films will
inevitably change.

What's happening in France today could be even more important to film makers
around the world and to those of us who look at movies than the acquisition of
two major Hollywood studios, Universal and Columbia, by Japanese interests.

Marin Karmitz, one of France's most outspoken and independent film producers,
put it this way the other day. "It's significant," he said, "that the dominant
figure at this year's Cannes Film Festival was not Fellini or Godard or Bergman,
but Madonna, someone created entirely by television and video."

Mr. Karmitz was taking note of the recent emergence of two powerful new sources
of film financing here. Both have their roots in television and, in one way and
another, both stand to change the shape of film production not only in France
and Europe, but also in Hollywood.

The newcomers are Studio Canal-Plus, the production company formed by
Canal-Plus, France's hugely successful pay-television movie channel; and Ciby
2000, the production company owned by the very rich Francis Bouygues, who made
his fortune in construction and is the largest shareholder in France's most
popular TV station, TF-1.

Until now, Canal-Plus and TF-1 have had to scramble on the open market to
acquire the films they show. Henceforth they'll have access to their own movies.
New production money is welcome, but there are those who worry about the kinds
of film that will be made by companies whose initial impulse is to fill their
television libraries.

Further, the resources of Studio Canal-Plus and Ciby 2000 are such that,
combined with those of existing production companies here, they could form the
nucleus of a strong, cohesive European film-making bloc that will give American
producers a run for their money. To an extent, they already have.

Ciby 2000, which is opening an office in Los Angeles this month, has signed
multiple-picture deals with David Lynch, Isabelle Adjani and Pedro Almodovar.
Last week it agreed to provide 100 percent of the financing for a new Bernardo
Bertolucci epic about the life of Buddha. No one is talking about the amount of
money involved, but, it's assumed, Mr. Bouygues is the kind of man whose offers
aren't easily ignored.

Studio Canal-Plus has been even busier. It is a production partner in two films
that were highly regarded competitors at this year's Cannes festival: Krzysztof
Kieslowski's "Double Life of Veronica," a French-Polish co-production, and
Maurice Pialat's French film, "Van Gogh," a revisionist's view of the life of
the painter.

In addition, Studio Canal-Plus has signed an agreement with Warner Brothers to
make 20 films, produced by Mr. Milchan, over the next five years, one of the
first of these films being "JFK," with Kevin Costner.  Another is "The Mambo
Kings," directed by Arnold Glimcher, who is not exactly an auteur of
international repute yet, and starring Armand Assante, who is a good reliable
American actor.

The company is also an investor in "Terminator 2," the Arnold Schwarzenegger
movie that has become notorious for its alleged budget of $100 million.

"We have become gringos to the gringos," Mr. Karmitz said, referring to the way
that American film makers are now coming to France, hats in hand, to ask for
production money.

Mr. Karmitz is not entirely happy about the entrance of the well-heeled
television people into theatrical film production. He recalled that no
television financing was available when he was seeking investors to back Claude
Chabrol's screen adaptation of Gustave Flaubert's "Madame Bovary," one of
France's literary treasures.

"My wife doesn't like costume pictures, and I don't either," said one man as he
turned down the producer.

"Madame Bovary," with Isabelle Huppert playing Emma, is a stunning-looking
production now in the eighth week of its first-run engagement in Paris. Mr.
Karmitz was ultimately able to finance it by selling its distribution rights to
individual countries throughout the world.

"Even," he said, "South Korea," though he was uncertain whether the attraction
to the South Koreans was Flaubert or Huppert. The Samuel Goldwyn Company will be
releasing the film in the United States in November.

Mr. Karmitz's point: "Madame Bovary" would never have been made had the decision
been left to the television people.

Claude Berri, best known as the director of "Jean de Florette" and "Manon of the
Spring," is much more optimistic. He welcomes the availability of the television
money and doesn't fear that it will affect the content or look of the
quintessentially French movie that he himself makes.

Among other things, he says, Studio Canal-Plus needs French films to meet the
television quota, which decrees that 50 percent of all films shown be French and
10 percent European, while 40 percent is left for films from all other sources.
In practice, that means 40 percent American.

Yet, in these days of multinational co-productions, it's sometimes difficult to
tell whether a film is really French, German, Vietnamese, American or
what-have-you. An exemplary case in point is "The Double Life of Veronica,"
directed by Mr. Kieslowski, who is Polish, starring Irene Jacob, who is French
(and who won the best-actress prize at Cannes for her performance).

That the first third of the film was shot in Poland and the remainder in France
would seem to have been dictated by the screenplay. This is about the parallel
lives of two young women, one Polish and one French, both played by Miss Jacob,
and their mystical connection.

Yet the film's narrative shape could also have been dictated by a co-production
deal in which the French partners put up two-thirds of the financing and the
Polish partners one-third. In this kind of film making, the contract is the
muse.

I have no idea if this was true for "The Double Life of Veronica," but the film,
as intriguing as it is, looks to have been rather arbitrarily split between the
Polish sequences, by far the more successful, and the long French coda. The
film's feeling is far more Polish than French, though "The Double Life of
Veronica" will qualify as French under the local quota rules.

The biggest danger in all of this international wheeling and dealing is that
European movies, and possibly even American movies, will wind up looking
stateless, that is, uncharacterized by any nationality, much like the seminal,
mostly awful European co-productions of the 1960's.

This was a problem with Luc Besson's "Big Blue" ("Le Grand Bleu"), the
big-budget French adventure film, shot in English, which opened the 1988 Cannes
Film Festival. The movie was a grand hit in France (it's still playing here at
the Grand Pavois in the Rue Lecourbe), but flopped everywhere else. That it did
badly in the United States was a particular disappointment. The United States
market was one of the reasons it was made with an English-language soundtrack.

Mr. Besson has apparently learned his lesson. His new French film, "La Femme
Nikita," which mixes violent American action with French comedy, while all the
time speaking French, is on its way to becoming a hit in its first engagements
in the United States. With its spectacular gunplay, breathless pace and boutique
chic, it could be the prototype for the new pan-European film, which, until now,
has always been American.

For better and often for worse, the film that travels most easily from one
European country to the next has been the standard Hollywood genre film, most
recently the big-budget, special effects-loaded action dramas on the order of
the "Die Hard" movies. While Studio Canal-Plus put money in Mr. Pialat's "Van
Gogh," its hope for international success will be with "Terminator 2."

However it turns out, "Terminator 2" will be a real American action film, not
some scrawny, pan-European mock-up.

Two years ago, there was a rush here to shoot French films in English, to appeal
not only to American audiences but also to audiences in other countries in
Europe, Latin America and Asia, where English soundtracks are preferred.

That is no longer true, except for the most expensive films, including, at the
moment, two films that would appear to be quintessentially French in subject
matter and appeal: Jean-Jacques Annaud's "Amant" ("The Lover"), and Pierre
Schoendoerffer's "Dien Bien Phu," about the collapse of French colonial power in
what was then Indochina. Both films are now being shot in Vietnam.

In addition to directing his own films, Mr. Berri is also active as the producer
of his colleagues' films, including Roman Polanski's "Tess" and, more recently,
Milos Forman's "Valmont." It is Mr. Berri's company, Renne Productions, that is
producing "L'Amant," a $30 million adaptation of Marguerite Duras's piercing,
packed 117-page novella in which a ravaged older woman recalls her affair, at
the age of 15 1/2, with a rich 30-year-old Chinese man in Saigon.

"Dien Bien Phu," directed by the man who made the stunning "Crabe Tambour," is
budgeted at a reported $25 million. In view of the fact that the average French
film these days costs between $5 million and $6 million, both films might
qualify as French equivalents to "Terminator 2," at least in terms of their
budgets.

With or without television money, co-productions are here to stay, leading to a
continuing series of oddities in the films themselves.

Karen Chakhnazarov's "Assassin of the Czar," a fascinating Anglo-Russian
meditation on regicide, was shot in both Russian and English, though the version
shown at Cannes was Russian in order that the film might qualify as Russian.
Unfortunately, Malcolm McDowell, who gives a marvelous and mad performance as
the czar's assassin, speaks no Russian, and so was quite obviously dubbed for
the Cannes audience.

Marcello Mastroianni speaks dubbed Greek in Theo Angelopoulos's "Suspended Step
of the Stork," which was Greece's entry at the Cannes festival, while his
co-star, Jeanne Moreau, who plays the French wife of the Mastroianni character,
speaks only English. This is covered at one point by having Miss Moreau say
rather airily, "Oh, I never learned to speak Greek."

In the festival's Soviet-French co-production, "Anna Karamazova," Miss Moreau
speaks Russian, in a voice that actually seems to be her own. There is not,
however, a great deal of dialogue.

Pragmatic as always, the French have acknowledged that, in the privacy of their
homes, people sometimes do things that are not entirely nice or legal. They even
pirate the movies and sports events they watch on television. The solution: to
charge a two-franc tax for every hour of blank tape sold.

The film portion of this fund is then divided three ways among the producers,
the authors (the director, writer and composer) and the actors, according to a
formula relating to the number of times a film has been telecast. Last year the
kitty contained $100 million.

The French: pace setters in 1789, pace setters in 1991.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Bernard Giraudeau and Catherine Deneuve in "La Reine Blanche"
("The White Queen")--Lines are forming in Paris, where many of the radical,
quite heady changes in the film world are originating. (TF-1/Ciby 2000) (pg.
15); Maurice Pialat, left, directing a scene from "Van Gogh"--Studio Canal-Plus,
with money derived from France's successful pay-television movie channel, helped
finance this revisionist view of the painter (Erato Films); Jean Reno, left, and
Anne Parillaud in Luc Besson's "Femme Nikita"--perhaps the prototype for the new
pan-European film (Samuel Goldwyn Company) (pg. 32)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Will the Gulf War Produce Enduring Art?

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 22; Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1111 words


When on that great day in 1918 Americans and others celebrated the end of World
War I, they could not have known that the dreadful conflict was going to produce
great art -- the poems of Rupert Brooke, such films as "Grand Illusion," plays
like "What Price Glory?" and hundreds of other works.

Once again, Americans are celebrating. A traditional ticker-tape parade will be
held in New York tomorrow for the victors of the Persian Gulf war. But if this
war has produced a surge of national pride reminiscent of 1918 and 1945, there
is no guarantee that it will, like the Civil War, the two World Wars, and the
conflicts in Korea and Vietnam, produce a commensurate art.

It seems as though the gulf war, rapid and militarily successful as it was, fell
short of several of the ingredients that previous wars had in great quantities.
Happily, it lacked length. It lacked arduousness. It lacked the sense of
national anguish, disillusionment and painful self-scrutiny that inspired many
of the books and movies that emerged, in particular, from the Vietnam War. It
was a war so carefully scripted for television that it was in a way already a
movie. It's hard to imagine what a film maker could do that the war itself, and
previous movies, haven't done already.

"In a sense," said Oliver Stone, whose movies "Platoon" and "Born on the Fourth
of July" were two of several major films about the Vietnam War and its
aftermath, "Tom Cruise already did the Persian Gulf war in 'Top Gun.' "

Robert Stone, author of the novel "Dog Soldiers," also inspired by Vietnam,
said: "When I think of the cultural impact of the Persian Gulf war, what I end
up with literally is commercials on CNN, some of which became noticeably more
patriotic."

For a war shown 24 hours a day on television, the gulf war seems to have been
short of the sorts of scenes that have exercised imaginations in the past.

"In every other war," said John Eskow, a screenwriter whose credits include "Air
America," about the secret C.I.A. airline in Laos during the Vietnam War, "there
were dynamic central images that were almost like Jungian archetypes, from
Mathew Brady's photos in the Civil War to Iwo Jima in World War II, or that
naked Vietnamese girl in tears running away from an American bombing. This war's
image is of a smart bomb hitting a target, but that has no emotional
reverberation." He said that if a producer called him asking for a screenplay on
the gulf war, he would have no idea where to begin.

Perhaps among the soldiers fighting in the gulf there was some future Norman
Mailer or Joseph Heller or Oliver Stone, whose vision a decade or so from now
will transform "Desert Storm" into biting satire or transfixing drama, a "Naked
and the Dead" or a "Catch-22." One Hollywood publicity agent advised against
underestimating the entertainment world's ability to come up with something
salable to both advertisers and the television public -- a five-part
mini-series, say, on the life of Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf. But it would be
hard to see that in the same vein as works whose purpose was to depict human
beings and their dilemmas in the situation of ultimate intensity that war
creates. When the young Steven Crane wrote "The Red Badge of Courage," he was
doing for the Civil War what the young Ernest Hemingway did for World War I in
"A Farewell to Arms." They were both dramatizing conflicts between men and what
others were demanding of them.

What would there be to dramatize about the gulf war? Surely, as a battlefield
episode, America's latest war was scary, a crucible of experience for the men
and women who fought in it. Yet the war's push-button, long-distance nature
seems to have sucked it dry of the juice of human drama. Even with Vietnam,
nobody made a movie about B-52 pilots based in Guam who dropped their payloads
after a monotonous six-hour flight across the Pacific. Except for the last three
days of the gulf war there were almost no man-to-man confrontations. And the
ground war itself was over so quickly that it was devoid of the suspense that
drama requires.

"It was the perfect war for Antonioni," said Ken Burns, creator of the acclaimed
10-part "Civil War" documentary. He was speaking of the Italian film director
who has made a virtue out of depicting alienation from real events. But insofar
as war stories require proximity to experience, Mr. Burns said, the gulf war
will prove to be lacking: "There's no reality to this war, but only a kind of
virtual reality."

Oliver Stone said: "The war picked up Hollywood's expectations of what war is.
There was none of the grittiness, the dirt, the sweat of hard ground combat that
there was in the Korean War or in Vietnam." Rather than scenes of battle,
Americans and others saw scenes of briefings and high-tech video clips during
the gulf war. And what they saw was so carefully orchestrated, as Mr. Eskow put
it, that no movie or play or novel could surpass it as a created event.

"Schwarzkopf and Powell were a perfect buddy team," he said. "Schwarzkopf was a
Gene Hackman character and Powell was like Danny Glover -- one the big, burly,
gruff but friendly white lead, the other the brilliant black sidekick. They even
came up with the perfect title, Desert Storm, and you know how important titles
are in the movies."

To Paul Fussell, author of "The Great War and Modern Memory" about the ways war
often enters into the collective conscience as falsification and myth, the gulf
war had another aspect that makes it an unlikely source of art. For the first
time in American history, a major war was fought by an all-professional army
probably not very rich in poets.

"The poets of the two World Wars were mainly civilians, and they brought a
highly civilian viewpoint to the conflict," he said. "Even in Vietnam, most
people who wrote were there unwillingly, and therefore they had the great
literary opportunity of contrasting what they were doing with what they thought
they ought to be doing as human beings. A professional soldier is less likely to
have that point of view."

And yet, perhaps there's more material in the gulf war than one would think --
the evil personified by Saddam Hussein, the clash of Western and Arab societies,
the tragedy of the Kurds after the battlefield victory. Any of that could
produce novels, plays or movies. And, of course, there are those things that
nobody has thought of yet. Nobody can predict the wellsprings of art. After
World War II would anyone have imagined that one of the best movies to emerge
from the conflict would be set not on the fields of France but in an obscure
North African backwater called Casablanca?

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A scene from "Grand Illusion"--Previous wars had more of the
juice of human drama, but the gulf war seems sucked dry.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Slowly, Democracy at Council on Foreign Relations

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 34; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1187 words


Nearly two dozen members gathered in a dark wood-paneled parlor of the Council
on Foreign Relations Wednesday morning to ponder democratization in the Soviet
Union. They were for it -- up to a point.

The night before, nearly two dozen members of the organization's board had met
in the same dark room to consider democratization in the Council on Foreign
Relations. They voted in favor of democracy -- up to a point.

The 70-year-old foundation on the Upper East Side, long known as a club for the
Eastern establishment elite, holds a reputation for impregnable seriousness. The
vote, which some members likened, unsmilingly, to perestroika, granted members a
modicum of choice when electing directors to the council's board. Until the
vote, council elections were run Soviet style, with only one candidate a seat.

Yet even before the change was approved, an unusual frisson of competition had
intruded on this year's election, scheduled for June 18. One member, Stephen F.
Cohen, director of the Russian studies program at Princeton, is running as an
insurgent. Well versed in the ways that Soviet dissidents tested the fine print
of the Helsinki Accords, Mr. Cohen said he decided to "test the system" closer
to home by availing himself of a rarely used rule that allows candidates to
propose themselves for nomination by their peers. "I'm no radical dissident,"
Mr. Cohen said. "I have no grievance against the council except a certain level
of tedium now and then."

'I Was Satisfied'

The wave of democracy that has swept through the council did not sit well with
all its members. "I was satisfied with the old autocratic system," said Leslie
H. Gelb, a columnist for The New York Times and a member of the council's
nominating committee. "If directors have to run, they risk the embarrassment of
losing -- the elites don't like to be elected, they like to be the elect."

The decision, which will soon be announced to the council's 2,670 members, was
not made lightly or in haste. "An organization like ours takes its time on
issues of governance," said Peter Tarnoff, a retired diplomat and the
organization's president. Theirs is also an organization governed by what Robert
D. Schulzinger, who wrote a history of the council, called a "thick fog of good
manners." However fractious, the board's debate on Tuesday night did not violate
decorum -- or disturb a dinner of lamb chops, asparagus and more discussion on
the Soviet Union. "We never have had a board of directors issue spill over into
dinner," Mr. Tarnoff said.

There was, however, considerable anguish over one issue. By selecting more than
one candidate for each vacancy on the 24-person board, the council will subject
some future candidates to the humiliating possibility of defeat. Mr. Tarnoff
emitted a sharp sigh of distress at the prospect. "Most of us have come to the
view that we will just have to ask candidates to take that chance," he said
sadly.

The seismic shift was prompted by a petition signed by 109 council members in
January. "It was the largest uprising in the history of the council," said
Jeremy J. Stone, president of the Federation of American Scientists, and the
author of the petition. Mr. Stone, however, is no Spartacus. He described the
council as "superbly run on a consentual basis, which is, of course, even more
than democratic." Still, he felt that running more than one candidate an office
would be nice.

The Council was founded in 1921 as a "school for statesmen," a place where New
York City's most prominent bankers, diplomats and executives could leisurely
ruminate over the great issues of the day -- and then quietly advise Washington.
In its elegant East 68th Street town house filled with books, tapestries and oil
portraits, the council holds selective dinners with visiting heads of state and
is the host of countless seminars on topics like "The Strategic Petroleum
Reserve and United States Energy Security." There are also field trips to places
like NATO.

A Room, Not a Seat

The council, which also publishes the magazine Foreign Affairs and many in-house
studies, has gradually lost some of its preeminence to rival think tanks. But
membership still carries social and professional cachet.

During the Vietnam War, Stanley Hoffmann, a professor of history at Harvard,
once complained that "nobody raises their voice." He compared debate at the
council to "punching an eiderdown." But Mr. Hoffman served as a director from
1983 to 1989.

A Prague-Spring-like experiment in contested elections that began in 1972 ended
in 1985, after some members were not voted on the board. In 1981, Henry
Kissinger was one of the unhappy few. "For a former Secretary of State to suffer
that kind of humiliation was no fun for anybody," Winston Lord, a former
Ambassador, who was president at the time, recalled painfully. After his defeat,
Mr. Kissinger remained a member, and a research room was named after him in
1985.

The council's board did not entirely surrender to the democracy movement. The
board, which also voted to reduce the number of directors up for election each
year to five from eight, will still retain the right to appoint two of those.
Warren M. Christopher, a former deputy Attorney General and the board member who
devised the new system, said it would "retain the power of the board to preserve
diversity."

Diversity was the rallying cry of those who opposed change. Since the 1970's,
the council has struggled to broaden its membership. Currently, 7 percent of its
members are are black or Hispanic and 13 percent are women; the median age is
58.

Diversity, however, is not easily attained. Six of the eight candidates on the
ballot are seeking re-election. The two new candidates are Richard C. Holbrooke,
50 years old, a former assistant Secretary of State and an investment banker at
Shearson Lehman Hutton, and Robert D. Hormats, 48, a former assistant Secretary
of State and an investment banker at Goldman Sachs.

Young at 52

Cora Weiss, president of the Samuel Rubin Foundation, was the first member to
write a petition letter nominating Mr. Cohen. She was prompted by an urge not
often expressed at 58 East 68th Street. "This could liven things up," Ms. Weiss
explained in an interview. "Professor Cohen is very bright, and still young
enough to be considered a little younger than other candidates." Mr. Cohen is
52.

Mr. Cohen said he decided to run after surveying the field chosen by committee
and detecting a "certain sameness." The rules permit a candidate to be on the
ballot if he or she is nominated by at least 10 other members. Mr. Cohen's
chances of victory, however, appear slim. No petition candidate has won since
1972.

Mr. Cohen, who is also a special commentator for CBS News, said he thought that
his television exposure might lend him an inside edge. "In terms of name
recognition, I may be as well-known as the other candidates," he noted.

His rivals, however, did not appear unnerved. "I am all for this -- it is not
awkward in the least," Mr. Holbrooke said. "I much prefer that people be given a
choice."

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "I'm no radical dissident," said Stephen F. Cohen, left,
director of Russian studies at Princeton, who is also running for director of
the Council on Foreign Relations. "I have no grievance against the council
except a certain level of tedium now and then." (Ed Quinn for The New York
Times); Peter Tarnoff, right, a retired diplomat and the organization's
president, said, "An organization like ours takes its time on issues of
governance." (Dith Pran/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Ideas & Trends;
A Long, Slow March Out of Storybook Land

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 917 words


WHEN he became a literary agent in 1972, Morton Janklow was invited to lunch by
Simon Michael Bessie, then a senior editor at Harper & Row. Mr. Bessie's
summation of the principles of publishing was straightforward: "Just remember,
there are never too many books about Hitler, Lincoln, Napoleon and the Civil
War." For a seat-of-the-pants business, such homespun wisdom seemed to be
enough. Green jackets, it was said, do not sell, nor do short stories or books
on the American Revolution or the Arctic. Dogs and doctors, however, were
reported to be subjects of inexhaustible appeal.

In an industry in which it is sometimes said that market research consists of
the first printing, anecdotal evidence and even superstition still flourish. But
publishing, now a $17 billion business, is growing up, and many of its myths are
crumbling. Stiffer competition, mergers, escalating advances and declining book
sales are all making publishers look more closely at reality.

At the Association of American Booksellers annual convention in New York last
week, there was abundant evidence of an industry now far too diverse and
sophisticated for old nostrums to suffice.

More than 1,600 publishing companies and more than 7,000 booksellers were
present. So too were hordes of foreign publishers and agents. In all, over
35,000 people attended, a record. Drawing them was an astonishing variety of
books: first novels, reissues of the classics, stories of film stars and
reformed criminals, tales of Waldo and Wall Street, reference works and revamped
Bibles, coffee table books and new novels by Norman Mailer, Anne Tyler and Amy
Tan.

It was apparent that in trying to sell all these wares, publishers have come a
long way from the time when myth had it that books either sold themselves or
they failed. Take Doubleday's "The Firm," a thriller by John Grisham, which was
prominently displayed. Written by a little-known author, it was cleverly built
into a best seller, partly by marketing directly to law firms through
advertisements in legal journals and by seeding the market with mailings of
sample books. Or there was Donna Tartt, a diminutive figure being escorted
through parties as a hot new property, her mystique the object of careful
cultivation by editors at Alfred A. Knopf. Her first novel, "The God of
Illusions," was bought by Knopf for a sum reported to exceed $400,000.

As Ms. Tan said, "We have to perform." Forget myth, substitute marketing.

The convention came at the end of a year that has seen the collapse of one of
the biggest myths of the book trade, that fiercely loyal book addicts make the
industry recession-proof. With Waldenbooks and B. Dalton stores proliferating,
bookselling has become more tightly intertwined with other retail businesses.
When mall traffic declines, as it has by as much as 20 percent over the last
year, so inevitably do book sales. Moreover, the very fact that the reading
public has grown larger and more disparate means that it is more fickle. A book
lover will buy even in hard times but an idle browser of commercial blockbusters
will hesitate.

Other myths are also dying hard. Instead of sticking to the old wisdom, which
held that the biggest books should be published in either May or October -- to
attract buyers looking for a good read for their summer vacations, or to lure
purchasers of Christmas gifts -- publishers are experimenting. Increasingly, any
month except December (too much competition) is regarded as a viable month to
publish. Even mid-summer, once considered a dead period, is now believed to be a
time when reviewers are less besieged. "The rules are less clearcut than in the
past," said Roger Straus, the publisher of Farrar Straus & Giroux. "The only
surviving myth is when publishers tell you the check is in the mail."

Pricing, long a myth-ridden area, is also becoming more flexible. Cork Smith,
the editor in chief of Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, recalls working at J. B.
Lippincott in the early 1950's and having "a long and extremely serious debate
over whether it was possible to price a long hardcover novel called 'Angelique,'
by Serganne Golan, over $5."

Until last year it was widely assumed that no one would buy a nonfiction book
that cost more than $29.95. But "The Civil War" by Geoffrey C. Ward, with Ric
Burns and Ken Burns, priced at $50 by Knopf, and a biography, "Captain Sir
Richard Francis Burton" by Edward Rice, priced at $35 by Macmillan, both became
best sellers. Meanwhile, Random House has decided to price books at round dollar
figures, abandoning the myth that $19.95 is a lot more attractive than $20.

Still, some old adages have not been abandoned: A book that has not worked in
hardback will generally not sell in paperback either even though it is much
cheaper. The Vietnam war works, the Korean war does not. Fiction from Latin
America is fine, but non-fiction books about Latin America don't sell so well.
Forget the Philippines: the country does not sell. Aborigines are tricky: books
entirely about them are not easy to sell, but works partly about them do better.
And it may still be a good idea to call a book "Lincoln's Doctor's Dog."

"It all makes about as much sense as the book business makes," said Mr. Smith of
Harcourt, Brace. "But you tell me why the American Revolution is uninteresting
and the Civil War nearly always sells."

Another publisher, who insisted on anonymity, said, "The biggest myth of all
survives: that we know what we are doing."

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The American Booksellers Association convention drew 35,000
people to the Javits Convention Center in Manhattan last week. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
Instant Replay, Confettied

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 731 words


One of the weirdest technological wonders of our modern age, along with the fact
that you can now bake a potato in the time it takes to blow your nose, is the
strange case of the video camera. We have a generation of children who think
life works like this: You do things, and then as soon as you are finished doing
them, you watch yourself doing them on television. The result is that reality
sometimes seems even more synthetic than it is.

This is the image that comes to me when I consider the Persian Gulf war parade
to be held tomorrow in lower Manhattan. The parade will be an instant replay of
many of the elements that made the conflict in the gulf so popular in some
quarters, and so troubling in others:

* The parade will divert attention from domestic disasters, in this case the
city of New York, which will put its best face forward and keep all the homeless
people with shopping carts off the parade route. Mayor Dinkins has called this
the Mother of All Parades, and he should know; he's dealing with the
Great-Granddaddy of All Fiscal Crises in a city that has long seemed like
America's Stepchild. Tomorrow, for a few brief hours, this will look like an
intact family.

* The parade will cost lots of money. And, like the war, no one knows exactly
how much. The money is coming from private sources, since even amid parade fever
it was agreed that spending millions of city dollars when we can't afford to
keep our libraries open or our playgrounds in decent shape was not going to fly.
But private money could be spent on more enduring things than confetti and
balloons. Job programs for unemployed veterans might be one nice way for the
private sector to show its support.

* The parade will make things seem simple. We won, we're glad, we're great. This
is what parades always do. When the Yankees win the Series and all seems right
with the world, it is fitting that we throw trash at them and yell our fool
heads off. But the St. Patrick's Day parade has always made me a little queasy
because it suggests that Ireland is God's darlin' little patch of perfect green
when Belfast is still lousy with bullets and blood. "Triumph in the Desert," its
publisher has called a glossy picture book about the gulf war. Triumph isn't the
word I would have chosen.

Parades are often one-word answers to complicated questions.

Perhaps there has never been a sentiment so potent in this country as the one
that demanded we expiate the sins of Vietnam by embracing the veterans of the
gulf war. Except for the national sentiment that said this was going to be quick
and clean and done with. Parades provide a sense of closure, and of celebration.

But both are illusory. Most of the American men and women in the gulf came home
safely, and that is a great blessing. But Saddam Hussein remains in power,
Kuwait is a feudal nation aflame, and America has sunk back into the recession
doldrums that war fever gilded for a time.

Tomorrow the usual suspects will hold counterdemonstrations, that small
indefatigable coterie who protested Grenada and Panama and Vietnam, who have had
a lifetime of picketing government buildings. There were others of us who
thought that this war was wrong and have watched with horror its aftermath, the
carnage and suffering in Iraq and the subsequent closing of the American mind to
anything but our own supremacy. But we only mumbled our objections, then and
now, because we feared being caught by the patriotically correct. Like the war,
the parade is designed to bury dissent beneath an overdose of hardware and warm
fuzzies, to say again: support the troops or else.

I think the best way to support the troops is to provide decent conditions on
their bases while they serve, and to promote an economy that can provide jobs
when they are discharged.

And the best way to consider the lessons of war is not a multimillion-dollar
paper storm. I like the group of Catholics from Queens who will gather in a
church to read the verse from Isaiah about turning swords into plowshares and
the Gospel according to Matthew in which Jesus exhorts us to love our enemies.
This will not be as photogenic as either the parade or the war. But at least it
is not synthetic reality, not an instant replay reinforcing again the crazy
conclusion that the Persian Gulf war was nothing more than Norman Schwarzkopf's
grin and Roman candles.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MS. PLAYBOY

BYLINE: BY ROGER COHEN;  Roger Cohen is a media reporter for The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 32; Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4157 words


ON THE UNDULATING APPROACHES TO Hugh M. Hefner's Los Angeles mansion, squirrel
monkeys, peacocks, flamingos and an occasional jogging Playmate parade. A paved
driveway loops up past a grotto filled with Japanese koi fish and ends at the
portals of the mock-Tudor retreat of Playboy's reclusive 65-year-old founder.
Thirty-eight years after he started Playboy and two years after he married a
Playmate less than half his age, Hefner still lives his fantasies.

It was to this unusual corporate outpost that Arthur Kretchmer, Playboy's
editorial director, and Barry Golson, then its executive editor, came in August
1989 with a proposal for a new magazine called Men's Life. Enthusiastically
backed by Hefner's 38-year-old daughter, Christie, it was designed to revamp the
other-era image of Playboy by offering a magazine for men who had, well,
outgrown the centerfold.

Christie was convinced of its worth and had committed the company to a yearlong
preparation of a prototype, at a cost of about $250,000. Here, at last, in a new
men's magazine for the 90's -- sans ladies in lingerie -- was a demonstration of
the change this down-to-earth woman promised when, with much fanfare, she became
chief executive of Playboy Enterprises in November 1988. Here was a product with
features on kids, sports, fashion, business and family life that would reflect
the real concerns of men in the second half of their lives and quash the notion
that Playboy has not moved with the times.

Kretchmer and Golson were ushered into the mansion's wood-paneled dining room,
which is served by a 24-hour kitchen and adorned with a copy of a Jackson
Pollock painting (the original was sold in 1987 to raise much-needed cash for
Playboy). A critical decision for the future of Playboy Enterprises loomed;
Hefner, who still owns 71 percent of the company's voting stock, wasted little
time in making it. He told them he did not like the proposal.

"I came out of there knowing Men's Life was dead," says Golson, who has since
left the company. "Christie did everything she could to get the magazine off the
ground. She saw it bringing Playboy into the mainstream by addressing the
concerns of a universe of men who have grown up."

"But," he adds, "although she is C.E.O. and runs the company, the fact is Hefner
still owns it; and on major risks or publishing decisions, he makes the calls."
At stake is an American icon, a $168 million company that publishes what is
still, with a circulation of 3.5 million, the biggest-selling men's magazine in
America -- larger than Esquire, Rolling Stone and GQ combined.

The father and daughter juggling for control of Playboy Enterprises could not be
more different. He is a shrewd eccentric; she is a brass-tacks businesswoman.
His reputation has been made, while hers is still in the making. And, as the
Men's Life decision shows, Hefner's conservatism tends to clash with Christie's
desire to innovate.

Although Hefner virtually abandoned Christie as a child in order to bury
himself, very publicly, in Playboy and its Playmates, neither one of them gives
any hint of tension between them. "In front of everyone in the world, she
suppresses her feelings, because she has a burning loyalty to her father," says
Mark H. McCormack, the sports entrepreneur, who is a former member of the
Playboy board. "She may disagree with him, but she tries to get through to him
in different ways rather than frontally. It's very complicated."

William A. Stokkan, Playboy's former president of licensing and merchandising,
who left the company last year, puts it more bluntly: "Hefner's place in history
is assured. That puts him in a place where risk is not desirable. She wants
change. But I always felt his hidden, restraining hand."

Christie insists that since she started work at the company in 1975, as Hefner's
personal assistant, they have disagreed only once -- over when to close down the
ailing Playboy Clubs, which were finally shut in 1986, five years later than she
had wanted.

Even on the issue of Men's Life, which was bought by Rupert Murdoch and folded
after one issue because of financial problems in his magazine group, Christie
glosses over differences. She says that she "had a number of business concerns,"
although she was attracted by "a magazine for men who grew up with Playboy but
no longer have a voice." She plays down the stubborn enthusiasm that led her to
make a further pitch for the magazine during a visit to her father in Los
Angeles a few weeks after his meeting with Golson and Kretchmer.

As for Hefner, he says that he rejected the proposal because "a magazine, like a
human being, must be more than the sum of its parts and I did not see a magazine
there." Moreover, it dwelt on reality rather than fantasy. Christie, he
intimates, had a different view, but "she wrote to me months later and conceded
I was right."

Swathed in a maroon bathrobe and clutching a can of Diet Pepsi (he abandoned
regular Pepsi, swapped M&M's for trail mix and gave up his pipe six years ago
after a mild stroke), he smiles and muses: "You know, if Christie had not been
born to it, the promotion department would have had to invent her!"

CHRISTIE, WHOSE Annual salary is $499,000, is indeed a model chief executive
officer. Consider her performance earlier this year at an investors' luncheon at
New York's Grand Hyatt Hotel. After the braised salmon, she races through what
she calls "a fast-forward version of the overview" of Playboy Enterprises. Her
pitch is serious stuff by any standard. She talks about being a "low-risk,
high-reward company." She compares the Playboy brand name to Coca-Cola. She
wants to "leverage beyond our expertise if we can find strategic partners." Her
message: Playboy is a lot more than its famous centerfold and the time has come
to buy the stock.

As this gathering suggests, Playboy parties are not what they were when the
rabbit-with-a-bow-tie logo was a trendy symbol of lascivious revelry. It is hard
to imagine these portfolio managers and stock analysts -- all of them male --
jiving with simpering Playmates to the beat of Ike and Tina Turner beneath the
benevolent gaze of Hefner and the aromatic fug of his pipe smoke.

But then Christie wants to be a symbol of change. Some consuming zeal drives her
to attempt to refashion her father's sex-based company. She wants it to be a
more diversified media concern offering several magazines, videos, television
programs and catalogues: in short, "quality fun for adults." To this corporate
mission, she is ready to make an extraordinary commitment.

"I can tell you," she states bluntly, "that I will be running the company for
the rest of my life."

With hemlines that do not budge far from her knee and a hair style that is
quietly conservative, Christie's scrubbed-clean look is the image of Midwestern
decency. If Hefner is Los Angeles baroque, luxuriating in a mansion that costs
the company $3.7 million a year, Christie exudes the briskness and pragmatism of
her hometown and favorite city, Chicago, and has a surface manner so steel-like
it is hard to gauge what lurks underneath.

Overall, she is as comfortable in the gray-suited business world as her dad once
was hosting all-night bashes. Where Hefner "leveraged," to use Christie's
favorite word, his fantasies into a thriving business that helped change
America's sexual mores and then used his own unbridled sexuality to feed
Playboy's myth of the eternal bachelor, she maintains a strict division between
business and pleasure and an even stricter eye on the bottom line.

"Hef," she says, "is a man of the big picture. He is a creative force. I try to
insure that he does not have to worry about our business performance. So I
manage very closely." Then her voice takes on a sharp edge as she adds: "You
can't delegate turning a company around."

Hefner himself seems far more relaxed than his daughter. Having married a
26-year-old former Playmate of the Year, Kimberley F. Conrad, in 1989, he now
has a 1-year-old son, Marston, and is working on an autobiography. "It does not
get any better than this," he declares. "I took my own journey in my own times
on my own terms. My whole life has been a reaction to the hurtful parts of my
Puritan heritage; it has been an attempt to put sex back into the Puritan ethic.
It is, after all, the one part left out!"

WHEN CHRISTIE BECAME president of Playboy Enterprises in 1982, the company had
degenerated into a sprawling mess. Without strong management to direct them,
Hefner's ideas had lost much of their commercial magic.

The magazine's domestic circulation was declining from its annual high of 6.8
million in 1972. The once-swinging company-owned clubs and their bunny girls had
fizzled. The British courts had revoked the licenses on the company's profitable
London casinos, where a lot of Arab oil money was spent during the 1970's.
Forays into theatrical film production, recording studios, book publishing, a
limousine service, resorts and other ventures had gone awry. In 1982, the
company announced its first annual loss since going public in 1971 -- $52
million.

"There is no question that we came to the edge," recalls Hefner, whose ideas had
been so hot during the 1950's and 60's that he seemed a modern-day King Midas,
making millions by mocking monogamy.

By 1986, all the company's clubs were closed. After a disastrous venture in
Atlantic City, the casino there was sold. Entire divisions, including book
publishing, records and resorts were also divested. The Playboy cable television
channel foundered. Even two paintings -- a Willem de Kooning and the Jackson
Pollock -- were sold for $5.1 million.

Christie was an improbable candidate to save Playboy. She had grown up in
Wilmette, on Chicago's North Shore, using the family name of her stepfather --
Gunn -- and scarcely seeing her father, who left home when she was 3. "I would
go for dinner with him perhaps five times a year," she recalls. It was her
mother, Millie, still a Playboy employee, who raised Christie and her younger
brother, David. Neither her mother nor her brother, who shuns Playboy and now
has a computer business in California, would speak about Christie.

Christie went to New Trier West, a public high school with a reputation for
academic excellence, and was a model pupil. She took the lead in several plays,
sang and was good at sports. "A teacher had to be strong with her because she
was never intimidated and wanted to know the answer to everything," says
Florence Malizola, her homeroom teacher.

But it was not always easy being Christie Gunn. Of the students in her homeroom,
Malizola recalls, only two had divorced parents, and "the situation was hard to
cope with at times because of the reputation of Playboy." That reputation was
then enormous. "Playboy brought acceptance of nudity into the mainstream. It
changed America," says Gay Talese, the writer who studied sexual mores in his
book "Thy Neighbor's Wife."

For Christie, Playboy's impact was more immediate. In particular, Malizola
remembers having to fend off a boy who, in Christie's freshman year, walked in
and said, "I'm doing my junior theme on pornography and I want to do my term
paper on Playboy. So I want to interview Christie Gunn." When she was 14, a
story on Playboy appeared in Time magazine, making it clear that Christie Gunn
was Hefner's daughter. "She did change then and become a little defensive,"
Malizola says.

That defensiveness is still apparent. Christie is not a person inclined to admit
to weakness or pain. Everything about her -- except an occasional gesture of
nervousness -- suggests balance, good sense, self-control. Indeed, balance --
whether between work and her long-distance romance with Jim Korris, a Hollywood
producer, or between Playboy's publishing and other activities -- is an
obsession.

Asked if she has modeled herself on anyone, she gives a reply that is a model of
balance: Katharine Graham of The Washington Post as a businesswoman, the late
Illinois Senator Paul H. Douglas as a public servant and her mother "as a human
being." Faced by a personal question, she quickly provides a pat answer, as if
to hesitate might allow her feelings -- and the unbalanced -- to impinge. For
example, when the subject of children comes up, she does not even draw breath as
she states in her shareholders-meeting voice: "I'd like to have one child at
some point. It's not something I plan to do in the next year or two."

As for her own childhood, Christie says: "I experienced no conflict between my
mother and father, which was entirely due to my mother's compassion,
intelligence and maturity. And I read the magazine growing up so I wasn't
withdrawn from Hef's editorial passion."

Asked if, as a child, she recalls being resentful of Hefner when he left home
and took up with a succession of Playmates, she seems to click into a kind of
automatic pilot as she recites these lines: "No. First of all, the politics of
Playboy are the politics of my generation. I felt comfortable. His politics were
my politics. So, for example, during Vietnam, when the term 'generation gap'
came into common parlance, I did not have any of that experience with my father,
whether it had to do with attitudes towards drugs, sexual relations, the war,
Nixon, race or, later, the environment."

The same almost disembodied tone takes over when she describes her feelings
about Hefner's attitude toward women: "No, I was never troubled by the way Hef
treated women. In a world in which infidelity, coercive sex in and out of
marriage and dishonesty between the sexes are problems that men and women are
concerned about, this is a man who has been open in his relations and lived a
highly moral life."

AFTER NEW TRIER, Christie went to Brandeis University, where she graduated summa
cum laude with a degree in English and American literature in 1974. During that
time, she decided to change her name back to Hefner and put that name on her Phi
Beta Kappa certificate. The decision, she says, was natural because her mother
was separated from Edwin Gunn and she had begun spending more time with her
father as a summer intern at Playboy. The rapprochement was such that, a year
and a half after her graduation, Hef decided to offer Christie a job. She
accepted, thinking it would be no more than temporary. Seven years later, she
was president of the company.

Starting in 1982 with a wayward and indebted enterprise, Christie cleaned up the
balance sheet and fashioned a coherent company based around three divisions --
publishing, product licensing and video and television entertainment.

Touting a favorite slogan -- "Think globally, act locally" -- she leveraged
Playboy's assets wherever she could. She created a thriving Special Editions
business based on the company's vast art collection and photo library. She
expanded licensing operations to new products and markets. She looked for new
ways to market Playboy's subscription list (which accounts for more than
three-quarters of its circulation) to people wanting access to the male market.

She cut costs by consolidating printing operations, merging departments and
reducing staff. In a tired company, she conveyed a sense of renewal by
appointing new executives. She also moved Playboy's headquarters to ultra-modern
lakeside premises in Chicago, where paintings by Andy Warhol and sculpture by
Frank Gallo decorate the offices.

"We recently drank champagne to celebrate her 15 years at the company," says
Arthur Kretchmer, "and I said in my toast that, lest we forget, there was no
question in my mind that this woman saved the company." Employees tend to speak
about Christie with this kind of reverence.

Nonetheless, Christie's actions, up to now, have been mainly defensive, a
successful rear-guard action. True, the entertainment division is expanding with
a pay-per-view television service (a revamping of the old Playboy Channel) and a
successful European television show called "Playboy Late Night." Some new
businesses have been added, including a retail and mail-order costume jewelry
company called Sarah Coventry and a catalogue called Critics' Choice Video. But
there has been nothing to make the business community -- as opposed to the idly
curious -- really sit up and take note.

The company's stock languishes in the $5 to $6 range. Playboy lost money in 1986
and 1989. For all Christie's work, there is still a widespread sense that
Playboy is an anachronism. McCormack says he was so concerned about this image
problem that he once suggested renaming the company something like "Lifestyle
Enterprises" and making Playboy a division of that.

Still, in 1990, Playboy did move into the black, earning $6.2 million. Net
income has improved for the last two quarters. David I. Chemerow, the company's
chief financial officer, argues that with close to $30 million in cash, and
minimal debt, it is now poised to advance beyond the base that Christie has
established.

Others are less sanguine. "She's gotten rid of the garbage, it's being run as a
ra tional business rather than a personal fiefdom, and the name still has some
cachet," says Michael E. Garstin, a managing director of Bear, Stearns &
Company. "But the fact is that Playboy has an unattractive track record, it's
very small for a media company, and it's only if earnings go up that people will
take notice."

FOR THE BUSINESS world to react, Playboy Enterprises will probably have to do
something dramatically new -- either start a magazine such as the Men's Life
project or, more likely, acquire existing magazines. The corporation did make a
failed bid for Smart, a men's magazine that has since gone under, and Christie
says it is in negotiations for the acquisition or development of three other
magazines. Michael S. Perlis, president of the publishing group, says he expects
Playboy to own five magazines by 1995.

In September, the company will start a monthly hotel-room general entertainment
magazine provisionally called Spectravision in a 50-50 joint venture with
Spectradyne Inc., the largest supplier of in-room hotel movies, based in
Richardson, Tex. The next venture after that may be Max, a young men's urban
lifestyle monthly started six years ago by the Milan-based media company RCS
Editori, still widely known as Rizzoli. Playboy is discussing starting a United
States edition of Max next year as a 50-50 joint venture with RCS and has hired
Rebecca W. Darwin, formerly of The New Yorker, to look at what Perlis calls
"Americanizing a great European idea." Max has also hired Adam Moss, who is a
consulting editor at The New York Times, to advise on the project.

But innovation presupposes that Christie and Hefner really see eye to eye.
Roxanne J. Decyk, a friend of Christie's who has vacationed with her in the
Greek islands, says: "I feel Hefner's desires for the business are still the
heaviest vote that's cast. Christie will really stamp it as hers if and when she
can take all the strategic issues under her umbrella."

Certainly, the company's current setup was deeply frustrating to William
Stokkan, the former licensing president. "You can't do cooking without spices,"
he says, "and you can't do business without risk. The restriction I felt there
was that unless the proposal was a 100 percent certainty, there was no
willingness to go ahead." As a result, "Playboy is rearranging things rather
than going out and building new things."

Even within Playboy, there seems to be some difference of view as to who is
really the arbiter of the company's direction. Richard S. Rosenzweig, a
corporate executive vice president and a company veteran, says: "Christie runs
the company. But let's face it: Hef owns it. She has a very free hand. But the
captain charts the course and she steers the ship."

To which Christie counters: "I would say that from the time I became C.E.O., I
set the course, and I steer the ship."

What is clear is that Playboy has now leveraged a great deal of its existing
businesses. Christie will have to make a success of new ventures if she is to
prove herself. Although the company reports that one in nine American men, with
an average age of 32 and an average household income of $36,000, still reads
Playboy, it also still carries baggage that makes it seem a quaint hangover from
another era. Christie bridles at this. "How wide can the perception be that
Vanity Fair is hot and Playboy is old-fashioned if we sell 3.5 million and they
sell 700,000?" she asks angrily.

The company has several strengths. Advertising pages in Playboy magazine have
risen this year at a time when many other magazines were losing advertising
revenue.  The magazine's odd mix -- in which fine writers like Margaret Atwood,
Nadine Gordimer, Doris Lessing, John Updike, Elmore Leonard and T. Coraghessan
Boyle are featured beside dumb jokes and photographs of nude women -- continues
to draw readers. Moreover, the company has enough financial strength to borrow,
even large sums, to start new projects.

But Hefner, who retains a streak of Midwestern parsimony from his Illinois
youth, is wary of debt. "I am very financially conservative," he says. Moreover,
it is clear that Christie wants to be the model daughter, and that could
complicate asserting her vision of things to Hefner. "She endlessly does all the
right things," comments McCormack.

CHRISTIE IS PASSIONATE IN her backing of the causes her father approves of --
civil liberties, women's rights and First Amendment issues. She has established
the Christie Hefner Fellowship for AIDS research at a medical center in
California. And, goaded by the attacks on the magazine by both feminists and the
Moral Majority during the 1980's, she is as close as she ever gets to frenzied
in her defense of Hefner's magazine: "I have never thought women were demeaned
by the magazine. I don't think you can ever make that case. Some people are
anti-Semitic, too. People can think all kinds of things that are wrong. But any
critique of the magazine as being antiwomen is unsubstantiated and
unsubstantiatable. Forget my being head of the company. This is a magazine that
time and time again has stood up in the most progressive way for human rights,
including women's rights, and I don't see a lot of people doing that."

She goes on. "My question is: If you think women should be allowed to be sexy,
if that is, like, a good thing, an acceptable thing, and you don't think Playboy
imagery is acceptable, what imagery is?"

Her stand amounts to a balancing act almost as delicate as the one with her
father. In a corporation that got rich by publishing photographs of nudes once
described as "fair young mammals" -- and that still relies on such images for a
good part of its revenue -- Christie wants people to see the feminism in
Playboy. She believes the magazine promotes an openness on sexual issues that is
good for men and women (the magazine claims that 20 percent of its readership is
women). "To me, saying you're not a feminist should be like saying you're a
racist," she says. "It should be that politically unacceptable."

Some see her position as laughable. Barbara Ehrenreich, the feminist writer,
says that "Playboy certainly does not present a feminist notion of sexiness.
It's a definition of sexy that excludes any women who are not 18 years old with
a 20-inch waist."

But Erica Jong, a writer who has been published in Playboy, argues that "it's
progress for the daughter to be running the business rather than the son, or
son-in-law." "That," she says, "would not have happened 37 years ago and is, in
itself, radical. As for the images, I don't elevate them to the political level.
They're mainly adjuncts to teen-age masturbation."

The novelist Joyce Carol Oates says: "I was amazed, but Playboy last year
published a feminist story of mine called 'The Swimmers' and the response was
enormous. People really seem to read the fiction in the magazine."

But perhaps the women photographed alongside the fine fiction could look a
little less like airheads? Christie's retort is immediate: "These are sexy
pictures of real women. Why do people think they are empty-headed? I grew up in
a world where if you were pretty, you could not be smart, and if you were smart,
you could not be pretty. That's just a dumb way to look at the world."

Down the hall from Christie's office the business of Playboy goes on.
Photographs for a feature are being shot. The lucky woman is Liz Pasko, a former
I.R.S. agent who has decided to reveal all. Asked what her friends will say,
Pasko says with a laugh: "They'll say, I didn't know you looked that good!" And
her family? "That's another story!" And the future? "I hope this will change my
life. Everyone wants to be Christie Brinkley!"

As for the other Christie -- just like Hef -- she wants, at the very least, to
be able to go on giving every woman that chance.

NAME: Christie Hefner

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Alfred Hassler, Lifelong Pacifist And Environmentalist, Dies at 81

BYLINE: By MARVINE HOWE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 38; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 335 words


Alfred Hassler, a lifelong pacifist and leader of the Fellowship of
Reconciliation and a pioneer in the environmental movement, died on Wednesday at
the Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern, N.Y. He was 81 years old and lived in
Monroe, N.Y.

He died of cancer after a long illness, said Richard Deats, director of
interfaith activities at the Fellowship of Reconciliation in Nyack, N.Y.

Mr. Hassler was executive secretary of the United States Fellowship, an
organization of religious pacifists, from 1960 until his retirement in 1974. He
was also general secretary of the international Fellowship, with headquarters in
Alkmaar, Holland, and president of the International Confederation for
Disarmament and Peace.

Influenced by Vietnamese Buddhist thought, Mr. Hassler founded the Dai Dong
project, linking war, environmental problems and poverty, in 1970.

Last year, on the 75th anniversary of the Fellowship of Reconciliation, Mr.
Hassler, wrote that "the reality of modern weapons seems finally to have
convinced the so-called great powers that nothing can be gained, and everything
lost by going to war."

Born in Allentown, Pa., he grew up in New York City, attending Brooklyn
Polytechnic Institute and studying journalism at nights at Columbia University.
He worked for The Leader-Observer in Woodhaven, Queens, and then for the
American Baptist Publications in Philadelphia, before joining the staff of the
Fellowship in 1942.

Author of numerous anti-war books and artcles, his "Diary of a Self-Made
Convict," published in 1954, is the story of his imprisonment for conscientious
objection during World War II. He wrote his 1970 book, "Saigon U.S.A." after
extensive visits to Vietnam.

After retiring, Mr. Hassler and his wife helped found a retirement community,
Almeria, in southern Spain, where they lived for over a decade.

He is survived by his wife, Dorothy; a son, Donald, of Monroe; two daughters,
Laura, of Alkmaar, and Judith, of Clintondale, N.Y., and six grandchildren.

NAME: Alfred Hassler

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Nation;
Despite All His Efforts, Nixon Is Still Wrapped In the Tapes of Watergate

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 905 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


ROUGHLY 64 million Americans nearly a quarter of the population -- have been
born since Richard Nixon resigned on Aug. 9, 1974. To them, the historical
figure whose Presidency fell on the sword of Watergate is as ancient as the
Beatles. Their flickering image is drawn largely from Mr. Nixon's meticulously
prepped role as eminence grise -- in Beijing with Deng Xiaoping, in Moscow with
Mikhail Gorbachev, in bookstores with weighty tomes on global politics or
personal struggles.

But like ordinary men, Mr. Nixon cannot entirely escape his past. The latest
glimpse was the release last week of some 60 hours of conversations between the
President and his advisers, transcribed from secret tape recordings made in the
Oval Office and other White House locations in the early 1970's.

The National Archives made them available under a 1974 law passed to give the
public the full record of the Watergate scandals, but that record seems largely
complete. What the transcribed tapes provide instead is a reminder of the
vindictiveness and sense of persecution that chewed at Mr. Nixon's White House,
and much of America, during the Vietnam and Watergate years.

If Watergate is just a break-in now, it was then the synonym for a host of
abuses of political power that led many Americans -- notably, but hardly
exclusively, those who opposed Mr. Nixon's conduct of the Vietnam War -- to fear
that their Government had not just deserted them, but turned on them. It was a
time in which the President of the United States and his aides reveled in nasty
tricks against political rivals, sabotaged the antiwar movement, wiretapped
their underlings. In a conversation on Sept. 15, 1971, that included John W.
Dean 3d, the White House counsel, the plot involved using the Internal Revenue
Service against Democratic critics:

PRESIDENT: We have to do it artfully, so that we don't create an issue by
abusing the I.R.S. politically. And, there are ways to do it. God damn it, sneak
in in the middle of the night . . .

DEAN: . . . The other thing is, you could always increase your compliance
program . . . just happens that a lot of Democrats get caught.

Although the abuses are long since public, Mr. Nixon has fought for years to
preserve the secrecy of much of the estimated 40 million pages of documents and
4,000 hours of tape recordings now under the Archives' control. Mr. Nixon's
spokesmen have said that he seeks not to bury the record of Watergate -- he did
not contest the latest release of transcripts -- but to preserve his
constitutional rights to privacy and free speech, and the Presidential legacy of
executive privilege.

Lawsuits by Mr. Nixon and some of his associates have slowed and restricted the
release of his papers and of the transcripts. Mr. Nixon has sought assiduously
to cast his actions in the best light. The latest release of Nixon tapes does
that effort little good.

Keeping Tabs on the Tapes

Consider Mr. Nixon's 1971 order to the F.B.I. to wiretap journalists and members
of the Executive Branch in an effort to root out leaks to newspaper and
television reporters. "For at least 25 years, every President and Attorney
General authorized wiretaps to obtain intelligence in both foreign and domestic
security matters," Mr. Nixon wrote in his 1978 memoirs, "RN." It was not until
1972, he notes, that the Supreme Court ruled that such taps on Americans not
suspected of espionage required a court-ordered warrant.

Mr. Nixon's own taped conversation on Oct. 8, 1971, with Attorney General John
N. Mitchell and his chief domestic adviser, John D. Ehrlichman (and with
references to Assistant Attorney General Robert C. Mardian, Henry Kissinger, the
Secretary of State, and J. Edgar Hoover, Director of the F.B.I.), casts the
decision in a different light:

MITCHELL: We have those, uh, tapes, logs and so forth over in Mardian's safe on
that background investigation, wiretapping we did on Kissinger's staff, the
newspapermen and so forth.

EHRLICHMAN: My impression from talking to Mardian is that Hoover feels very
insecure without having his own copy of those things because, of course, that
gives him leverage with Mitchell and you --

PRESIDENT: Yeah.

EHRLICHMAN: -- and because they're illegal.

To date, 60 hours of taped conversations relating to Watergate and some 5
million pages of documents have been made public. Sixteen archivists are at work
on the remainder. The tapes alone have required the creation of a 27,000-page
log of the people, times and subjects of White House discussions.

Jill D. Brett, Archives spokeswoman, said the processing is "incredibly
tedious," and the tapes are of poor quality, as this October 1971 excerpt
attests:

PRESIDENT: Yeah, yeah. Because (unintelligible) we can't (unintelligible) I
guess, well, (unintelligible). Everybody has a (unintelligible).

MITCHELL: Goodbye, Mr. President.

If Mr. Nixon has hopes of preserving his freshly burnished image, Ms. Brett
suggests that time is his ally. Some 40,000 people listened to the first 12-hour
batch of tapes after they were made public in 1980, she said. So great was the
interest that for years, scores of people were turned away daily from the 32
tape players set up for listeners.

Late last week, days after the latest Nixon tapes were made public, a reporter
visited the Archives' Nixon Project offices in suburban Washington. One
professor was reading transcripts.

NAME: Richard M. Nixon

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Campus Life: Grinnell;
Class That Missed A Commencement Returns to Campus

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 43; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 609 words

DATELINE: GRINNELL, Iowa


Grinnell College's class of 1970 never had a a commencement ceremony. Rocked by
student demonstrations against the Vietnam War and the killings at Kent State,
the Grinnell campus closed early in the spring of 1970, and commencement
exercises were canceled. Last weekend, nearly 30 percent of the class of 1970
made some headway in filling the two-decade void. Older, many with children and
looking like any other baby boomers, 60 of the 206 members of the class returned
for the dedication of a grove of trees to the maintenance of peace. It was also
a day for reunions and remembering the chaotic spring of 1970.

The peace grove, which was financed by donations from the class, was a result of
several months of debate among class members. Some alumni favored a traditional
commencement ceremony with caps and gowns. Others were opposed to any kind of
formal ceremony that might detract from the actions and goals of 20 years ago.

They finally agreed on the peace grove, with a variety of species of trees as
well as benches where students and visitors can sit and contemplate. The grove
overlooks Grinnell's central campus, where the college's most vocal protests and
debates of the Vietnam era took place.

Passion and Promise

Andrew Cooper, a 1970 graduate and executive vice president of the Burson
Marsteller public-relations agency in New York City, remembered when the central
campus was dotted with crosses serving as a mock graveyard.

"We had such passion and bright promise," Mr. Cooper said at the dedication
ceremony. "But it diminished with every newscast about Cambodia or Kent State."

To classmates in the Peace Grove, however, he recalled: "This class was special,
passionate and involved. And we appreciate that the college not only tolerated
this but also nurtured free speech."

Jon Royal, a 1970 graduate from Des Moines, remembered that the last month of
classes was spent in discussions, protests and meetings. When the campus closed,
many students headed to Washington for anti-war demonstrations.

Mr. Royal noted the controversy in the Grinnell community regarding some of the
protesters' symbolic gestures. When the American flag was inverted, he recalled,
a local scoutmaster came to the campus brandishing a pistol.

A Time for Healing

"I think there is a healing going on," Mr. Royal said in an interview. "I grew
up with people and we went two different paths. We're finally coming to love and
accept each other. The peace grove is a very good solution."

Some alumni from the three classes who were celebrating reunions contrasted the
activism of the Vietnam era with student responses to this year's Persian Gulf
war.

"The winds have really changed," said Diedre Prikopa Jones, a 1971 graduate from
Minneapolis. "There is such a difference in attitude between now and then.
There were a lot of turbulent feelings then, a lot of antagonism." The peace
grove, she said, "makes a statement -- it shows what you stand for."

Marcia David Koester, a 1971 graduate who has made her home in Grinnell, said it
was difficult for her college-student son to understand the protests of the
Vietnam era. "It is something unusual for him to try and understand how students
gathered on the central campus and discussed potential volence," she said.

Grinnell's president, George Drake, in his remarks at the ceremony, answered the
skeptics who wondered what would become of the "renegade" class of 1970. He said
its members included a Nobel Prize winner, Thomas Cech, a 1989 winner in
chemistry; a music critic, Gary Giddins of The Village Voice, and a trustee, Mr.
Cooper.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Students from Grinnell College's class of 1970 and their
families listening as Andrew Cooper, a classmate, spoke at the dedication of a
peace grove honoring members of the class of 1970. Commencement exercises were
canceled at the college in 1970 because the campus closed early after student
demonstrations erupted against the Vietnam War and the killings at Kent State
University. (Jennifer Grinnell/Grinnell College)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Flag Maker, Patriotic Renewal Brings Star-Spangled Sales

BYLINE: By ROBERT A. HAMILTON

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 1; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1041 words


IN 45 years in the flag business, Harold D. Burns has watched sales wax and wane
with patriotism. "The Bicentennial was a busy time, and so was the time when
Alaska and Hawaii were admitted to statehood," he recalled. "But Desert Storm
has surpassed them all."

As the country prepares to celebrate Flag Day on Friday, an era of flag-waving
patriotism appears to be sweeping the country, said Mr. Burns, who has spent 23
years as general manager of the Sirtex Printing Company in Old Mystic, a
division of Dettra Flag Company of Oaks, Pa.  It began when troops fired the
first rockets at Iraq during the Persian Gulf conflict, and it has not subsided
"one iota," Mr. Burns said.

The Stars and Stripes is the most popular, but he said that demand has also
increased for Army, Navy and Marine Corps flags, state flags, and those that
remember American prisoners of war and military personnel who are missing in
action.

Mr. Burns and his 40 employees are working longer days, and Saturdays, to keep
up with demand, he said. His backlog of orders has more than quadrupled.

"The patriotism is continuing because of the homecoming of the troops and
because of the President's request for a super Fourth of July celebration," Mr.
Burns said.

Teresa A. Johnson, one of the employees in the screening area of the plant, said
she feels much more patriotic about printing flags now than she did when she
took the job a year ago.

"Sometimes it's hectic, especially these days, but it makes you feel good," Ms.
Johnson said.

Aaron S. Rathbun, assistant general manager at the plant, said the upsurge of
patriotism has added a new dimension to the job for many employees. "You're part
of the whole team, doing what you can to support your country," he said.

Mr. Rathbun said that since the start of the Persian Gulf war, nearly all the
employees have ordered flags and flagpoles for their homes.

The state adjutant for the Veterans of Foreign Wars, Dominic J. Romano, said the
extent of the upsurge of patriotism was driven home for him when he called the
organization's national office to order some 3-by-5-foot flags for display at
state posts.

"There are 7,000 flags ordered ahead of mine," Mr. Romano said. "Usually I have
the flags within two weeks of the time I order them. This time, it took a month
for me to get a letter saying they were on back order. And they won't even give
me a date when they'll be able to ship them. It's unbelievable." Mr. Romano said
he saw the patriotic trend developing even before the recent war. "The last four
or five years, people have been becoming more and more patriotic," he said. "But
Desert Storm was something to rally around. I have marched in Memorial Day
parades every year since 1955, and I have to say the treatment we got this year
was the best I have ever seen."

The State Veterans Commissioner, Hamilton D. Harper Jr., agreed. "There's no
question the level of enthusiasm for our armed services and our veterans is at
an all-time high," he said.  Mr. Harper said that part of the reason might be a
collective national guilt over the way this country has treated veterans in the
past 40 years. He said he can recall Victory over Japan Day in World War II, in
his hometown of Shreveport, La., when about 75,000 people, three-quarters of the
town's population, lined Texas Avenue to celebrate the victory and show support
for United States troops.

Then the veterans of Korea came home to a lukewarm reception, Mr. Harper said.
"And, God, we all know when the troops came home from Vietnam, they got a cold
reception, and sometimes a cruel and ugly one," he said. "I think our conscience
bothers us over how we treated Vietnam veterans. Now people are kind of giving
vent to that guilt, saying, 'I'm sorry.' "

But Mr. Harper said he also knew public sentiment can cool rapidly. His wife
owns a gift shop in Florida and often places large orders for popular items, he
said, only to have them arrive after demand has subsided.

Mr. Burns said he does not expect the demand for flags to continue at such a
peak. "I would say after the Fourth of July, you might see a slowing up," he
said. "But I wouldn't predict how much."

The Sirtex factory, a brick building off Route 27 on the banks of Whitford
Brook, was built as a woolen mill in 1920. The mill went out of business just
before World War II, and after the war, two brothers bought it to do silk
screening, which eventually turned into the flag business that was sold to
Dettra in 1967. The following year, Mr. Burns, who had been with Dettra for 22
years, was named general manager of the Sirtex division.

Dettra says it is the second largest maker of flags in the country, after Annin
& Company in New Jersey, and the Sirtex division ships thousands of flags a
week, Mr. Burns said. But even many people who live nearby are unaware of what
is done there.

"We're kind of low-key," Mr. Burns acknowledged.

Longer Wait for Orders

The company uses silk screening to produce flags for all 50 states, dozens of
counties and cities, more than 100 countries, all the military services and a
variety of companies.

Because Sirtex has its own art, photography, ink mixing, and screen making
departments, it can usually respond to an order for a new design and begin
shipping the flags within a week, Mr. Burns said. But these days, the wait has
become much longer, because of the tremendous demand.

The company also makes a variety of historical flags, although that is one
segment of the business that has not enjoyed explosive growth this year, Mr.
Burns said. He said perhaps that is because most people in this country do not
realize the history of the flag. He pulled out a desktop display of a dozen
3-by-5-inch historical flags, including the Bunker Hill flag, which is red, with
a fir tree on a white field in the corner, and the Grand Union, with the
familiar red and white stripes but with a Union Jack in an upper corner.

For now, though, people are more interested in contemporary flags, Mr. Burns
said, adding that he has his own reason for flying the flag a little higher
these days. His 35-year-old son, Jeffrey, a helicopter pilot whose reserve unit
was activated in February, is still in the Persian Gulf.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Workers making flags at the Sirtex Printing Company in Old
Mystic (pg. 1); Gretchen Berg, left, and Louise Burgess, employees of the Sirtex
Printing Company. (pg. 16) (Bruce Johnson for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 10, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Crack Dealer Posing as Family Man. What Is the Message?

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 301 words


To the Editor:

I am writing in response to "Crack Dealer Feeds a Family and Habits of Fewer
Addicts" (front page, May 16). I am black and incarcerated in a Pennsylvania
prison. I am a recovering drug addict from the streets of Queens in New York
City.

Willie T., the crack dealer you profile, is a bum, shiftless and lazy. For him
to have been locked up, given a good skill and then still come home to sell
drugs -- I want to know, What is the message?

While people are living in refrigerator boxes and many others are miserable with
drug-infected AIDS or strung out on crack, Willie lives in a $750-a-month
apartment. So Willie won't sell crack to a pregnant woman. I wonder how many
kids 10 and under he might sell to in a day.

I came from a very good home. My father worked for a living; my mother kept
house. When I was coming up, my brothers and sisters and I didn't want for much.
I'm a Vietnam war hero (I won't cry on you). I fell addicted to heroin and
cocaine.

When you let drugs take you to the lowest level of society, you steal from your
parents and you take your daughter into a shooting gallery. On occasion you
think of suicide. I know Willie very well. If he could, you know, he would shoot
you. So what's your message?

There is a dangerous message in your article for kids (especially minorities)
who are straddling the fence between taking an honest job at McDonald's or
taking a chance for that fast money.

Willie is an all-around poor example. He has a high-school equivalency diploma
and barber skills, yet he elects to throw bricks at the jailhouse in contempt of
society. I've got a message for Willie:

One way or another we are involved in cocaine

We either use it, or sell it

Or are a victim of the game.

RAYE GRANT
Graterford, Pa., May 21, 1991

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 10, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

New York Prepares Embrace for Troops

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1289 words


In Battery Park, where 24,000 troops who served in the Persian Gulf will gather
to bask in their "Welcome Home" parade today, tourists and New Yorkers basked in
a hot Sunday sun yesterday and took in the parade preparations -- yellow ribbons
painted on the pavement and white portable toilets placed along the sidewalks.
Tourists talked of witnessing a piece of history. New Yorkers spoke of what
would be left once that shining moment had passed.

Two visitors from Britain sat on a park bench in the shadow of the United States
Bankruptcy Court Building in lower Manhattan and marveled at the kind of
uninhibited self-celebration that, in their view, happens only in America. "We
don't do things like this in England," said Susan Yates, who lives near
Manchester and is an employee of the British post office, the Royal Mail. In her
crisp Bermuda shorts and crisp English accent, she added: "Unfortunately, they
don't have parades. They welcome back soldiers very subtly."

Her mother, Marjorie Levchenko, agreed, saying that "going to church and singing
anthems" was about all she could recall her compatriots doing for the return of
British troops from the Persian Gulf. "British people are very patriotic too,"
she explained quietly. "They just don't show it the way you do here. We are a
little more reserved."

Nearby, two maintenance workers were bent over shovels, sweatily patching a
broken subway vent in time for the parade. Like the gravediggers in "Hamlet,"
they offered an unsentimental view from the ground. Gary Derkel, 35 years old, a
Transit Authority maintenance worker, seemed to wish New York City could borrow
a little of Britain's stiff-upper-lip restraint. "I'm patriotic," he said
gruffly, "but we don't need all this pomp. It's a little too much -- with people
getting laid off, they should come first."

He was not the only city employee who expressed civic worry along with national
pride. Esmelda Hernandez, 40, said she looked forward to the parade as "a
once-in-a-lifetime thing to see," but she couldn't keep her mind off what would
be left the next day -- litter.

Ms. Hernandez works in the city's recycling office, which could be closed
because of budget troubles. "They are thinking of suspending the recycling
program," Ms. Hernandez said, her eyes widening with horror, "and they are going
to throw tons of paper onto the streets, and confetti!"

"I think," she concluded, "we can celebrate in a more conservative way, maybe
just waving flags and wearing yellow ribbons."

Sailors on the Town

New York is a city inured, and often indifferent, to the invasion of sailors
during Fleet Week, the annual gathering of warships in New York Harbor. This
year Fleet Week and Operation Welcome Home coincided, and the city fell in love.
The 15,000 sailors and marines who fanned out across the city -- mingling with
the shoppers of South Street Seaport, slipping into X-rated movies in Times
Square and crowded pubs near the piers -- found they were welcome everywhere.

Larry Hernandez, a 20-year-old sailor on the guided missile cruiser San Jacinto,
went to Yankee Stadium, where servicemen and women got in free to yesterday's
game between the Yankees and the Texas Rangers. "Wherever we've gone, it's been
'Good job,' and 'Welcome home, glad to have you back,' " he said. "It makes you
feel appreciated."

Bill Weiss, a sailor from the aircraft carrier America, stood outside the Staten
Island ferry terminal with some friends, eager for a return visit to the borough
that he, for one, would never forget. "When we go in," he said of Staten
Island's bars, "somebody will put $50 on the table and set up a tab, and
somebody else will match it."

"These guys don't have to pay for anything," he said with awe.

Two officers from the carrier decided to skip the bars and burlesque of Times
Square and headed straight for the epicenter of Manhattan sophistication,
grabbing ringside seats on the outdoor terrace of Le Relais on Madison Avenue at
63d Street.

Slouching like lifelong boulevardiers, Lieut. Paul K. Hubbard and Lieut. John
Ritchart sat expectantly in their braid and dress whites, and were studiously
ignored by regular patrons sipping Pellegrino in their dress black uniforms of
Chanel and Calvin Klein. The $4.50 Heineken beers they ordered, they paid for
themselves.

Lieutenant Ritchart, 29, of Oldham County, Ky., a small town that he said
installed its first street light three years ago, said he felt "overwhelmed" by
the sights, smells and insistent sounds of the city. He was not certain he would
march alongside his comrades through the Canyon of Heroes along lower Broadway.
"I don't like crowds," he confessed. "Besides, I think the parade is really for
the families."

He did manage to momentarily catch the eye of certain sophisticates seated
nearby. Asked by a reporter if he was married, he replied, "No, I am single." At
the next table, three heads of carefully combed, streaked blond hair snapped to
attention.

Lieutenant Hubbard, 39, who is married, said he had no complaints about New
Yorkers. "It's like the Mayor got the whole town together and gave them a pep
talk," he said wonderingly: " 'The sailors are in town, so give them a break and
extend a welcoming hand.' "

A Look at the Hardware

The Navy returned the hospitality yesterday by inviting tourists to inspect the
America on Pier 88. The carrier that sailed through the Suez Canal with its
lights out the night before the ground war began experienced something almost as
unnerving in New York Harbor: it was turned into a colorful, noisy day-care
center.

Children, wearing souvenir sailor hats, "Desert Storm" T-shirts and Popsicle
stains galloped up and down the vast flight deck, perching on helicopters,
missiles and airplanes to screech "cheese" as their parents snapped their
pictures.

Sailors and pilots tried to calmly explain their functions aboard the ship, only
to be bombarded with questions about how fast the planes went and how many
missions they had accomplished. Often, the civilians had all the answers.
Nine-year-old Joey McPartland and his 8-year-old brother George debated whether
or not the speedy F-14 was better than the "more maneuverable" F-16. A
near-mutiny broke out when one sailor tried to limit the number of children
scrambling into the cockpit of a giant helicopter.

Even the adults could not resist the souvenir buttons, painter's caps, T-shirts
and books -- or tweaking the pointy noses of planes like the F-14A Tomcat or the
F/A-18C Hornet. They peered into the cockpits of the jets and gently patted the
bombs.

"It looks much smaller on television," said Sister Monica Lesnick, as she held
her habit with one hand to keep it from being carried off by a strong sea
breeze.

One man touring the ship thanked his hosts. "I've enjoyed your carrier," he told
a pilot. The pilot replied, "It's your tax dollars, so it's your carrier too."

Those Who Didn't Return

All servicemen were invited to attend a party after the parade aboard the
carrier-museum Intrepid, where musical offerings will range from Kool and the
Gang to the Undefeated Jungle Grunt Band, a rock group made up of Vietnam
veterans.

Civilians were invited to the Waldorf-Astoria for a different kind of
post-parade party. A charitable foundation called Operation Support will hold a
benefit Tuesday night to raise money for the families of soldiers who did not
return from the gulf.

"We need to do a little more than just waving flags," said Billy White, 24,
owner of the Beach Cafe, and a founder of Operation Support. Mr. White said the
organization was created seven weeks ago and has raised nearly $400,000 for the
families of soldiers who were killed.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sailors at Yankee Stadium, where servicemen and women were
offered free entry to the game between the Yankees and the Texas Rangers. (Vic
DeLucia/The New York Times) (pg. B4)

Map: Map of Manhattan showing location of the parade route. (pg. B1)

Chart: "A Guide to the Celebration"

STREET CLOSINGS

PARADE: Today's ticker-tape parade at 11:30 A.M., private traffic will be barred
form the area south of Aanal Street between West Street and Lafayette street and
south of Chambers Street form the Hudson to The East River.
West Street, South Street and the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive will remain open.

FIREWORKS: The display in the East River off the South Street Seaport wll be
held form 9:30 to 10 P.M. Only South Street will be closed. The Franklin D.
Roosevelt Drive will remain open.

GETTING THERE

The A,C,E,J,M,N,T,1,2,3,4,5,6 and 9 trains all stop within waling distance of
the parade. Trains will run on rush-hour schedules until 11 P.M., on an average
of eve3ry two to four minutes. Two stations will be closed; Wall Street on the 4
and 5 line, and City Hall on the N and R line.

The stations closest to the parade will be:

Chambers Street on the 1,2,3 and 9 line and on the A,C and E lines.

Rector Street on the 1 and 9 line and on the N and R line.

Broad Street and Fulton Street on the J and M line.

CELEBRATING AT HOME

Television coverege will begin at 10 A.M. on WWOR (channel 9) and at 11 A.M. on
WABC (channel 7), WCBS (channel 2) and WNBC (channel 4). Cable News Network will
offer coverage throughtout the day. A concert by the New York Pops at 8 P.M. and
fireworks at 9:30 will be carried by WPIX-TV (Channel11) and two radio stations,
WCBS-AM and WNSR-FM.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 10, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
76 Trombones

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 711 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Listen up, you quagmirers who opposed the Persian Gulf war, and now deride the
costly parades in Washington and New York as a macho-militaristic "wargasm";

Pay attention, Democrats who followed Sam Nunn and Disjointed Chiefs of Staff
over the cliff to silly-sanctionland, and now fret about political manipulators
turning a national victory into a political winner;

And take heed, rightwing global cops of yesteryear, who tried to ignite a
prairie fire of isolationism, and now pale at the prospect of flower-festooned
American tanks rolling up our avenues and snatching the mantle of
superpatriotism;

The message to all: you can relax. The celebration is not over your defeat. The
flag-waving and the lumpy throats are not about the glories of militarism or the
wisdom of the White House or the satisfactions of intervention.

Even so, you say, these parades are expressions of overweening pride in our
ability to pulverize a second-rate power. Won't all the organized cheering at
our muscularity -- disguised as "support for our troops" -- hide our failure to
finish off Saddam Hussein or to save the brave Kurds and Shiites who answered
our call to oust him?

Not all pride overweens. From the mid-60's to the mid-80's, we slogged through
the Slough of Self-Doubt. We lost a war to Vietnam and lost a President to
Watergate and lost faith in our know-how when the choppers collided at Desert
One. The prospect of continued decline debilitates a people's will.

Then the tide turned. The Soviet Union was forced to expose its internal decay.
The world was faced with a different, regional threat -- an aggressive dictator
reaching for a nuclear equalizer -- and the United States clobbered him.

Now we feel better about ourselves and our system. Is this unnatural? No. Is it
dangerous? Only if we allow it to make us arrogant, or our leaders afflicted
with hubris.

That is not happening. President Bush erred tragically at the verge of victory.
He knows it; he was rightly and roundly criticized for putting cockamamie
geopolitical calculation about Iraqi sovereignty ahead of his moral
responsibility; he has been trying to patch it over by offering protection to
refugees.

These are not the actions of a Caesar or an arrogant power; on the contrary,
they are the acts of a leader of a nation that will not stand for dishonor,
especially when televised.

What, then, is the strange fervor coursing through our veins as we watch the
bands go by and we wave at the troops on the tanks? If pride is too troublesome
a word, with all its affinity for the adjectives "false" and "overweening," let
us turn to a compound much more in vogue: self-esteem. The response to the
parades' stimulus is a surge of legitimate national self-esteem.

Consider what we have done that justifies that esteem. We recognized a threat
before it was at our own throats; we debated what action to take and brought it
to a vote in the Senate; and we entrusted the destruction of threat to our armed
forces, which performed as well as we hoped.

Had doves not demonstrated; had the loyal opposition, which preferred lesser
sanctions, not opposed; had the media not provided prognostications that made us
fearful of great costs; had the President not felt it necessary to give our
national interest in self-protection the gloss of collective defense -- then the
self-esteem that we feel today would not have been earned.

It ain't just what we did, it's the way that we did it. Arguing and wondering
among ourselves, leading the single-superpowered world, surprised at our success
and eager to recoup our failure -- that's the American character at its best.

And that is why pacifist, partisan or isolationist resentment at the celebration
is misplaced. Sure, some technojerks are falling in love with the latest
implements of war, and some Republicans are trying to milk the good feeling.

Brush all that aside. Each of us -- misguided or misgiving, right or wrong or a
combination thereof -- has a piece of this welcome-home to constructive
confidence.

Honor the heroes, respect the dissenters, experience the kinship, criticize some
part of the policy, salute the flag. Anyone who has taken part in the action and
the passion has a place in this parade.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 10, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The March Of Images

BYLINE: By Fred Ritchin;  Fred Ritchin is author of "In Our Own Image: The
Coming Revolution in Photography."

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 505 words


Today, as our troops march down city streets, deluged by confetti, applause and
speeches in a welcome home that veterans of the Vietnam War never had, we might
also begin to feel a little sorry for them.

They are heroes who fought admirably, we are told, but we were allowed to
witness little of their bravery. Government policies intended to keep the public
committed to the war effort made the whole campaign largely an abstraction.

In trying to suppress images of civilian and military casualties, of war's
extraordinary and inescapable horror, the officials who allowed only carefully
restricted photo opportunities also obscured the contributions of these soldiers
on parade. Even they have few images to remember their experience by.

Now our returning troops march against a backdrop of shadows, their recent past
and our recent history -- our collective memories -- rendered nearly invisible.

During the Vietnam War, whether one agreed with the country's policies or not,
the images made us see and feel the violence, craziness, cruelty and bravery: a
monk lighting himself on fire; a grimy, exhausted G.I.; a Vietcong prisoner
executed at point-blank range; terrified Vietnamese children running down a road
away from a napalm attack. And one could see, not incidentally, images that at
times contradicted the Government position.

From the Persian Gulf war, on the other hand, perhaps the most significant
images we will remember show the roof of a building in the cross-hairs of a
camera linked to a bomb hurtling toward that same roof.

No more was the documentation of battle entrusted to intelligent, feeling people
-- photographers in the celebrated tradition of Robert Capa, W. Eugene Smith,
Don McCullin -- but to a camera accompanying a "smart" bomb. If one could not
see as a smart bomb could -- anonymously, successfully -- then seeing was
thought to be too dangerous.

Photographs that spoke directly to war's consequences were negated. For example,
the images of the bunker destroyed in central Baghdad by an American Tomahawk
missile were quickly obscured by a cloud of questions. Were the Iraqi dead
civilians or soldiers? Whose fault was it? Was the claim that the victims were
civilians a propaganda ploy by Saddam Hussein? As a front-page headline in The
Los Angeles Times put it, "Images of Death Could Produce Tilt to Baghdad." It
was not the actual death of individuals that was important but the image and the
way it might be used.

There appears to be a growing nostalgia for imagery from previous wars. In part
it seems to be an attempt to understand this one. The photography of war
essentially used to be the photography of people -- people like those parading
today and like those who lived and died in Kuwait and Iraq. Not images of
rooftops.

One wonders what role, if any, photography will be assigned in future wars.
Certainly there will be many images of this parade, perhaps more than were taken
previously of the these men and women who survived to march up Broadway.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: View from the video camera aboard a Stealth F-117 bomber in
Iraq. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

New York Salutes: Critic's Notebook;
TV Reporters Compete In Yellow Ribbon Game

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 5; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 873 words


On all the channels that carried yesterday's parade, emotions sprouted like
yellow ribbons and patriotic phrases were waved like flags. Channel 7 announced
that it was saluting "Our Heroes" and Channel 2 pasted the title "Heroes on
Parade" on its coverage. (As it turned out, the focus was less on the paraders
than on the watchers.) Channel 9's Sara Lee Kessler reported, "We had the will
to do it, and we did it," the "we" presumably being forces outside Channel 9.
Another Channel 9 staffer wore a "Desert Storm" T-shirt with an American flag on
it. "These colors don't run" the reporter said. Stationed down at Battery Park,
Roz Abrams of Channel 7 seemed to be kept from flying out of her chair only by a
clip board. "We are psyched!" she said.

It was outsized but in character. When dealing with the ordinary run of mostly
depressing reports that make up the early evening news, television acts as
surrogate for viewers, signaling the appropriate emotions. If a child is hurt in
an accident, a visitor shot, a house burned down, the local reporter can be
counted on to soak the account in sympathy. Every death, except of a criminal,
is called a tragedy. If a poor youngster makes it in the big city or neighbors
show kindness to someone in distress, the report will share the upbeat spirit:
Hey, look at us! The nightly message is that we're all in this together. The
objective is wholesome symbiosis: Viewer merging with reporter, New Yorkers all.


Ebullient Journalists

So it was only natural that the four local channels that devoted hours to
yesterday's "Welcome Home" parade would be competing in the yellow ribbons
stakes. The reporters became part of the celebration. Maybe it was just
professional technique, but it seemed spontaneous: Journalism with a human face.
As they popped here and there, with the band music and uniforms and New York
itself as background, buttonholing onlookers who could be sure they were where
the action was because the cameras were there, the excitement became infectious.
It was not that anybody had anything special to say but that everybody seemed to
mean it when they said it was a great day and New York was a great city. What
New Yorker could not help getting a charge from it?

All right, no doubt there were some who were left cold by the commotion. In the
minds of some viewers, assuredly a very small minority, the parade was a
problematic event: Such a big celebration for such a small war. Such pride over
a victory that has brought such unsettling consequences. So much attention to
the few American deaths, so little to the deaths of the Iraqis. There were
references to such matters through the afternoon, but they passed like swiftly
moving clouds on a sunny day.

Channel 7's John Johnson was quick off the mark with the report that several
protesters had been arrested at Park Row and Broadway. Susan Roesgen, the
station's co-anchor for the event, said that the incident was "a sad thing to
see in a nice wonderful parade like today" -- but nobody saw it. Wherever
protesters appeared, the police kept cameras at a distance.

Sanitation a Star

The soberest approach through the afternoon came from Bill Beutel on Channel 7.
Stationed on the 19th floor of a building in lower Manhattan, he used the
respites between the ebullient reports from below to talk with John F. Lehman
Jr., former Secretary of the Navy, and James Shenton, professor of history at
Columbia University. The other channels hauled in experts, too, and on all of
them the material about New York and about parades in general was fresher than
the reprises of the war and the obligatory references to Vietnam. Everything was
covered from security to sanitation -- especially sanitation -- with frequent
mentions of the tons of imported ticker tape that were storming down and
pictures of the workers who began shoveling it up while the marching was still
going on. Along with the array of police, the sanitation workers certified the
New Yorkness of the occasion.

Television can't get through a long afternoon without its fix of hype. Viewers
learned that the Jeep was the official welcoming vehicle and that for $19.95 ($5
of which would go to a veterans memorial) they could buy a "Welcome Home" video
from Channel 2.

Even at such an affair, the fawning on all channels over the military and
everyone connected with it sounded like the sort of indulgence that might give
journalists a day-after hangover. The gush was as thick as the confetti. On
Channel 2, General Colin L. Powell was called "unique" three times in less than
one minute. But it didn't matter much. Silliness goes with parties.

For a television-bound New Yorker, it was a kick to see General Powell, the
Bronx boy, sending kisses along the route and to hear all those people saying
nice things about the city for a change. It would take a mighty dour television
critic not to be affected by the appearance of so much friendliness on streets
that have a reputation for anything but. Tony Guida of Channel 4 was not
exaggerating too much when he called it "a love fest." Shortly before the parade
began, someone on Channel 2 said "New York needs something to feel good about
itself for." Well, it got it.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEW YORK SALUTES;
In a Ticker-Tape Blizzard, New York Honors the Troops

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1858 words


Three months after the last angry rocket of the Persian Gulf war, New York City
lionized the victorious troops yesterday with a magnificent blizzard of ticker
tape, patriotism and affection in a homecoming parade up lower Broadway's Canyon
of Heroes.

With painted yellow bows underfoot and a glimmer of blue between the skyscrapers
overhead, brass bands exploded, flags and confetti whirled in the wind and what
might have been another Monday in Manhattan's gray financial district suddenly
boomed into a dazzling holiday of music, marching, balloons and deliriously
roaring crowds.

And last night, capping the day's celebration, a giant fireworks display lighted
the velvet skies over the East River with chrysanthemums of red, white and blue,
thundering pirouettes of silver and gold and, for its finale, the simulated
destruction of an Iraqi Scud by an American Patriot missile.

Misgivings for Some

In the footsteps of Lindbergh, MacArthur, the Apollo astronauts and American
legions home from World Wars I and II, some 24,000 marchers -- troops from 17
allied nations that fought in the gulf, plus veterans of other wars and civilian
groups -- crossed the Rubicon into history under a deafening tumult of cheering
and cascades of confetti and ticker tape.

But the day was not a one-sided blast of patriotism. For many, the euphoria that
had followed the swift victory over Iraq with relatively few American casualties
in January and February had given way in the intervening months to new concerns
over recession, crime, sagging municipal finances, civil rights and other
matters, and some felt that the time for orchestrated celebrations had passed.

Moreover, many Americans could not find triumph in the conquest of a nation with
the gross national product of Kentucky, certainly did not regard the Persian
Gulf war as a great victory, and were uneasy about a celebration that would
surpass those for the far more devastating world wars or the profoundly bitter
conflicts in Korea and Vietnam.

And in the rush of yesterday's tumult, some said, it was easy to forget that
150,000 had died on the other side, that Iraq's economy and infrastructure had
been bombed back into the 19th century, that Kuwait was still little more than a
family-run enterprise, that Saddam Hussein remained in power in Baghdad and that
American troops were still in his country protecting Kurdish citizens.

Even so, the day meant a great deal to New York. It was a chance for the city to
strut its stuff, despite fiscal crisis and recession, to express gratitude to
those who sacrificed and died for the country, and to reaffirm some
old-fashioned ideals in an age that seems preoccupied with money, political
correctness and marketable sentiments.

"U.S.A.! U.S.A.! U.S.A.!" the crowds chanted again and again as the troops in
desert battle fatigues and sharp dress uniforms, the bands, the floats, the
missiles and other military hardware, the international color guards and the
celebrities moved up the skyscraper-walled canyon.

'Great Day to Be Back'

"It's a great day to be back home in New York," exulted Gen. Colin L. Powell,
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who was born in Harlem and raised in
the Bronx.

The police estimated that 4.7 million people lined the one-mile route from
Battery Park to Worth Street, and they called it the largest crowd for any
single event in city history. The count, for all its seeming precision, appeared
to be extravagant.

It implied that 235,000 people lined each of the 20 blocks on the route. The
police conceded that it was based on a formula using square feet of street space
and was a bit like numbering the blades of grass on a hillside. But it was in
keeping with the hyperbole of the day.

"This was the mother of all parades," beamed Mayor David N. Dinkins, who had
been using the phrase for weeks.

There was no disputing that the throng was enormous. People filled the broad
sidewalks to capacity, gawked down from windows and rooftops at dizzying
heights, spilled out of the plazas and side streets and choked four blocks of
reviewing stands lining City Hall Park. And millions more watched on television.

It was an artist's conception of a spring day in New York: people in summery
pinks and oranges for temperatures in the high 80's, an azure sky brushed with
horsetails, the harbor shimmering in the sun like silver coins, and all along
the parade route a palette of red, white and blue flags, yellow ribbons and
desert-tinted uniforms. A brisk wind up from the Hudson swayed the trees in City
Hall Park and blew the leaves in great masses like a woman's hair.

In the enormous fall of confetti and ticker tape, the sky at times grew dim, and
the city and the parade seemed to recede in the storm as if into a framed
picture. And for a while the familiar music of the streets, the bass rumble of
traffic, the brassy horns were gone and all you could hear were the faint
strains of "Hail, Hail, the Gang's All Here" or "The Halls of Montezuma," and
above it all the madrigal song of a million cheering voices.

The four-hour extravaganza -- a $4.7 million private production that did not
cost the hard-pressed city a cent -- was billed as the nation's biggest gulf war
homecoming and the largest ticker-tape parade in New York history, and it was a
day to remember.

The Negative View

But, like any big event in a nation of diversity, there were those who disagreed
with its substance and tenor, or whose enthusiams were at least tempered by the
knowledge that this was just one of many parades and celebrations held across
the country recently to mark the return of American forces, and that the
conflict from which they had come home was perhaps the nation's least perilous
war in this century.

Antiwar protesters dotted the route, but were concentrated at Vesey, Fulton and
Ann Streets. "Operation Desert Massacre," proclaimed one sign mocking the march.
"Jobs, health care and schools -- Not war!" said another. "This parade and the
millions of dollars spent on it to celebrate the evil destruction of Iraq is
obscene."

At least 25 protesters were arrested and 11 officers were injured in two
clashes, one at Fulton, where a dummy was thrown into the path of the paraders,
and another at Ann, where Christmas tree balls filled with red paint were
hurled.

Many knew of the parade, but did not attend. "It's a bittersweet kind of
celebration," said Carol Levine, a psychotherapist who had her bike out in
Riverside Park. "It's not that I don't give a damn. I appreciate that we made an
effort to do something, but it's a peculiar thing to celebrate, because Saddam
Hussein is still in power and Kuwait is such a mess. I am left with a feeling
that it is not resolved."

Festivities Start Early

But for most of the people in lower Manhattan, it was a banner day of tribute to
12,000 troops from all 50 states and 17 nations, who marched with 6,000 veterans
from other wars and 6,000 civilian groups ranging from bands and drill teams to
dance troupes and fife-and-drum corps.

Even before the parade, the town was alive with activity. Mayor Dinkins, at a
breakfast, gave the keys to the city to the three grand marshals -- Secretary of
Defense Dick Cheney, the gulf commander Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf and General
Powell.

By 10 A.M. all motor-vehicle traffic was cut off to lower Manhattan below Canal
Street, and extra subway trains ferried in the swelling flow of paradegoers
joining the ranks of those who had staked out the best viewing spots before
dawn. Within an hour, the sense of excitement along Broadway was almost
palpable.

Vendors hawked T-shirts, buttons, hats, flags and other souvenirs; 3,000 police
officers formed phalanxes on both sides of Broadway; workers in hundreds of
government and corporate office buildings filed out, and the crowds grew so
dense that some spectators were squeezed 15 or 20 deep on the sidewalks.

"You couldn't even move," said Samantha Simone, a 14-year-old from Garden City,
L.I., who fainted in the late morning heat.

148 Treated for Heat

The Emergency Medical Service said 148 people were treated for heat exhaustion
in temperatures that reached a high of 89 at 2 P.M., and for a variety of other
minor injuries. A spokesman said 103 were treated at the scene, and 45 were
taken to nearby hospitals. Most had fallen from barricades or trucks, and two
were hit by objects thrown from windows.

Generals Lead the March

A trio of vintage convertibles carried the grand marshals and their wives at the
head of the line of march. Mr. Cheney, in a business suit, General Powell, in
his dress greens, and General Schwarzkopf, in his familiar battle fatigues,
waved constantly through the barrage.

Behind them came thousands of soldiers, sailors and marines, most of them in
battle fatigues with helmets or barracks caps and desert boots, with rifles at
shoulder arms or assault weapons slung tightly on the right.

They moved in lock-step mostly, shoulders back, chests out, heads up, battle
flags in the vanguard of each unit, representing infantry, armored, cavalry,
airborne, intelligence, mountain, support, engineers, maintenance, medical,
supply, communications and reserve detachments.

A 15-foot Patriot missile, orange with a white tip, rolled by on a truck,
followed by its launch system on a flatbed 12-wheel trailer. A few howitzers and
battle tanks, ambulances and an armored car were in the parade, but it was not a
show of weaponry or technology, which had been amply demonstrated during the war
and seen in other parades.

Behind the United Nations flag came Jeeps bearing the flags of 40 countries that
had sent observers, but not marchers, to the parade, and then marching units
from 17 nations that had been allied in the Persian Gulf.

Awash in Debris

When it was over, shortly before 5 P.M., Broadway was awash in debris: 12,000
pounds of confetti, one million yellow ribbons, 200 miles of ticker tape,
enormous reams of computer paper and envelops and thousands of unidentified,
multicolored bits and pieces.

The half-hour of fireworks that ended the celebration began at 9:45 P.M. as
rockets climbed above the East River, filling the night sky over lower Manhattan
and Brooklyn with a dazzling display of exploding colors. Every pier and vantage
point on both sides of the river was jammed with spectators who numbered "in
excess of a million," the police said. One of the most popular viewing spots in
Manhattan was the South Street Seaport, which was closed at 8 P.M. when it was
filled. to capacity.

Just to the south on Pier 11, overlooking the river and the Brooklyn Bridge, two
marines who had marched in the parade gazed at the fireworks and reflected on
their day in New York. "I've never experienced anything like this," said Pvt.
Richard Douglas, 22, who was in the Persian Gulf for eight and a half months.
"I've signed over 150 autographs today on T-shirts, flags, arms and even legs."

Pvt. Nicholas Collins, 22, said: "The City of New York has spoiled us. The
parade was incredible. This makes us feel like celebrities."

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: As confetti and ticker tape swirled above their heads, troops
marched up Broadway near City Hall. (Vic DeLucia/The New York Times); One man
broke from the cheering crowd at Cedar Street and Broadway to congratulate the
marchers. (Jim Estrin for The New York Times); High in a building on Broadway,
spectators waved to the troops. (Angel Franco/The New York Times) (pg. A1); Many
parade watchers along Broadway waved flags. Stephanie Remini's was larger than
most. (Dith Pran/The New York Times); The feet of some 24,000 marchers, troops,
veterans and civilians, had to step through streets thick with ticker tape and
confetti. (Ruby Washington/The New York Times) (pg. B4)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

EDITORIAL NOTEBOOK;
Still Wallowing With Richard Nixon

BYLINE: By JOHN P. MACKENZIE

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 328 words


To appreciate the latest 28 hours of tape recordings to emerge from the Richard
Nixon archives, it is necessary to remember what they are not. They're not the
"smoking gun" evidence that forced him to resign while he was being impeached in
1974. And they're not the conversations that made this President a criminal
conspirator, though not an indicted one, and sent his Attorney General and top
White House aides to prison.

No, we've heard those old tapes or read their transcripts. These are the third
and fourth sub-criminal layers of Watergate mire. Mainly they exhibit not
criminality itself but attitudes, ways of thinking. Yet they do help to explain
some of those high crimes and misdemeanors.

Why hire a gang of burglars to rifle Democratic Party offices before the 1972
elections? The new tapes disclose that, a year earlier, the President heard his
chief of staff, H. R. Haldeman, suggest hiring "eight thugs" from the teamsters'
union to beat up antiwar demonstrators. Who would think of burglarizing
opponents' records? Well before the election, Mr. Nixon calls for getting the
tax files of insufficiently loyal bureaucrats. How? "Goddamn it, sneak in in the
middle of the night" at the Internal Revenue Service.

What preoccupies the head of state? "Aren't the Chicago Seven all Jews?" he asks
as talk turns to the demonstrators tried for disrupting the 1968 Democratic
National Convention.

How does he react to the publication of the Pentagon Papers, the secret history
of previous Administrations' policies in Vietnam? He's sure it's part of a plot
against his Administration. "We've got to get at the conspiracy angle here," he
declares.

Some of these Oval Office vapors took shape as enemies lists, illegal wiretaps
and the Watergate scandal itself. But their enduring value will be to remind
older Americans -- and enlighten younger ones -- about why it was so important,
as Richard Nixon said sneeringly, to wallow in Watergate.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

ON MY MIND;
The Pentagon Papers

BYLINE: By A. M. ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 725 words


At The New York Times 20 years ago, the publisher and a small group of editors
and reporters were handed one huge untidy package, take or leave it, that made
them suddenly confront many things of great importance to them:

The meaning of patriotism and national interest, the purpose of journalism, the
boundaries of constitutional freedom, the reputation of the newspaper around
which their lives were built, and their own careers.

Inside the package were the Pentagon Papers, 7,000 pages of secret Government
documents and analyses about how for the previous quarter-century four
Presidential Administrations had handled Vietnam.

It was like opening a locked chest, peering down and watching and listening as
Presidents Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy and Johnson, each in his own time
compartment, made decisions. Readers of the Pentagon Papers could know what each
President could not -- how what he did would affect the Presidents in the
compartments to come, and how step by step their decisions would lead to the
most disastrous foreign war in the country's history. In The Times's hands was
the secret study of the war ordered by Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and
directed by Leslie Gelb, now a Times columnist.

It was brought to the paper by Neil Sheehan, a Times reporter in Washington who
had covered Vietnam -- Sheehan, half poet, half cop. Daniel Ellsberg, who turned
against the war after serving in the Defense Department, has identified himself
as the person through whom Mr. Sheehan got the documents. After he left the
Defense Department Mr. Ellsberg had access to one of the 15 copies, as a
consultant to the Rand Corporation.

First we had to make sure the papers were genuine. James Greenfield, then
foreign editor, headed a page-by-page examination. He convinced us they were not
the product of dormitory typewriters -- "you be the Chief of Staff and I'll be
the C.I.A."

The war was still going on in 1971. Although the documents ended in 1968, not
touching current operations or the Nixon Administration, nobody had any doubts
that President Nixon would react with fury. We knew that many Americans might
also be angry at us -- including some we cherished most in the land, our regular
readers.

All the reporters and editors directly involved were strongly for publication.
Some of them, including myself, then managing editor, had at one time supported
the war. Outside the news department were editors and executives who had always
opposed the war but felt The Times should not mount such a massive challenge to
government secrecy and feared the courts would rule against us.

They received support from Lord, Day & Lord, our outside law firm, which made
its point by walking out on us. But we also had lawyers who understood the First
Amendment and the purpose of newspapers -- led by The Times's own chief counsel,
James Goodale.

On such a matter the final decision could be made only by the person responsible
for the entire newspaper and its purpose. After all the articles and headlines
were written and set in type, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, the publisher, gave his
approval.

Two days later, Sunday, June 13, we printed the first of what would be nine
installments. On Tuesday the Government got a court order blocking further
publication of the series.  Then began the most important press case in U.S.
history; our legal team was led by Alexander M. Bickel and Floyd Abrams. The
Supreme Court ruled 6 to 3 against the Government's effort at prior restraint.

And in 1989 came this epilogue: Erwin N. Griswold, who as Solicitor General had
presented the Government's case, wrote that he had "never seen any trace of a
threat to the national security from the publication" of the Pentagon Papers.

Historians still study the story in the Pentagon Papers: how the American public
was taken ever deeper into the war, never told the full truth by the Presidents,
themselves often stumbling and frightened.

But for other editors I offer only this advice, 20 years later:

First get the right colleagues and lawyers. Second, if you know in your stomach
that information stamped secret is essential to public understanding of where
the Government is going, or has been, there is only one answer to the question
asked of us at the time: "How can you print this?" The answer is, "How can we
not?"

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 12, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Subpoena Sought for Boa Constrictor

BYLINE: By RONALD SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 437 words


The lawyer for a Taiwanese immigrant accused of taking part in the murders of
three Vietnamese youths asked a Manhattan judge yesterday to subpoena a boa
constrictor into court on the ground that the police had used the snake as an
"instrument of terror" to coerce a confession from his client.

"Imagine the fear he felt," the lawyer, Paul Ascher, said as he tried to
persuade Justice Richard T. Andrias of State Supreme Court to order that the
seven-foot snake be brought into court. The lawyer said he wanted the judge to
experience the "terror of the snake" and thus hand down a ruling that his
client's admissions to the police were involuntary and could not be used as
evidence against him.

'Zoological Showcase'

Mr. Ascher said there was a strong legal precedent to call the boa as a witness:
a 1908 ruling by a New York State appeals court that overturned a decision in
which a judge refused to allow into court a horse that was at issue in the case.

But Justice Andrias demurred, indicating that he would decide later this month
whether to be the first judge in New York ever to subpoena a snake as a witness
in a murder case.

"At this point I don't need the snake," he said. "And I don't have to make a
zoological showcase of this courtroom."

The defendant, 20-year-old David Tai, contends that the police used the snake to
force him to incriminate himself in the Oct. 15, 1990, murders of three
Vietnamese youths who were found shot to death in a parking lot at 75 Reade
Street.

A police spokesman, Lieut. Raymond O'Donnell, said that the snake belonged to an
officer assigned to the First Precinct station house at 16 Ericsson Place and
that the officer had left it there because he could no longer take care of it.
The snake, named Maxwell, is now kept in a fish tank in the police scooter room,
where it is fed three mice a day.

Mr. Tai, of 515 58th Street in the Sunset Park section of Brooklyn, contends
that after he and three other defendants were arrested on Oct. 18, two officers
forced him to sit near the snake while he was being interrogated.

During the interrogation, he said, an "American" officer threatened to loose the
snake on him unless he confessed to the shooting. Meanwhile, Mr Tai said, a
kinder Chinese-American officer warned him to obey, saying, "We're Chinese, and
you know Americans mean what they say."

Colleen Roche, a spokeswoman for the Manhattan District Attorney, said the
office would have no comment on Mr. Tai's allegations until a court hearing on
the snake, which is set for June 25. The police, too, would not comment on Mr.
Tai's account.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A defense lawyer in a murder case wants to subpoena a boa
constrictor he said the police used to threaten his client. Police Officer
Mitchell Zykofsky held the seven-foot snake, named Maxwell, at the First
Precinct station house at 16 Ericsson Place, where a fellow officer has kept it.
(Ed Quinn for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 12, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

In the Nation;
An Unwinnable War

BYLINE: By TOM WICKER

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 715 words


The Persian Gulf war evoked many echoes of Vietnam; and the quick and
overwhelming victory in the desert awakened many of the old charges -- in
Vietnam the U.S. sold out a loyal ally, failed to use sufficient force, but
still lost the war only for lack of support at home.

One of the most important contributions of the memoirs of Clark Clifford, just
published by Random House as "Counsel to the President," is to demolish these
arguments with the authority of an extraordinary public man who played a vital
role in most of the Vietnam era.

"The war was not lost at home," Mr. Clifford writes. "It was lost where it was
fought, in the jungles and rice paddies of Southeast Asia, and in the offices of
a corrupt and incompetent ally."

Clark Clifford served as a member, then chairman, of the President's Foreign
Intelligence Advisory Board in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, and in
the last year of the latter he was its Secretary of Defense. He argued against
President Johnson's deployment of ground troops to Vietnam in 1965, thereafter
supported the war policy, then from the Pentagon became a powerful advocate for
"winding down" the war, stopping the U.S. bombing of North Vietnam and
negotiating peace.

Mr. Clifford was more than an officeholder. From his service as counsel to
President Truman and architect of the great Presidential victory of 1948, as
manager of the Eisenhower-to-Kennedy transition in 1960, as a personal counselor
to John F. Kennedy and as a leading Washington attorney, he had become by the
late 60's one of the most impressive figures in the capital and the Democratic
Party -- a voice to be listened to with respect.

As Secretary of Defense, Mr. Clifford had the courage to do what few public
officials ever do; he reversed himself and argued against a policy he had
previously supported (risking Lyndon Johnson's formidable wrath). As a
memoirist, he does not shrink from admitting his own mistakes and those of the
Administrations -- two of them Democratic -- that pursued a war he came to see
as "unwinnable at any reasonable level of American participation."

The U.S., he asserts, "overestimated our allies, underestimated our adversary,
and thought that the American presence on the battlefield would be sufficient to
change the situation in our favor. We were wrong."

Mr. Clifford is impatient with the charge of "selling out" an ally. The U.S., he
points out, sent troops and advisers to Indochina from the late 50's until 1973,
"the longest war in American history." It sent "massive aid" to South Vietnam
throughout that period and for two more years. Over 2.5 million Americans, of
whom 58,000 died, were engaged in the war, and well over $150 billion was spent
to support it.

"It was our South Vietnamese allies -- fractious, corrupt, and poorly led -- who
failed," Mr. Clifford concludes. "They were given every chance to survive and
succeed."

He dismisses, too, as a "dangerous" myth the notion that the antiwar movement in
the U.S. and the press were responsible for defeat.

And it was, he writes, "the hawks, not the doves, who weakened America by
pursuing the war for so long. The hawks argued that America's worldwide strength
and credibility were on the line in Vietnam, which was not true. They argued
that Vietnam was another Munich, which was not true. By putting our national
prestige on the line at the point where our ability to control events was at its
weakest, the hawks undermined the very national strength and prestige they
claimed to be protecting."

For all these reasons, Clark Clifford -- buttressed by the record of the period,
copiously quoted, and by his own unparalleled experience -- argues that "We
should not draw the wrong lessons from Vietnam. It was a defeat but not because
we failed to stay the course. Rather than lacerate ourselves for our failure, I
believe we can look back today and say that we demonstrated our willingness to
make an enormous commitment. . . . We did everything we could reasonably do to
help the South Vietnamese -- more, for that matter."

These arguments won't end debate on Vietnam; that's probably beyond anyone's
power. They ably counter, however, the lacerating idea that we could have done
in Vietnam what we did in the desert, if only we would have.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 12, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Immigration Brings New Diversity To Asian Population in the U.S.

BYLINE: By FELICITY BARRINGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1129 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 11


Unusually large waves of immigrants from Southeast Asia and South Asia in the
1980's transformed the Asian community in the United States, setting off an
explosion of diversity among Asian-Americans, the nation's fastest-growing
minority, figures made public today by the Census Bureau show.

The political upheavals and economic hardships that beset Asian nations from Sri
Lanka and the Philippines to China and South Korea have sent more than two
million immigrants across the Pacific Ocean in the past decade, according to
Federal immigration figures.

As a result, the fastest-growing subgroups under the Asian-American umbrella
were Vietnamese (134.8 percent growth in the past decade), Indians (125.6
percent) and Koreans (125.3 percent).

'Different From Earlier Ones'

"These immigrants are different from earlier ones because of their enormous
diversity," said Lawrence H. Fuchs, a professor of American Civilization and
Politics at Brandeis University. "We had Japanese, Chinese and Filipinos. The
variety now is just enormous. You have variety within variety -- more variety of
class, more variety of skill, more variety in origins."

In 1965, Asian-Americans numbered barely one million; a quarter of a century
later, the census counted 7.3 million Americans of Asian and Pacific Islander
background. Immigration represented about 54 percent of the increase; the
remainder represented children born to Asian parents here.

While Chinese-Americans are still the dominant Asian group in this country,
they, too, have seen profound changes in the past 25 years.

Since 1965, said Ronald Takaki, a professor of Ethnic Studies at the University
of California at Berkeley, the number of Chinese immigrants has equaled or
surpassed the number who came here in the first 80 years of Chinese immigration.

He said that more than 60 percent of the 1.6 million Chinese-Americans here had
been born overseas and that the figure had climbed to more than 80 percent in an
area like New York City's Chinatown. The population of Monterey Park, a Los
Angeles suburb, is more than half Chinese, mostly immigrants from Hong Kong and
Taiwan.

Breakdown by Ethnicity

Nearly 23 percent of Asian-Americans are of Chinese heritage, and about 19
percent, or 1.4 million people, trace their roots to the Philippines.
Japanese-Americans, who 30 years ago represented 52 percent of the
Asian-American population, now represent 11.7 percent, just ahead of East
Indians, at 11.2 percent, and Koreans, at 10.9 percent.

These figures from the 1990 census represented the most detailed breakdown to
date for the nation's Asian minority. The figures also included breakdowns for
some Hispanic subgroups, including Mexicans, Puerto Ricans and Cubans. These
figures show that Mexicans remain the dominant group among Hispanic residents.
The 13.4 million Americans of Mexican heritage make up 60 percent of the 22.3
million Hispanic people counted in the 1990 census, roughly the same proportion
as in 1980.

The 53 percent increase in the Hispanic population in the 1980's largely
reflected a rise in groups that had already established themselves in this
country. But among Asians, many of the new immigrants had little cultural
connection to the earlier Asian immigrants.

More Cultures Represented

Some parts of the country have been settled by ethnic groups whose very names
are unfamiliar, like the Hmong, the agricultural people from the mountains of
Laos who have moved by the thousands into communities like Eau Claire, Wis., and
Fresno, Calif.

Almost 40 percent of all Asian-Americans, or 2.4 million people, live in
California, while New York and Hawaii each have slightly more than 9 percent.

Dr. Fuchs and Dr. Takaki said Asian-Americans had become a more economically
stratified group, with a highly visible and successful layer of professionals --
doctors, engineers and scientists -- a strong commercial middle-class that
includes grocers, nurses and government workers, and a less-visible group of
immigrants, many still on welfare.

Dr. Takaki said he had found welfare rates as high as 80 percent among some
Hmong communities. The Hmong, whom the Central Intelligence Agency recruited
from their rural homes to help fight the North Vietnamese in the 1960's, "are in
many cases illiterate in their own language," and are ill-equipped to find a
place in the American economy, Dr. Takaki said.

Filipinos, while no longer one of the most rapidly growing Asian minority
groups, still increased their numbers by 81.6 percent , or more than 600,000
people, in the 1980's, according to the 1990 census. But, like a smaller and
faster-growing minority, the East Indians, Filipinos tend to have less
difficulty adapting to a new culture, in part because most arrive speaking
English.

"The Indians are a more integrated group," Dr. Takaki said. "They are betwixt
and between -- Asians, but English-speaking. They come here with a certain
degree of Westernization and language proficiency."

As a result, he said, they are less likely to congregate in easily identifiable
ethnic enclaves.

"This is true for Filipinos too," he said. "Filipinos also represent a critical
mass, but you don't often find the establishment of 'Manila-towns.' Filipinos
and Asian Indians tend to be much more in the mainstream economy than other
immigrants."

But the large existing population of Filipinos and the long backlogs that keep
would-be-immigrants waiting for five or even 10 years have slowed that
community's growth rate to 81 percent, well below the 107.8 percent that
Asian-Americans as a whole have experienced in the past decade.

"You can't get the percentage growth for Filipinos any more," said Dr. Fuchs.
"In the case of Indians and Koreans, you have a large percentage of people who
are fairly well-educated and have a perception of the opportunity here, a vision
of the future. They have friends, connections and relatives already here. The
base isn't as large as the Filipinos', so they're in a growth spurt. Once their
population base is larger, their growth rate will fall back like the Filipinos'
did."

Dr. Fuchs and Dr. Takaki predicted that the 1990's would see an Asian
immigration as large as that of the 1980's, thanks, in part, to revised Federal
immigration legislation enacted last year.

Other figures from the census released today show the Japanese-American
population -- most of them second- third- and fourth-generation Americans --
stands at 847,000. The Korean-American population has risen to nearly 800,000
and the East Indian population stands at 815,000. The Vietnamese population in
the United States is about 615,000. Laotians number 149,000, Cambodians 147,411,
Thais 91,000, Hmong 90,000 and Pakistanis 81,000.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 22, 1991, Saturday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article on June 12 about the diversity of the
Asian-American population misidentified one group. Figures from the 1990 census
show that 11.2 percent of Asian-Americans are of Indian descent, not "East
Indian."


GRAPHIC: Graphs: "More Asians in the United States" shows percentages of Asians
vs. Chinese, Koreans, Indians, Japanese and Filipinos in the United States in
1980 and 1990. (Source: Census Bureau) (pg. D25)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

The Real Story of '68 Vietnam Bombing Halt

SECTION: Section A; Page 28; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 879 words


To the Editor:

William Safire's May 23 column ("Clark Clifford's Confession") turns history on
its head about the covert operation mounted in October 1968 by Richard M. Nixon,
John Mitchell and Anna Chennault to ditch President Lyndon Johnson's agreement
with Hanoi for serious peace negotiations to end the Vietnam War. I participated
in the events of that month and have recently done extensive research on the
period for my own historical purposes.

Mr. Safire states that Mr. Johnson's bombing halt announcement on Oct. 31, 1968,
looking to immediate negotiations, was an "election-weekend stunt." On the
contrary, "Counsel to the President," Mr. Clifford's memoir, shows that Mr.
Johnson's terms for a bombing halt, worked out in late June 1968, never changed.
As Mr. Clifford relates with feeling, Mr. Johnson resisted many attempts to
soften or shade these terms, forcing a platform confrontation that played a big
part in the disastrous Democratic National Convention in August. Some election
stunt!

The crucial breakthrough came from the North Vietnamese on Oct. 9 in Paris, when
they dropped their resistance to South Vietnamese participation in peace
negotiations. Both in Saigon and Washington, Mr. Johnson's military and civilian
advisers were unanimous in urging rapid pursuit of the opportunity, arguing that
North Vietnam was hurting and thwarted as never before and might be ready for
real give-and-take peace negotiations.

President Johnson promptly went back to President Nguyen Van Thieu of South
Vietnam, who reaffirmed his earlier concurrence in the unchanged terms, and on
Oct. 16 Mr. Johnson alerted the three Presidential candidates (Mr. Nixon, Hubert
H. Humphrey and George C. Wallace) in a conference call. In response to a
question by Mr. Nixon, Mr. Johnson made clear that he was sticking precisely to
his position, with which Mr. Nixon was familiar from previous personal
briefings. Mr. Nixon reaffirmed his support for a deal on that basis, and Mr.
Johnson took him at his word.

Although Mr. Johnson wanted to go ahead within the next day or two, niggling
details were raised both by Hanoi's men in Paris and by Mr. Thieu in Saigon,
consuming 10 days. By Aug. 27 everything seemed set.

At this point Mr. Thieu suddenly reneged and backed off. In all probability he
was critically influenced by anguished pleas from Anna Chennault, in constant
touch with Mr. Mitchell and the South Vietnamese Ambassador, Bui Diem. These
three had come together in Mr. Nixon's New York apartment, probably on July 12,
as Bui Diem recalls, with Mr. Nixon presiding and laying down that Mrs.
Chennault would be his channel to Mr. Thieu via Bui Diem.

About Oct. 29, as Mr. Clifford recounts in more general terms, Mr. Johnson and
his inner circle (of which I was not part) learned through intercepted South
Vietnam Embassy cables, particularly one of Oct. 27, that Anna Chennault was
conveying via Bui Diem apparently authoritative "Republican" messages urging Mr.
Thieu to abort or cripple the deal by refusing to participate.

That "smoking gun" cable included promises of later favor from Mr. Nixon,
including a possible visit to Saigon before inauguration if he were elected. (As
Mr. Nixon well knew, "reading the mail" of allied governments of importance to
United States foreign policy was not an exceptional practice in the postwar
period.) Thus alerted, Mr. Johnson requested Federal Bureau of Investigation
surveillance of Mrs. Chennault and the embassy, and the results amply confirmed
her activity.

No Clifford "confession" was needed about these actions. The surveillance was
disclosed fully in Senate Committee hearings in 1975, the F.B.I. testifying that
it accepted Mr. Johnson's request based on possible violations of the Neutrality
Act and the Foreign Agents Registration Act, both concerning dealings by United
States private citizens with the governments of other countries. Interference
such as Mrs. Chennault's is certainly something the United States Government is
entitled to know about as a matter of national security, in a situation such as
prevailed in late October 1968.

On Nov. 3, two days before the election, Mr. Johnson taxed Mr. Nixon with Mrs.
Chennault's activities, and Mr. Nixon categorically denied any connection or
knowledge -- almost certainly a lie in light of later disclosures. In the
circumstances, Mr. Johnson and Mr. Humphrey decided, separately, not to raise
what would surely have been a highly divisive issue so late in a campaign. A
year later, Theodore White, describing the episode in his book on the 1968
campaign, rightly called Mr. Humphrey's decision one of the most decent actions
ever taken by an American political figure.

Mr. Safire has badly distorted what was indeed a black page in American
political history. Clark Clifford's honest and unflinching account nails down
the conclusion that President Johnson acted throughout in the national interest
as he perceived it. We still lack an honest account of what Richard Nixon did
and knew, or in what interest, other than his own political gain.

WILLIAM P. BUNDY
Princeton, N.J., June 4, 1991

The writer was Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs,
1964-69, and editor of Foreign Affairs, 1972-84.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vercors, 89, Author Who Wrote Of Nazi-Occupied France, Is Dead

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section D; Page 24; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 643 words


Jean Bruller, who wrote under the name Vercors and whose clandestine wartime
novella, "The Silence of the Sea," moved the French nation and those who shared
with France the agony of the German occupation in World War II, died on Monday
at his home in Paris, his family announced yesterday. He was 89 years old.

The cause of death was not given.

"The Silence of the Sea" was the story of a German who loved France and who
tried for months to convince his French friends of Hitler's good intentions. He
realized too late that he had been deceived by the Nazis. The novel was widely
hailed as a powerful indictment of what the Nazis truly stood for in their
occupation of France.

It was published in France in early 1942 by Les Editions de Minuit, which
Vercors had founded with Pierre de Lescure and which functioned throughout the
war, much to the annoyance of German occupation authorities. The book was
published in the United States in 1943, and by 1948 "The Silence of the Sea" had
sold more than a million copies in 17 languages.

Writing While Recuperating

Vercors took his pen name from a mountain region at the foot of the French Alps.
He had been demobilized from the French Army shortly before the outbreak of
World War II. After the war began, he was drafted and was wounded. Recuperating
from his wound, he wrote two pages of his novel every night, he later said, to
keep his brain working. Vercors was also one of the names he used in the French
Resistance.

He kept his identity as Vercors a secret from as many people as he could, even
his wife. But his editor at Les Editions de Minuit was found out by the Nazis,
arrested and executed.

During the war, Vercors worked in the Resistance, passing messages for the
French branch of British Intelligence.

Before he wrote "The Silence of the Sea," Vercors was a little-known artist and
engraver. Under his real name, he wrote six works of satire from 1925 to 1939.
These included "A Slice-Up Man," "Hell" and "Reassuring Images of War."

Sold Publishing House

After the war, Vercors sold his publishing house, but continued to write essays
and fiction. Among the works that attracted attention in the United States were
"Three Short Novels" (1947), "You Shall Know Them" (1953), "The Insurgents"
(1956), "Paths of Love" (1961), "Sylva" (1962), "Quota" (1966) and "The Raft of
the Medusa," (1971).

Among the best received was "Sylva," which Germaine Bree, writing in The New
York Times Book Review, called "a delightful novel." In Paris, Le Monde praised
the novel and said that "as soon as one accepts the fiction in this
philosophical tale, one is carried along by its charm." The novel, like others
he wrote, was translated into English by his wife, Ruth Barisse.

His other works included "Denatured Animals" and "Tender Shipwreck."

Vercors was by no means limited to fiction and did not hesitate to speak out
against injustice wherever he saw it. In 1957, he returned his Legion of Honor
medal to the French Government in protest against what he called "the tortures
in Algeria," a reference to the conduct of French troops there.

In January 1973, as the Vietnam War dragged on and President Richard M. Nixon
seemed unable to extricate the Americans from a conflict that had become
globally unpopular, Vercors wrote an essay for the French daily Le Monde, which
was reprinted in The New York Times, that asked: "Where is the difference?
Between the devastation of Guernica by the planes of Hitler and the devastation
of Hanoi by those of Mr. Nixon, where is the difference?" Vercors referred to a
"Nero-like shadow" of Mr. Nixon, which, he said, would "hover over all of us who
will have done nothing to have stopped him."

Vercors was born Feb. 26, 1902, in Paris. He studied at the Ecole Alsacienne and
received a diploma as an electrical engineer.

NAME: Vercors (Jean Bruller)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jean Bruller, who wrote under the name Vercors. (Camera Press,
1970)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

ESSAY;
Carry Me Out of Old Virginny

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A; Page 29; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 712 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Remember that silent-movie classic in which Laurel and Hardy destroyed their
neighbor's car while he grimly took apart their house? The same tit-for-tat
demolition is happening within the Democratic Party.

Gov. Douglas Wilder is a Virginian, a Democrat, a Korea combat hero, the first
elected black Governor of any state. Senator Charles Robb is a Virginian, a
Democrat, a Vietnam combat hero, L.B.J.'s son-in-law, chairman of the Democrats'
Senatorial Campaign Committee. Both want to be President and they have long
detested each other.

Senator Robb and his operatives suspect that Governor Wilder's hand was in the
recent rehash of stories about Robb partying in the early 80's. The Governor
denied this but ordered his state police to investigate any intimidation of
people who accused the Senator of anything.

Governor Wilder and his coterie suspect that the hardball players on the Robb
staff were behind the electronic eavesdropping and taping of the Governor's
cellular calls from his car in 1988. A transcript that recently surfaced in The
Washington Post had him saying of Mr. Robb, "He's been reduced to nothing."

In this mud-wrestle, Governor Wilder is winning and Senator Robb is losing.

Senator Robb's aides stupidly called in a former Miss Virginia who was claiming
to have had an affair with the Senator and told her to warn her private-eye pal
that he would have I.R.S. problems. The woman had secretly "wired" herself,
however, and NBC gleefully broadcast her recording of the aide's blustering.

The Virginia Senator submitted to a lengthy examination about what he
characterized as an innocent massage in a hotel room. He broke the political
rule of dignified denial: Don't lie, but never go into detail.

Governor Wilder took a feistier approach. Although the eavesdropping of his car
phone shows him derogating his fellow Democrat, he protests that he was not the
source of the Robb smears; moreover, he issued a statement from a European jaunt
that the cellular invasion showed him to be "the victim of crime."

Senator Robb, on the ropes and under pressure from his senatorial colleagues,
has just suspended all three of his top staff aides. He admitted he did know
about the taping of Mr. Wilder, adding he hadn't listened to it and had ordered
it destroyed -- but not until a couple years after it came in over the transom.

The triumphantly victimized Governor has said from Europe he would agree to meet
with the Senator, not in Washington but in Richmond, where presumably he would
take a surrender in full gubernatorial regalia.

The question lurking in evil political minds: What else do the Robb forces or
supporters have in the files?

The divorced Governor has gutsily defended his friendship with the recently
divorced wife of the billionaire John Kluge. Provoked by the humiliation of the
Senator, however, Robb supporters are seeking evidence of a relationship in the
80's; perhaps to forestall that, the Governor is reminding snoopers that
telephone eavesdropping is a crime.

Who needs all this stuff? Here are two high officials with good futures, on the
same side of the same party, reducing each other's reputations to rubble -- for
what? To be the Vice-Presidential candidate on a losing ticket in 1992? Thegame
is not worth the candle.

Republicans in and beyond Virginia are quivering in their piety. Up to now,
national G.O.P. strategists had been worried that conservative Douglas Wilder
would push radical Jesse Jackson off the Presidential primary trail, and thereby
save Democrats from going too far left again.

But Governor Wilder, in at least contributing to the Robb ruination, has allowed
personal vindictiveness to show; he loses by winning. Jesse Jackson, saved by
the feud, will pick up delegates in the proportional-representation Democratic
primaries; that's great news for Republicans.

Thus do bugged belles and taped cells have their effect on great events. Twenty
years ago, electronic eavesdropping was used unlawfully to plug security leaks
or learn financial secrets; now, with advanced mikes and scanners, it is being
used to entrap fellow hardballers and to snatch gossip out of the air.

Nonracial, non-ideological, nonpartisan -- sleaze oozes on.

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
A Lifetime of Fighting For What One Believes

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 10; Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 411 words


In "Forever Activists," which was nominated for an Oscar this year as the best
documentary feature of 1990, Judith Montell interviews seven veterans of the
Abraham Lincoln Brigade, who fought for the Loyalist cause in the Spanish Civil
War from 1936 until they were disbanded in 1938.

The film's point, and one not often emphasized in films about the brigade, is
that for many of these men and women, the Spanish Civil War was just one of a
series of continuing social struggles that gave their lives meaning. "Forever
Activists" opens today at the Bleecker Street Cinema.

The scene-setting material (old newsreel clips) is familiar, but veterans' faces
and their stories seem ever new and raw, even when it's apparent that the same
tales have been told many times before. All of those who testify are creatures
of the Great Depression, idealistic and dedicated to improving the lot of the
people President Franklin D. Roosevelt addressed as his fellow Americans.

The film's highlight is a reunion of the veterans in Spain in 1986, on the 50th
anniversary of the war's outbreak. It looks to have been both a picnic and a
time for summing up.  Yet the film's most moving moments come when the veterans
recall their treatment when they went home after the war.

Passports were revoked, and for many their membership in the brigade was to cost
them jobs and reputations for decades to come. Most, it seems, absorbed the
shocks and went on to fight on behalf of labor, civil rights and the peace
movement during the Vietnam War.


On the same bill, but a good deal less effective, is "A Letter to Harvey Milk,"
Yariv Kohn's short fiction film. It's about the friendship of a gay woman (Karen
Waddell), who teaches creative writing at a California center for the elderly,
and one of her students, Harry Weinberg (Irving Hoffman), a widower. The movie
means well, but its characters are too politely conceived to be especially
compelling.

Forever Activists

Directed and produced by Judith Montell; photography by T. Robin Hirsh; edited
by Yasha Aginsky; music by Bruce Barthol and Randy Craig; narration written by
Mr. Aginsky, Phil Cousineau and Ms. Montell. Running time: 60 minutes.

A Letter to Harvey Milk

Directed, produced and written by Yariv Kohn; adapted from a short story by
Leslea Newman; distributed by Tara Releasing . Running time: 27 minutes. These
films are unrated. At Bleecker Street Cinema, at La Guardia Place.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

What Potential Presidential TV Debates Have!

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 405 words


To the Editor:

I strongly disagree with Tom Wicker's assertion in "High Noon, Low Hype"
(column, May 22) that Presidential debates have little or no value to the
American voter.

Without debates, a voter's only exposure to Presidential candidates is through
television commercials, bumper stickers and 10-second sound bites on the evening
news. True, voters will receive this superficial campaign publicity anyway, but
without debates, there may otherwise be no opportunity for the candidates to
confront important issues directly.

Without debates candidates could just as easily avoid issues altogether.
Would-be Presidents could simply address the importance of "family values," the
necessity of a "strong economy" and the evils of his opponent. Debates, however,
force candidates to define their national agenda and defend that agenda in front
of the entire nation.

Past Presidential debates have not answered my every question about the
candidates. Indeed, they often generate more questions about candidates and
issues than they seem to answer. But at least they challenge the candidates to
address national issues, while challenging the public to face these issues as
well. When voters are only exposed to television smear ads or "feel good"
commercials, featuring images of grandchildren or waving flags, neither the
public nor the candidates are challenged.

Mr. Wicker concludes that from 1960 to 1976 the United States "got along quite
well without Presidential debates." The Vietnam War, however, was never debated
publicly between the Presidential candidates in 1960, '64, '68 or '72. I think
it should have been. And in 1972, Richard M. Nixon was never forced to defend
his bombing of Cambodia or the corruption in his Administration by participating
in a debate with George McGovern. He should have been.

The worst our nation could have suffered from such debates was a better
understanding of the candidates and issues. And had those debates taken place,
our recent history might have been spared the damage that the Vietnam, Cambodia
and Watergate episodes have since inflicted.

Then again, maybe Presidential debates in those years would have had little or
no affect on history. All we know is that the potential benefit of Presidential
debates to the American people, whether that potential is fully realized or not,
is of great national value.

CHARLES HARDER
Santa Cruz, Calif., May 22, 1991

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Long and Lonely Journey of Ramsey Clark

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section B; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk; Law Page

LENGTH: 1635 words


Three portraits of his late father, the former Attorney General and Supreme
Court Justice, look down at Ramsey Clark from the walls of his disordered law
office on East 12th Street in Manhattan. Those who knew Tom C. Clark think that
if he could, he would be frowning over what he saw.

They think the elder Clark, a conventional and conservative Democrat, would
disapprove of his son's clients, who include the political extremist Lyndon H.
LaRouche Jr. and the Palestine Liberation Organization. They think he would
loathe his son's world view, which has led him to denounce American power and
policies from Hanoi to Tripoli, Grenada to Panama, and most recently, Iraq.

And those who knew Tom Clark think would be deeply disappointed that having
sacrificed his High Court seat in 1966 to facilitate his son's new role as
Attorney General, the younger Mr. Clark would have veered from the center of
power to the fringes of public opinion. From the Government's top
law-enforcement official, a post he held until 1969, Mr. Clark has evolved into
one of its harshest and most unrelenting critics.

But Ramsey Clark himself thinks his father, who died in 1977, would approve of
his views on law and life, just as he pooh-poohs the notion that deliberately or
subliminally he has spent that life repudiating what his father stood for. "He
might have said, 'Bub gets carried away every once in a while,' but he loved me
to a fault," he said, using a childhood nickname. "Everything I ever did, he
thought was wonderful."

Still Has His Texas Twang

Mr. Clark still seems like the boy from Dallas, though he has lived in New York
for more than 20 years. He still speaks with the soft twang that led Attorney
General Robert F. Kennedy to assign him civil rights work in the South in the
early 1960's. Texas argot persists as well, as he offered a visitor some "soda
pop" on a recent warm afternoon.

He remains thin and lanky, right down to his fingers, and seems perpetually
youthful. In fact, he is 63 years old, old enough for people to take the measure
of his highly unorthodox career.

Earlier this year, as the Persian Gulf war raged, Mr. Clark toured Iraq, where
he denounced what he called the American bombing of civilian targets. Earlier,
he met with Saddam Hussein. The trips brought him much criticism, as did earlier
excursions to Iran during the hostage crisis and to Libya after the American
bombing of Tripoli.

Last April, in an article in The New Republic entitled "The Curious Case of
Ramsey Clark," John B. Judis, a contributing editor, traced Mr. Clark's path
from the Justice Department to what he called "the furthest reaches of the
fevered swamps of American politics." Mr. Clark, he said, had squandered his
early promise and become "a legal 911 for a tawdry collection of accused
terrorists and neo- or ex-Nazis."

'Possessed by the Demons'

In his work for Mr. LaRouche, Mr. Judis asserted, Mr. Clark had gone from legal
counsel to publicist and apologist. Mr. Judis called Mr. Clark an "easy mark for
political con men," and said he had effectively "served as a flack" for
President Hussein of Iraq; Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader; and
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the Iranian revolutionary leader.

He further asserted that Mr. Clark was "possessed by the demons of
anti-Semitism." As evidence, he cited not only his representation of Mr.
LaRouche but also his defense of Karl Linnas, a onetime Nazi concentration camp
guard in Estonia who was deported from the United States to the Soviet Union,
and his defense of the P.L.O. in a suit filed by the family of Leon Klinghoffer,
the American killed by Palestinian terrorists on the cruise ship Achille Lauro.

Norman Podhoretz, editor of Commentary magazine, acknowledged that Mr. Clark had
what he called "a certain integrity. "Among the many who were radicalized in the
1960's, he stands out as the one really meant it," he said. "Far from swinging
back to the center, he has not only stayed radicalized but gone even further.

"But the content of this radicalism is negative and nihilistic," he added. "It
seems to consist only of hatred of the United States and automatic support for
anyone opposed to the United States, for any reason whatsoever in any context
whatsoever."

Though Mr. Clark has been criticized frequently over the years for his causes
and clients, those who have worked with him consider the New Republic critique
hyperbolic and unfair. Some say his career has been a distinguished one, though
one distinguished as much by generous spirit as legal victories.

"Ramsey goes where he thinks people are hurting," said Alan H. Levine, who
practiced with Mr. Clark for five years in the 1980's and now teaches at Hofstra
Law School. "I can't think of any Attorney General who has performed more useful
public service since leaving office."

William Kunstler, who worked with Mr. Clark on behalf of inmates in the Attica
prison uprising, called him "the voice of conscience in the American bar." And
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach, Mr. Clark's predecessor as Attorney General, added:
"Ramsey doesn't always show great judgment, but he's always shown great
courage." He called Mr. Clark a person of "absolute decency, total honesty, and
sincerity" and the anti-Semitism charge nonsense.

But even Mr. Clark's admirers depict him as a kind of wayward son. They say he
can be naive, stubborn, simplistic and sanctimonious, more emotional than
analytical. They suspect he is haunted by the ghost of his father and qualms
over his days in Washington when he prosecuted draft card burners protesting the
Vietnam War.

Still, few pretend to really know the man. "I don't get him as a human being,"
said his former law partner, Melvin L. Wulf of New York. "He was and is a total
enigma to me, and I don't think anyone worked with him as closely as I."

Affection and Admiration

Mr. Wulf described Mr. Clark as one who never realized his potential. "He lost
the opportunity to be a really effective, influential voice on the American
left, such as it is, and that was a great loss," he said.

Like many who have long known him, Henry Schwartzchild, a former longtime staff
member of the American Civil Liberties Union, spoke of Mr. Clark with a mix of
affection and admiration, puzzlement and sadness.

"He works in a hundred coalitions but he's very much a loner," he said. "His
career has not been successful -- nor would he have had it otherwise."

Mr. Clark takes the criticism in stride. He called Mr. Judis's facts "all wrong"
and said that The New Republic "has a thing about me," but he did not dwell on
the story. "I believe in a free press," he said. "I'd like to see one."

Apart from a recent photograph of Nelson Mandela, Mr. Clark's office is filled
with memorabilia from another era, a time when college students still attended
hootenannies and wore sports jackets and thin neckties to class. There are busts
of Lincoln, the Kennedy brothers and Lyndon B. Johnson, along with a photograph
of J. Edgar Hoover warily eyeing Mr. Clark.

Trouble Paying the Bills

He estimates that he does 75 to 90 percent of his legal work free, and with his
frequent trips abroad ("You have to stoke the fires all the time," he
explained.) costing him $25,000 to $50,000 annually, he acknowledges some
trouble paying bills.

He said one principle tied together his legal and political work: to make the
United States live up to its ideals. "The measure of your quality as a public
person, as a citizen, is the gap between what you do and what you say," he said.
"Camus said, 'I should love to be able to love my country and love justice.'
With him that was only a wish. I translate that into a duty."

That accounted, he said, for his decision to represent Mr. LaRouche, who was
convicted in 1988 for conspiracy, mail fraud and tax evasion in connection with
raising money through his political groups. "I don't believe in knocking people
I represent, but the idea that I'm his 'apologist' is absurd," he said. "If I
ever made a study of the man, I'd probably agree with 10 percent of what he
stands for. But that doesn't mean he shouldn't get a fair trial.

"If you don't stand up in the toughest cases, you're worthless," he said. "The
easy cases are easy."

Arrives When Smoke Clears

He said his love for country and for justice also explained his harsh criticism
of American foreign policy, and why he is prone to drop in on places as soon as
the smoke from American bombs and guns has cleared. He said America's legacy
abroad was one of "violence, poverty, authoritarian governments and turmoil." It
is a conclusion he feels Robert F. Kennedy would have reached had he lived
longer.

Though he said that people constantly tried to use him, he denied he was a dupe
for foreign leaders hostile to the United States, most recently Mr. Hussein.
"The idea that my going to Iraq helped a despot is too foreign to my
understanding of life to have any meaning," he said. "All I saw was a bunch of
poor people getting the hell beaten out of them."

Even the charge of anti-Semitism, which he called "kind of pitiful," didn't
perturb him. He differentiated between criticizing Israel and disliking Jews,
with whom he has practiced and still practices law. And he defended his
representation of Mr. Linnas, the former concentration camp guard, who died in a
Russian hospital after his deportation.

"There comes a time after the most horrible acts when the possibility of
reconciliation outweighs any possible need for retribution or to maintain the
integrity of the law," he said. "If you take a man who's senile, who's on his
deathbed, and you can hear the rattle, and you have to rush to strangle him
before he dies, then there's no hope for reconciliation."

NAME: Tom C. Clark

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Camus said, 'I should love to be able to love my country and
love justice,' " said Ramsey Clark, in his law office on East 12th Street in
Manhattan. "With him that was only a wish. I translate that into a duty." (Keith
Meyers/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 16, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

GENE-ALTERED PIGS PRODUCE KEY PART OF HUMAN BLOOD

BYLINE: By PHILIP J. HILTS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1518 words


Using genetic engineering techniques, biologists have created pigs that produce
human hemoglobin, the essential oxygen-carrying component of blood.

Experts said the achievement was a milestone in the effort to find a substitute
for blood that could be used in all types of transfusions and might offer
advantages over the donated blood now used. A blood substitute could be stored
for months instead of weeks, would be free of any risk of human infection, and
could be transfused into anyone without the need for blood typing and matching.

Officials of a small biotechnology company, DNX Inc. of Princeton, N.J., said
they had developed three pigs that produce human hemoglobin, the substance in
the red blood cells that transports oxygen throughout the body. When the pigs
were day-old embryos, the scientists injected sets of two genes that make human
hemoglobin, and now, about 15 percent of their hemoglobin is human.

A Key Purification Process

It is one of a very few times that scientists have put human genes into large
animals and had them function successfully.

The company's officials will outline the work today at a scientific meeting in
Anaheim, Calif., and will describe a discovery they regard as equally important:
a method of purifying the human hemoglobin produced.

The extracted hemoglobin has not been tried in humans, and might not succeed.
But DNX has given research data to the Food and Drug Administration and plans to
apply this year for approval of human trials.

The company said at least five years would be needed to complete research and
testing of pig-produced hemoglobin, and there are also serious questions that
will have to be overcome about the safety of using hemoglobin extracted from
animals for human transfusion.

Praise From Experts

But experts in the field nevertheless praised the achievement.

"I think this is an exciting development," said Dr. Robert Winslow, chief of the
blood research division of the Army's Letterman Institute of Research in San
Francisco. "Military doctors believe a solution to this problem of making a
blood substitute that can carry oxygen would have saved the lives of 10,000
soldiers in Vietnam. Soldiers bleed to death on the battlefield where you can't
get blood to them, and before you can get them back to where they can be
transfused."

Dr. Timothy Estep, vice president for research at the Baxter Health Care
Corporation, which has been working on extracting hemoglobin from human blood,
said the DNX work was "an interesting milestone" in the development of
hemoglobin through genetic engineering, adding: "It is one useful step among
many that need to be taken to make a blood substitute. We believe that some
product like this will be approved in the mid-1990's; things are moving fast."

Mr. Estep said the value of hemoglobin as a substitute for blood is generally
accepted among experts. "Now the question that must be answered is, how safe are
these products?" he said.

Among the safety questions are whether some animal viruses might escape the
purification process and cause illness in humans, and whether cellular debris
missed in purification could cause kidney damage or allergic reactions.

Dr. S. Gerald Sandler, chief of medicine in the blood division of the American
Red Cross, said the blood substitute work was important and welcome. He said
such a product would be especially useful in emergencies when blood was in short
supply, or when blood of the particular type was not available. He said he did
not expect that blood substitutes would eliminate the majority of ordinary blood
use, partly because of doctors' reluctance, partly because prices might be
higher than now expected and partly because safety problems might arise.

In recent years, the effort to make a blood substitute has turned toward genetic
engineering techniques in which animals are the hosts for foreign genes. In such
"molecular farming" several chemicals, including a substance that causes blood
to clot, have been successfully made.

The DNX experiments began with the two human genes that control the body's
production of hemoglobin. Researchers inject copies of the human genes into
day-old pig embryos that have been taken from a donor pig. The embroyos are then
inserted into the womb of a second pig, grow to term and are born. Pigs are used
because their hemoglobin closely resembles human hemoglobin.

Success With Three Pigs

Only about 5 in 1,000 of the transfers succeed, but three pigs have been born
with the human gene in their bodies in the last few years, the last one in
February. Research into breeding has begun, but DNX officials declined to
discuss the program in detail. In theory, all progeny of such breeding would
carry the human genes.

The altered pigs, which look and act just like ordinary pigs, produce red blood
cells that contain either pig hemoglobin or human hemoglobin. So far, about 15
percent of the cells have the human type, but company officials say they hope to
raise that to 50 percent.

Blood drawn from the pigs is put through a purification system that separates
the human hemoglobin from pig hemoglobin by distinguishing their molecular
electric charges. It is the discovery of this purification technique that
company officials believe is as significant as the creation of pigs carrying
human hemoglobin.

Other attempts to make blood substitutes have run into difficulties related
partly to purfication. One company, Biopure Inc. of Boston, tried using cow
hemoglobin extracted from ordinary cow blood, but tests in humans this year were
halted after unexpected reactions in the first volunteers.

An experiment by another company using hemoglobin extracted from human blood
that had been stored too long to be used in its whole form also failed early in
its human trials, apparently because debris from the red cells caused adverse
reactions, blood experts said.

The main advantages of making human hemoglobin in animals are related to red
blood cells. These cells are containers that carry hemoglobin through the body
as it absorbs oxygen in the lungs and delivers it to all cells.

But red cells are made of living membranes, which are perishable. Outside the
body they must be refrigerated, and even so are considered spoiled after about a
month. The red cells also bristle with an array of defensive molecules, and the
reactions of these in the body is what makes blood typing and matching
necessary.

But when hemoglobin is used alone, and purification is effective, there are no
defensive molecules. In addition, hemoglobin is a chemical rather than a living
cell and so may be stored for months, or even longer if freeze-drying
experiments prove successful.

When put into the bloodstream, naked hemoglobin carries oxygen just as it does
when in red cells. But while hemoglobin in red cells may last for six months,
naked hemoglobin lasts only hours or days.

Still, this is all the time that is needed in most uses. Transfusions are
intended as only a temporary blood supply until the body makes more.

Paul Schmitt, chief executive of DNX, said the company expected eventually to be
able to make the blood substitute for about $50 a unit, the standard measure of
blood, which is slightly less than a pint. He said the company would sell it for
about $250 a unit, and while this was higher than the $175 to $200 currently
charged for whole blood, Mr. Schmitt said blood banks would save money because
they would not have to perform typing and diseases tests and storage would be
cheaper.

He said the company could, if necessary, supply the United States' entire need
for blood. That would require a population of about 4 million donor pigs, which
could be grown in two years. There are now more than 60 million swine raised for
food each year in the nation.

The success of DNX raises questions not only about safety, but also of
philosophy.

Dr. Frank Loew, dean of the School of Veterinary Medicine at Tufts University,
said the work so far on genetic alteration of animals had shown that early fears
were exaggerated. "People thought we would see deformed animals and other
strange things," he said.

In fact, it was DNX itself that created some of the fears a few years ago. The
company, then named Embryogen, put extra growth hormone into pigs and created
animals that grew too fast. The animals were crippled, and the experiments were
stopped.

"The public is intolerant of cruelty to animals, or even apparent cruelty," Dr
Loew said. "Scientists must understand this."

He said that while some genetic experiments would be rejected ones like those at
DNX would be on the acceptable side of the new ethical lines. "This meets an
important social need without transgressing the new ethical feeling about
animals," he said.

Rabbi Ben-yamin Walfish, director of the Rabbinical Council of America, said
blood substitutes from pigs would probably raise no religious objections. In
Judaism, pigs may be used for purposes other than eating, he said, and in any
case, in matters of life and death kosher rules are set aside.

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Pigs that produce human hemoglobin have been created by
biologists using genetic engineering techniques. At a research center in Ohio, a
technician from DNX Inc. of Princeton, N.J., fed one of the pigs. (Mark Lyons
for The New York Times) (pg. 16)

Diagram: "Pig as Potential Blood Donors," shows how cloned human DNA can be used
to manufacture human compatible blood in pigs for use in human patients. (pg.
16)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 16, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
The 100 Questions

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 715 words


Twenty-four years ago to the week, I was handed a list of 100 handwritten
questions about the Vietnam War dictated by Defense Secretary Robert McNamara
and told to establish a task force to answer them. The assignment for a young
Pentagon official was a daunting one, as you will shortly understand.

We were to call our studies "History of U.S. Decision-Making Process on Vietnam
Policy." The public would come to know them, fortunately, by another name.

The 100 questions did not seem to have any particular rhyme or reason. Most were
the kinds of questions being raised at daily press briefings and in political
debate: How confident can we be about body counts of the enemy? Were programs to
pacify the Vietnamese countryside working? What was the basis of President
Johnson's credibility gap? About a dozen were historical: Was Ho Chi Minh an
Asian Tito? Did the U.S. violate the 1954 Geneva Accords on Indochina?

Though we asked, Mr. McNamara did not choose to illuminate us on his purposes.
We speculated that he was trying to help Bobby Kennedy's challenge to President
Johnson, or Johnson's re-election, or trying to better understand the war or
exorcise his own personal demons. To this day, I do not feel I know what drove
him to launch the project.

Mr. McNamara's aides authorized me to hire six experts and said the boss wanted
the job done in three months. The task force began collecting documents from all
over the Government. It was evident that we could not answer the questions
without a lot more documents, more experts and more time. Nor did we feel that
most of the questions could be "answered." We thus proposed in a memo to Mr.
McNamara to transform the questions into 47 monographs that would tell the story
of the war chronologically from 1944 to the present.

He approved the memo and through his aides issued this guidance: Make the
studies encyclopedic and objective. Preserve the substance of the documentary
record. And let the chips fall where they may.

Over the next year and a half, I expanded the team from 6 to 36 experts
(military officers, historians, think-tank researchers and civil servants). We
collected some 50 oversized safes full of documents. Our offices were filled
with chaos from dawn to dusk.

There is so much to say about the people involved in the project. Many like Paul
Gorman and John Galvin, now Supreme Allied Commander of NATO, became generals.
Some like Morton Halperin and Richard Holbrooke were to become high Government
officials. Others like Daniel Ellsberg became famous for other reasons. All were
afflicted with a passion to preserve the record. We feared that unless we
finished the job, these fragments of truth we had collected would never be
assembled again, and that this "documentary" story of America and Vietnam would
vanish.

In early 1969 I took the final studies to Mr. McNamara, then president of the
World Bank. I set two hefty boxes in front of him. "Take them back to the
Pentagon," he ordered, without looking at the contents. I left with no idea if
or how or when they would be made public, or if they would survive.

More than two years later Hedrick Smith, then a reporter for The New York Times,
telephoned me and asked about the project. "You've got the studies?" I asked.
"You'll see," he responded.

And I did one Sunday morning in June, 20 years ago to the week, when The Times
began publishing the Pentagon Papers. I did not think then or now that the
publication would compromise U.S. national security. They were "history."

But I cannot say that I was pleased. I worried about the turmoil that would
enter my life, then as a scholar at the Brookings Institution. I worried about
the potential misuse of the papers by doves to stamp Government leaders as liars
and by hawks to brand war critics as traitors.

What troubled me was that the papers -- a vast, undigested mass of fragmentary
truths -- in the newspapers would become like sticks of historical dynamite,
damaging more than illuminating the ongoing struggle over Vietnam policy. How
publication affected that struggle is still unclear. But then and now and above
all, The Times's publication insured what mattered most to those of us who wrote
the studies and to our democracy -- that the papers would live.

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 16, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Persistent American Yearning

BYLINE: By James Reston;  James Reston is the former executive editor and
Washington columnist for The New York Times. This article is adapted from his
memoir, "Deadline: Our Times and The New York Times," to be published in October
by Random House.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2699 words


THE LAST DECADE OF A CENTURY IS A TEMPTING TIME FOR PRESIDENTS, journalists,
end-of-the-world preachers and other dreamers. Presidents in particular begin
meditating on their place in history, and wondering how to make it look a little
better than it was. George Washington made his famous farewell address in the
last decade of the 18th century, and foresaw safety and prosperity for the new
Republic in isolation from the quarrels of the world. In the last decade of the
19th century, President McKinley was not thinking of isolation (or of his sudden
death soon to come), but was planning a new American empire and leading the
country into the Spanish-American War. And at the beginning of the last decade
of the 20th, George Herbert Walker Bush, the 41st President, was proclaiming the
dawn of a "new world order," and starting it with a war against Iraq in the
Middle East.

After studying the fortunetellers of the past, I admired their bravery more than
their judgment. In the 1890's, the best of them were writing confidently about a
future world of "inevitable progress." They were convinced that there was
something in the nature of the universe, or maybe in the economics of supply and
demand, or in the spread of knowledge and education that would surely lead to
the Golden Age. By the time I arrived in Washington two world wars later,
however, the pessimists had taken over, with books deploring "The Decline of the
West" (Spengler), "The End of Our Time" (Berdyaev) and "The Fate of Homo
Sapiens" (H. G. Wells).

All of their guesses were interesting, but most of them were wrong, for the
world changed faster than they could change their minds. Some chalky genius,
monkeying around in a laboratory or a garage, was always discovering how people
could fly like birds, or send messages, pictures and even the music of Beethoven
through space, or extract more food from the bounteous earth, or wipe out
disease or go to the moon. These thinkers and tinkerers invented not only a
better mousetrap but also a better mouse, named Mickey, who went into the movies
and made children happy. They also developed new ways to kill more people, with
atom bombs, but the human race just went on producing more children by the same
delightful old-fashioned process anyway.

I admired the optimistic spirit behind President Bush's new world order, but I
couldn't find much new in it other than his war in the Middle East. He vowed it
would assure "for ourselves and for future generations" an Age of Peace, "where
the rule of law, not the law of the jungle, governs the conduct of nations." I
was all for George, but I thought this sounded very much like the pronouncements
of other Presidents, particularly those of Woodrow Wilson, who thought not only
that America could "change the world" but also that it had a moral duty to do
so.

There was, I thought, something both wonderful and goofy about all this
persistent American determination to reform the world. It reminded me of the
little signs that used to hang in some of the service stores in Dayton, Ohio,
when I was a boy. I forget the exact words, but they promised to do anything
"possible" by tomorrow but conceded that the "impossible" might take a few days
longer. This was the spirit that had conquered the American continent, survived
the great economic depression of the 30's, helped restore Western Europe and
Japan after World War II and survived the cold war with the Soviet Union for
almost half a century.

But before you could say Saddam Hussein or even Yasir Arafat, President Bush had
sent half a million Americans to the Middle East battlefield when Congress
wasn't looking, and chased the Iraqis out of Kuwait in four days. It was a
perfect American war: quick, flashy and all on television. More Americans were
murdered at home during those four days than were killed in the war. President
Bush called it, without undue modesty, the greatest military victory in the
history of the Republic, and scarcely mentioned the 150,000 Iraqis who were
slaughtered in the process.

Accordingly, I began to wonder about these wars to end war, and think that maybe
old John Adams had a better idea. Adams said at the end of the 18th century that
America should always try to help other nations in trouble, but he added that we
should "go not abroad seeking monsters to destroy." In my years in the capital,
however, we were finding monsters all over the world, not only big-league
monsters in the Soviet Union and China but bush-league monsters in Korea,
Vietnam, Cuba, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Panama, Iraq and various other places
that didn't want our advice about freedom and democracy, or even know what the
words meant.

No doubt the Iraq war served several useful purposes. It put future aggressors
on notice that they could not assume American neutrality. It made clear that the
United States regarded the oilfields of the Middle East as "vital" to its
security and would not permit them to come under the control of any hostile
power. It put an end to the self-doubts that had plagued the nation after its
defeat in Vietnam, but this "Vietnam syndrome" was followed by a kind of "Iraq
swagger" of boasting that Uncle Sam was No. 1 and would now at last redeem the
optimistic visions of Woodrow Wilson and the other prophets of eternal peace.

My optimism didn't go quite that far. I thought the long nightmare of an atomic
war was over for the foreseeable future, but I had more modest dreams. I didn't
believe in new world orders that relied on fighting wars rather than deterring
them, or in United Nations resolutions that "authorized" the United States to do
most of the fighting. I believed in collective, not selective, security, and I
thought we needed to ask ourselves some questions.

What areas were really "vital" to the security of the United States? Would our
schools and slums be high on this list? When and how were we going to make the
United States independent of Middle East oil and how? How could we have a new
world order without cooperation between the United States and the Soviet Union?
When were these giants and the other industrial nations going to control or stop
the shipment of advanced military weapons and materials for the production of
nuclear, chemical and bacteriological explosives to the shaky gangster nations
of the world? In short, where was the end-of-the-century threat to United States
security anyway -- abroad or at home?

So every once in a while I mounted my old pulpit at The Times and suggested that
the time had come, not for another new world order proclaimed, financed and
policed by the United States and started with a war, but for a new American
order beginning with a reappraisal of our commitments and resources and a reform
of our priorities and decision-making procedures. I wasn't throwing off the
disorder of the old world -- it made so much news! -- I just felt it could be
improved with a little less fighting and a little more patience, common sense
and diplomacy. I may have been wrong about this, but I didn't think it would
hurt to review our commitments, keep them in line with our bank balances, pay
our debts and prepare our children for the new problems of the coming century.

I thought I knew George Bush fairly well, but I didn't recognize his warrior
pose. For years I had been longing for some Gentleman President to come along
and set an example of calm thinking and honest talking, and I felt that George
Bush was precisely that sort of man. The one I knew had promised "a kinder
America" in "a gentler world," and I admired his record. His whole career seemed
a preparation for the Presidency. He had more personal experience in Congress,
business, military intelligence, war and diplomacy than any other President of
my time. He was not an ideologue, having come out of the old Teddy
Roosevelt-Col. Henry L. Stimson progressive nonpartisan tradition. I followed
his career in the House of Representatives and at the United Nations. My wife,
Sally, and I flew around with him during the 1980 Presidential campaign, when he
was mocking Ronald Reagan's "voodoo" economics, and I felt sure he would bring a
more pragmatic spirit to the White House.

In many ways, he did. On most things, he consulted the leaders of Congress. He
abandoned his silly campaign promise of "no new taxes" (when he finally
switched, he called the new taxes "revenue enhancement"). He tolerated dissent,
and he held almost as many news conferences in his first year in the White House
as Ronald Reagan did in the previous eight years. But something happened to him
on his way to the White House. He campaigned like Richard Nixon and talked like
Lyndon Johnson, saying publicly that Saddam Hussein was "worse than Hitler," and
vowing publicly to "kick him in the ass." And when it was said that maybe he was
a bit of a "wimp," he disproved it by wandering into two wars in his first two
years in office.

He defied the principles of the United Nations when he went to war in Panama to
get rid of a dictator named Noriega (again, the personal military approach to
foreign policy), then relied on the United Nations principles when he went to
war against Iraq, and defended the wars as moral contributions to good over
evil.

More important, he talked about "the next American century," and said it was the
purpose of the United States to insure the stability and security of the Middle
East. "Among the nations of the world, only the United States of America has
both the moral standing and the means to back it up," he said. "We are the only
nation on this earth that could assemble the forces of peace."

The Republicans used to call this sort of thing "globaloney." Whatever it was, I
thought it aroused excessive expectations that would be followed, as usual, by
excessive disappointments. After all, most of the events that determined the
history of this century -- the collapse of the old empires, the rise of
Communism and Nazism, the Great Depression and the cold war -- were not
foreseen. Nevertheless, President Bush presumed to talk confidently about his
new world order for the next "American century."

There was no doubt that Saddam's brutal aggression deserved to be punished, but
there were many places in the world where war might be morally justified but
politically unwise. My fear was that this interventionist policy would
eventually produce a negative reaction in the United States, weaken the Western
alliance, revive the spirit of American isolationism and provoke racial tension
among blacks, who made up a disproportionate percentage of the American ground
forces.

His 100-hour ground war against Iraq, however, was highly popular. It was short
and dramatic. The armed services demonstrated more military foresight and skill
in waging the war than the civilian diplomats had shown in preventing it. And
the American press decided that nothing short of an economic depression could
keep President Bush from being re-elected in 1992.

I AVOIDED THIS GUESSING game, considering all my embarrassing predictions of the
past. I thought George Bush was driving into a future he could not foresee, with
one eye on the rear-view mirror and the other on the next election. He was, I
believe, thinking like an old soldier about the foreign wars of the past, and
not thinking much about the health of the nation, or even about the advice of
his own doctors to give his fluttery heart a rest.

Before the Iraq war started, I wrote that saying "my President, right or wrong"
was like saying "my driver, drunk or sober," but once the bombs started falling
on Baghdad and Tel Aviv, the debate ended and the popularity of the President
increased, as it did at the beginning of the Korean and Vietnam Wars.
Accordingly, I worked on my own idea, not of a new world order, but of a new
American order, which, in my imagination, would be planned in the last years of
the 90's and put into operation with a fixed deadline of Jan. 1, 2000.

I found that, to my delight and to the despair of my younger friends, the older
I got and the less information and energy I had, the more dogmatic I became. My
wife greeted this with a melancholy sigh, but I went ahead anyway. The new
American order of my imagination didn't contain anything that was not both
reasonable and achievable. For example, it would have in place by the first day
of the new century an energy program that didn't depend on the oil of the Middle
East. I thought this was essential, even if we had to rely on the sun, the wind,
atomic energy, taxes and horses. I didn't think this was ideal, but it seemed to
me more realistic than counting on peace and sanity in the Middle East.

In my new American order, the world wouldn't be peopled by phantoms, and the
objective would be to settle political disputes by negotiation, even with
scoundrels, and not by proclaiming another "American century" with Uncle Sam as
schoolmaster and chief of the world police. "Let George do it," I told myself,
wasn't a policy but a line out of an old musical comedy, which I didn't think
would be very popular when the bills came in.

By Deadline Jan. 1, 2000, under my dreamy scheme, both political parties would
be in agreement (1) that the main threat to the nation's security came from
within and not from abroad; (2) that a strong and modified defense force was
essential, and (3) that even America's resources were limited, and should not be
squandered on reluctant peoples who would rather fight than eat. I thought that
clarity as well as charity begins at home, and therefore that we should cut our
military guarantees to the essential minimum and reduce all moral posturing by
Congressmen and columnists as much as possible under the First Amendment. (This
would, of course, be denounced as the new isolationism, but I thought it was
better to be denounced for avoiding unnecessary wars than for fighting them.)

Under my fantasy of a new American order, the two political parties would have
an official smoke-filled room, preferably the old Supreme Court chamber in the
Capitol, where candidates for the parties' nominations for the Presidency and
Vice Presidency would be chosen by party leaders who knew something about
character and ability to govern the country. The political parties would, before
the election of 2004, I insisted, have abolished the present disgraceful system
of campaign financing and arranged for at least six free television debates
between the candidates (minus all reporters). They would not eliminate the state
primary elections, but would retain the power to veto any turkey or quail
proposed in these popularity contests.

On one wall of this smoke-filled room, there would be a portrait of Warren
Gamaliel Harding to remind the pros not to make the same mistake again, and on
another wall there would be a portrait of Teddy Roosevelt, preferably not on
horseback, together with his favorite warning:

"The things that will destroy America are prosperity at any price, peace at any
price, safety first instead of duty first, the love of soft living and the
get-rich-quick theory of life. This country will not be a permanently good place
for us to live unless it's a good place for all of us to live."

I had some other dandy, if not original, ideas: I thought it would help if
Presidents and other leaders told the truth, and mentioned the word "sacrifice"
once in a while. I didn't think we should amend the Constitution to conform to
every popular whim of the day, or try to police the bedrooms of the American
people. I thought it was unwise to corner dictators and other wild beasts, and
since Presidents were not immortal, I favored Vice Presidents that were as
reliable as a spare tire. I was for a longer school year because I was more
interested in smart kids than "smart bombs," and I was for voluntary national
service by young people to help in the overburdened, overexpensive hospitals,
and for a national anthem that anybody could sing, drunk or sober.

Nobody listened to these fantasies, of course, but that's one of the nice things
about being over 80: you don't care whether they listen, and even when they do,
you can't quite hear what they say.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Right: The author at his Washington home, 1991. Left: in
London, 1940, early in World War II. (Left: Wide World. Right: George Tames for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 17, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Women's Combat Role Raises Questions

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 351 words


To the Editor:

"As the military downsizes in the coming years," Capt. Carol Barcalow suggests
in "Women's Role in Combat: The War Resumes" (front page, May 26), "women will
need to be convinced that they have the chance for future advancement. And that
means combat arms cannot be closed to them." You also quote Prof. Charles Moscos
of Northwestern University saying: "I don't know if everyone will rush to expose
enlisted women to combat so female officers can advance their careers. Enlisted
women are not clamoring for it."

The enlisted men in my infantry camp in the 1940's were not clamoring for combat
either. Few would have willingly headed for the beaches of Guadalcanal or
Normandy. If women are declared eligible for combat, they'll be given no choice
either.

Much of the problem arises from the clouding of the term "combat" by the
exercises in Grenada, Panama and the Persian Gulf. Shooting fish in a barrel is
not comparable to months on Iwo Jima or in the mud of Vietnam. If there will be
no more Battles of the Bulge, why not send older folk into battle? We can push
buttons. No one can anticipate what future wars may involve, so let's approach
co-ed foxholes with caution.

Captain Barcalow says we don't understand modern warfare. "Even in noncombat
roles," she notes, "women have been exposed to risk for some time."

As the women of Guernica, Hiroshima and My Lai could tell her, that has always
been true in wartime. The women who served alongside me in North Africa and
Italy would have been blown up right along with me if our office had been hit.
But until the bomb dropped, certain amenities were observed. Female police and
fire officers are always at risk, but can maintain their privacy and dignity in
obvious ways unknown in serious battle zones. Is this important?

Does the picture of a man bayoneting a woman no longer repel us? Granted that
killing anyone is the sort of thing we might have stopped applauding with
parades and the like, is male violence to females no longer disturbing? Will we
even discuss this?

AL HORMEL
Weston, Conn., May 28, 1991

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 17, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Recovering From Wounds, Youth Is Slain by Stray Shot

BYLINE: By JACQUES STEINBERG

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 565 words


A 17-year-old Brooklyn youth who friends said had been shot at a party three
weeks ago was killed early yesterday morning by a stray bullet as he peered out
the window of a friend's apartment, the police said.

The teen-ager, Tango Gillard, had gone to the window when he heard the sound of
gunfire and a bullet struck him in the head at 2:20 A.M., the police said.

Detective Eddie Horton of the 73d Detective Squad said yesterday that the police
did not know why the shots were fired or who fired them outside the building, at
251 Osborn Street in the Brownsville Houses, a city housing project.

Mr. Gillard, who lived on the second floor of the building in the Brownsville
section, had gone up to the fourth floor to visit a friend whose name was not
released by the police. Mr. Gillard was pronounced dead on arrival at Brookdale
Hospital, a police spokesman, Sgt. Nicholas Vreeland, said.

'Scared and Nervous'

The killing was not the first time the teen-ager's life had been touched by
violence, friends said.

Florence Wheeler, 55, who said she had raised Mr. Gillard since he was an infant
and whom he called "grandma," recalled that he had come home from a party three
weeks ago with his shoulder and hand bandaged.

Ms. Wheeler said Mr. Gillard told her that he had been shot at the party by a
boy he did not know. She said she had no other detils of the incident.

"He was scared and nervous," she said.

The police said yesterday that they were unaware of the earlier incident, though
they said Mr. Gillard's hand had a bandage on it when he was killed.

"I just can't tell you if it was a stab wound or a gunshot wound," Sgt. Reginald
Ledee of the Housing Police said.

Violence in Neighborhood

Residents of the housing project said yesterday that gunfire and drugs were part
of daily life in the Brownsville Houses.

"You can't be safe anywhere," said Ms. Wheeler's daughter Harriet. "Everyday I
hear guns."

One friend of the family who spoke on condition of anonymity said the gunfire
early yesterday was particularly powerful.

"It was like Vietnam," the woman said. "The walls were shaking. I rolled out of
bed, my babies jumped on me and we crawled into the next room. It was like a war
zone."

In the seven-room apartment where Florence Wheeler had raised Mr. Gillard along
with her five daughters and three sons, family members remembered him as a
respectful young man who liked basketball and rap music.

'A Straight Kid'

"He was a straight kid," said Pamela Wheeler, one of Florence Wheeler's
daughters. "We got him when he was just a little boy and we couldn't stop
spoiling him."

Florence Wheeler said the boy's mother, a friend of the family, had given him to
her to raise while the child was still an infant, though she would not say why.
Though he was never adopted, "he was a member of the family," she said.

Mr. Gillard was happiest when he was playing basketball, said a 15-year-old
friend, Dwayne Legree, and he had perfected an effective, behind-the-back pass.

"He loved sports," Florence Wheeler said, and he often wore one of two favorite
caps -- either one that was emblazoned with the logo of the Los Angeles Lakers
or another with the logo of the Chicago Bears.

"Everybody knew Tango," Mr. Legree said, sitting on the steps of Mr. Gillard's
building. "He was a funny person. He said a lot of jokes."

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tango Gillard, a 17-year-old Brooklyn resident who was killed by
a stray bullet yesterday morning as he looked out a window at 251 Osborn Street.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 18, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Editors' Note

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 248 words


An article on June 6 discussed newly issued transcripts of conversations
secretly tape-recorded in the White House under President Richard M. Nixon. The
article said: "Some of the new tapes amplify on dark aspects of Mr. Nixon's
personality that have led some critics to accuse him of vindictiveness and
anti-Semitism. These unguarded remarks tend to cloud the image Mr. Nixon has
tried to cultivate in recent years of an elder statesman."

But two of the transcript passages that prompted those comments were not new
disclosures; they had been published earlier.

One, from a conversation on July 24, 1971, shows Mr. Nixon not knowing the name
of Assistant Attorney General William H. Rehnquist, whom he nominated to the
Supreme Court less than three months later. A transcript of that tape, in
slightly different form, was issued in 1974 by the House Judiciary Committee
during its impeachment inquiry.

The other previously published passage records Mr. Nixon on May 5, 1971,
wondering whether the antiwar protesters known as the Chicago Seven were "all
Jews." While never published officially before this month, that transcript had
been obtained by The Times and printed on Sept. 24, 1981.

No subject index exists for the Nixon transcripts. Most were published before
1980, when The Times began filing its published articles in a computer data
base. The "all Jews" comment, however, does appear in the data base, and The
Times should have noted its earlier disclosure.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editor's Note

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1149 words



INTERNATIONAL A3-13

The West could help the Soviet Union out of its economic morass without
resorting to vast amounts of aid, Secretary of State Baker said, outlining a
series of proposals. Page A1

Officials plan talks on Soviet aid and U.S. dollar A12

Boris Yeltsin arrived in the U.S., fresh from his victory in becoming the first
popularly elected Russian president. He sounded a conciliatory note about his
political rival, Mikhail Gorbachev. A12

Yeltsin has new aura and power A12

Anti-Semitic propaganda in Romania is on the rise. The Parliament recently
honored Marshal Ion Antonescu, the dictator who ordered pogroms and deportations
that led to the deaths of at least 250,000 Jews during World War II. A10

Filipinos continued to dig out from beneath a thick blanket of volcanic ash
released in a week of deadly eruptions by Mount Pinatubo in cities across
thousands of miles. A7

The job of Prime Minister of India has become the object of a power struggle
within the Congress Party between the elderly party president and a regional
leader from the business capital, Bombay.  A8

Gunmen kill judge in trial of Bhutto's husbandA8

Shanghai Journal: Cosmetic surgery gains in popularity A4

The United States has assured Israel that it would veto any Security Council
resolution affecting the Middle Eastern peace process as long as peace talks
were under way, Administration officials said.  A3

Jordan's Government was dismissed by King Hussein, who asked the Foreign
Minister, a Palestinian who favors a negotiated settlement with Israel, to form
a new administration, senior officials said. A3

Algeria's new Prime Minister picks Cabinet A10

News analysis: South Africa has scrapped the last apartheid laws, but President
de Klerk now faces the much more difficult step of enticing the African National
Congress into negotiations on a power-sharing constitution. A10

Infants' AIDS test is called reliable A5

Mudslide inundates Chile slums, killing at least 61 A6

NATIONAL A16-22

Preventive medical insurance for periodic tests to detect problems in people
with no symptoms of an ailment will be offered by Blue Cross and Blue Shield. In
the past, the health insurance industry has not paid for much preventive care.
A1

Insurers can face antitrust suits for certain price-fixing activities, a Federal
appeals court ruled. The insurance industry has long contended that it is exempt
from antitrust law. D1

Alan Greenspan said the recession may already have ended. But the Federal
Reserve Board chairman also indicated that no measurable expansion of the
economy had yet begun. A1

The savings and loan rescue effort will need another $80 billion to keep going
into next year, the nation's senior banking regulator is expected to announce,
while also calling for an overhaul of the way the rescue is managed. D1

John Sununu's travel practices again emerged as an issue of contention after a
report that Mr. Sununu has solicited companies to furnish him with corporate
jets for both personal and political trips. A1 Feuding Virginia politicians
declare a truce A20

Gray is expected to quit Congress A22

Study finds job complaints widespread at F.B.I.  A16

Louisiana adopted an abortion law that prohibits virtually all abortions in the
state. Both houses of the Legislature voted to override a veto by Governor Buddy
Roemer. A1

The issue of women's combat roles and whether they should be broadened is
dividing the Pentagon. The four service chiefs offered opposing views to a
Senate panel. A16

A fight over highway funds and how they are distributed was resolved in the
Senate, clearing the way for passage of a bill that calls for spending $123
billion for Federal transportation programs. A20

A series of chemical plant accidents around the nation, including fires,
explosions and leaks of poisonous gas, has baffled Government experts and
alarmed executives. A22

Parental smoking found harmful to children's health A18

Lake Lurleen Journal: In death (as in life), in the shadows A16

REGIONAL B1-4

Public-school students' math scores have shown a startling improvement over the
last year: 60.6 percent of those who took the annual achievement test performed
above the national average. A1

The F.B.I. charged a pet cemetery with indiscriminately disposing of pets,
either by burning them in mass incinerators and doling out the ashes to
unsuspecting owners, or by throwing them into open pits. B1

The emergency shelter system for families in New York City, including welfare
hotels, is growing more crowded, and advocates say conditions are harsher than
ever.  B1

Hispanic group rebuffed in Council election challenge B3 Sex-case accuser admits
lying about drinks B3

Many gay-bias incidents unreported, survey says B4

Former high school baseball stars, who were kings of their school and the
baseball-loving neighborhood of Washington Heights in the late 1980's, have seen
dreams die early and hard. A1

A sewage-assessment revolt in New Jersey has pitted property owners in South
Camden, who object to the stench and cost of a county treatment plant, against
more affluent communities served by the plant.  B1

Cuomo names a chief of staff B2

Measure gives notaries more respect and income B1

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

The Living Section

Food

A motley procession of fish finds its way to the table C1

De Gustibus: recipe writers' nightmares C1

Wine Talk C7

Living

The different languages men and women speak C1

Arts/Entertainment

Met Opera is recording again C11

Vatican restorers ready for "Judgment" C11

Music: Guns 'n' Roses C11

Word and Image: TV pursues courtroom drama C11

Memoir of a Marine in Vietnam C16

Education Page A23

Summer school cuts create a private boom

Health Page C9

High-tech view of sinus offers answer to chronic problems

Obituaries D25

Herbert B. Woodman, led major printing ink company

Sports B5-11

Baseball: Mets edge Reds B5

Yanks end losing streak B5

Tigers shut out A's B6

Another Met mystery - Franco's back B7

A's take steady route to top B7

Dibble plans to clean up actB7

Basketball: N.B.A. Notebook B8

Boxing: Notebook B11

College Sports: N.C. Central sued over scholarship benefits B11

Column: Vecsey on message to the locals B5

Football: Parcells signs on with NBC B8

Golf: Stewart savors Open victory B11

Tennis: McEnroe may turn to a computer B8

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A24

This AIDS ban invites ridicule

Wrong gray line

Help all families choose

Brent Staples: Boston pride

Letters A24

Tom Wicker: Here we go again A25

Leslie H. Gelb: Mideast con game A25

Sidney Blumenthal: Boris at the front door A25

William Conway: We can't shut the zoo A25

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
A Hero's Son Tells of Another Kind of Heroism

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 976 words



Fortunate Son
The Autobiography of Lewis B. Puller Jr.
389 pages. Grove Weidenfeld. $21.95.

That Friday in 1971, feelings of betrayal and disillusionment about the Vietnam
War emerged for Lewis B. Puller Jr., a former Marine lieutenant living in a
wheelchair. He felt bitterness toward the leadership of the Nixon
Administration, which had failed to conclude the war, but a kinship with the men
still doing the fighting and dying in the rice paddies and jungles of Southeast
Asia. Although

Mr. Puller was not in the antiwar movement, more than a thousand Vietnam
veterans were scheduled to march to the steps of the Capitol and discard their
medals in a symbolic gesture of protest. The night before, he took his medals
from his bedroom closet and debated whether he should drive to Washington and
throw them away, too.

"As I sat silently in the dimly lit closet feeling the weight of the bronze and
silver in my hand and studying the red, white and blue stripes of my Silver Star
and the majestic cameo of George Washington on my Purple Hearts, I knew that I
could never partwith them," he writes in "Fortunate Son," his heartfelt and
strangely inspiring autobiography. "They had cost me too dearly, and though I
now saw clearly that the war in which they had been earned was a wasted cause,
the medals still represented the dignity and the caliber of my service and of
those with whom I had served. I could no more discard them than I could
repudiate my country, my Marine Corps or my fellow veterans. As I put them away,
I was very sad and very tired but grateful nonetheless that my children were
asleep in their beds in America rather than anywhere else in the world."

Many books of fact and fiction have been written about Vietnam, but few deliver
a stronger personal punch than "Fortunate Son." A number of Vietnam studies are
more fully informed about the causes and follies of the war on the command level
in Washington and Saigon. Undoubtedly, more will be written about psychological
and political reactions to the Vietnam War, which may have led American
Presidents to commit troops to succeeding wars in Grenada, Panama and the
Persian Gulf. There is no flag waving in "Fortunate Son," and there are no
victory parades, but there is a haunting tribute to the names on the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial in Washington.

What makes this book particularly significant is its meaning for three
generations of Americans: the author's father, Gen. Lewis B. (Chesty) Puller,
hero in World War II and the Korean War, who was the most decorated soldier in
Marine Corps history; the author, now 45 years old, who lost his legs and
suffered injuries to both hands when he stepped on a mine near Da Nang in 1968,
and, by implication, Lewis Puller 3d, his 22-year-old son, who has not
experienced war.

The autobiography reaches even deeper into military history and tradition to
explain why the author volunteered to be a Marine platoon leader, knowing the
chances of being wounded or killed were high. Chesty Puller was proud that his
Confederate grandfather had served in what he referred to as the War Between the
States. Military service was not just a temporary calling to the Pullers; life
in uniform was an honorable profession.

Being the son of a famous military hero had its advantages and obligations. Even
as a child, he knew that one day he would sign up himself; his father had given
him a .22-caliber hunting rifle for his sixth birthday. The author desperately
wanted his father's love, and received it. Chesty Puller was a tough taskmaster,
an apologist for the harsh Marine training that broke spirits. But as a father,
he was kind and thoughtful. After his father's retirement as a three-star
general, the author writes, "It took me years to realize that I could never hope
to emulate the legend that was Chesty Puller, but I knew even then that I loved
the man far more than the legend."

Whenever father and son are together, "Fortunate Son" soars. Even generals cry,
seeing their sons off to war and returning home, half-alive.

With his wife, Toddy, pregnant, the newly minted Marine lieutenant went off to
join a battalion of the First Marine Division in Vietnam. (Toddy, to whom the
book is dedicated, is something of a heroine in the story; her loyalty makes the
author seem like a very fortunate husband.) The Vietnam combat scenes have the
ring of frightening authenticity -- a daily, indeed hourly, life of booby traps,
ambushes, firefights, accidental deaths, body counts and camaraderie.

In one of the memorable touches in the book, Lieutenant Puller's captain, who
wears no insignia in the jungle, tells him in no uncertain terms not to salute;
the captain says he does not care to be pointed out to any Vietcong snipers who
might be looking for "officer trophies." On another day, a young Vietnamese girl
is given a souvenir earring by a corporal; another little girl's arm is blown
off when a marine detects movement and fires into a house. "My platoon had taken
no casualties other than the young man who had shot the little girl," he writes.
"It was apparent that his psychic wounds would probably never heal."

When the author detonates a booby-trapped howitzer round and loses the lower
half of his body, he drifts in and out of consciousness. Saved by makeshift
tourniquets, he is evacuated and spends the next few years in surgery and in
rehabilitation wards. Now a different kind of courage is required, for
Lieutenant Puller, his wife and family. He endures terrible pain, and struggles
with alcoholism and depression. But he and his wife have a second child, and he
graduates from law school. Today, he is a senior attorney in the General
Counsel's office of the Defense Department.

With "Fortunate Son," Mr. Puller makes an important contribution to the personal
literature of war.

NAME: Lewis B. Puller Jr.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Jerry Bauer/Grove Weidenfeld)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              357 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Our Planet Can't Afford More Such Wars;
Iraq and Vietnam

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 347 words


To the Editor:

Leslie H. Gelb, in "Best and Brightest" (column May 26), has trouble
understanding why the victory in the Persian Gulf earns honor for those who
fought in Vietnam, even though Bernard Trainor, George Bush and many patriotic
Americans have little trouble in making this connection. The Persian Gulf
victory shows what the American military can do when allowed to do so.

Yes, there were many operational mistakes in Vietnam, but there were also
overarching political limitations under which our troops had to fight there and
an urge-to-lose mentality in this country at that time. It is now a lot less
plausible to assert with certainty that that war was unwinnable.

Elsewhere, Mr. Gelb deprecates the pride in winning the Persian Gulf War --
against the fourth largest army in the world -- and notes that this war pitted a
first-rate military power against a third-rate one. He should have noted, as my
boss Senator Stuart Symington did at the time, that the Vietnam War likewise
pitted a first-rate military power against a third-rate one.

Then he complains that the military in the Persian Gulf war "didn't have the
confidence to let the press do its job." When the press was allowed to do its
job in Vietnam, as in the Tet Offensive and the Cambodian incursion, it often
abused that trust through misleading overdramatization, innuendo and
implication.

Mr. Gelb dismisses American policy in Vietnam by saying it was based on the
false assumption that "the North Vietnamese were agents of a Sino-Soviet
monolith bent on toppling Southeast Asia as the first row of worldwide
dominoes."

As Nikita S. Khrushchev once noted, 50 percent of power is the perception of
power. Or, as Herman Kahn once told me, the main goal of American foreign policy
is to maintain the morale of the American people. When one has given due weight
to such intangible factors, the political effects of winning, or losing, a war
fall into place.

ROLAND A. PAUL
Westport, Conn., June 1, 1991

The author has served as a Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee counsel.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              358 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

TV in the Courtroom: 2 Plans to Capture Real Trials' Drama

BYLINE: By BILL CARTER

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1236 words


The two opposing lawyers in the first episode of CBS 's new series "Verdict"
deliver their closing arguments with considerably less dramatic power than
Victor Sifuentes, most recently of MacKenzie, Brackman.

That's understandable; they were trained as lawyers, not actors.

Otherwise, the intentions at work on this new half-hour show are basically the
same as those that define "L.A. Law," the hit NBC series where Mr. Sifuentes --
as played by Jimmy Smits -- has worked for five years.

Although the programs will use real testimony and not re-enactments, "Verdict"
is not in any sense a traditional news program. It is, its producers say,
designed to reach an audience looking for entertainment.

"We are doing dramatic television," says Andrew Heyward, the executive producer
of "Verdict," which begins an eight-episode run as a summer series Friday night
at 8 o'clock.  "The courtroom scene has been a staple of fictional drama for
years. Now technology and changes in the law have allowed nonfiction television
to catch up."

Indeed, real-life courtroom drama is about to become a regular part of daily
television programming. As "Verdict" gears up for its summer tryout -- CBS
executives hope it will become a full-time prime-time entry -- the Courtroom
Television Network, a new cable channel devoted to live trials in a format
modeled after sports coverage, is about to begin operation.

On July 1, the Courtroom Network will start its service, promising live coverage
of the testimony at trials of high national interest. If clearances can be
arranged, for example, the channel plans, during the day, to cover such eagerly
awaited cases as the trial of the white Los Angeles police officers captured on
an amateur cameraman's videotape as they beat a black motorist and the
sexual-assault trial of William Kennedy Smith in Palm Beach, Fla. At night it
will carry taped and edited versions of trials. It is to be on 24 hours a day.

Merrill Brown, vice president of corporate and program development for the cable
channel, says the Courtroom Network will be carried on both Paragon Cable in
Manhattan and BQ Cable in Brooklyn and Queens and will be advertiser-supported.

Both the channel and the CBS series are possible only because so many courtrooms
now permit cameras and microphones to record trials. As many as 45 states permit
some form of camera coverage in court, though Mr. Heyward said that about 10
have restrictions that make doing a show based on trials in those states
impractical. New York recently allowed its experiment of allowing cameras in the
courtroom to expire.

Mr. Heyward, who is also executive producer of CBS News's "48 Hours," added that
he saw more differences than similarities between what "Verdict" plans to do and
what the Courtroom Network will do. "What we're doing is compression. They are
trying to do the whole trial live. We also won't be doing high-profile cases
because part of our premise is that you don't know what the verdict is."

But the two formats do share some similarities, beginning with the fact that
they are both journalistic enterprises. "Verdict" is a CBS News production.

The idea for the programs sprang from two earlier episodes of "48 Hours," which
covered the events at trials. Al Briganti, senior producer of "48 Hours,"
suggested the series.

Mr. Heyward said the program had been enthusiastically received by CBS
Entertainment executives, who have sought more low-cost reality-based programs.

In "Verdict" a CBS News reporter outlines each case, interviews the lawyers
about their strategies, key witnesses about their testimony and, after the
trial, even the jury. The rest of the program is made up of tapes of the actual
court testimony. Mr. Heyward said that CBS uses its own camera crews and not the
official courtroom camera so it can get reaction shots of the judge, the jury
and those attending the trial.

Drama and Significance

The most challenging aspect of putting the show together, Mr. Briganti said, is
finding cases that both provide drama and illuminate some wider legal issue.

This week's case concerns a con artist accused of murdering one of the many
elderly women he preyed upon. A key issue in the case is the judge's decision
not to include evidence that the defendant was accused of a similar crime years
before.

"Certainly this show is structured more like a drama than a documentary," Mr.
Heyward said. "And it takes television news down a different road." He added
that if this format succeeded, he could see CBS News producers creating programs
not specifically based on news. Other reality-based shows, like NBC's "Unsolved
Mysteries" and CBS's "Top Cops," are produced by network entertainment
divisions. "News people have good story sense," Mr. Heyward said. "They're used
to working on deadline and getting by with fewer resources."

Steven Brill, the chief executive of the Courtroom Network and the editor in
chief of The American Lawyer magazine, also labels his programmming journalism,
saying the idea grew out of his own frustration at how newspapers and local
television news covered trials. "I got tired of seeing cases chopped up into
pieces that didn't tell anyone what really happened."

An Anchor With Experts

The Courtroom Network will use a news-anchor format (Fred Graham, a former law
correspondent for CBS, is the chief anchor) with a team of legal experts like F.
Lee Bailey to function much the way color commentators do on sports events
(without the slow motion replays).

Already the CBS show and Mr. Brill's channel have turned up at the same trial: a
case in Connecticut of a Vietnam veteran accused of killing a man and using
post-traumatic distress syndrome as a defense.

On CBS the trial will be edited down to a half-hour story. On the Courtroom
Network, the trial will appear in an edited two-hour "movie" version, Mr. Brill
said.

For the most part, however, the Courtroom Network is geared to be strong
competition for traditional daytime programming. On the best days, East Coast
viewers will see live trials from 9 A.M. to 8 P.M., when the trial day is just
ending on the West Coast. As in television sports coverage, commercials will be
inserted during lulls in the action.

"We are going to be very soap-opera competitive," Mr. Brown said.

He cited recent record ratings scored by local New Hampshire television stations
when they carried live coverage of the trial of a schoolteacher who was accused
of persuading a student who was her lover to murder her husband.

Better Than Writers

Executives from both enterprises said they did not expect legal complications to
arise from having their cameras in the courtrooms and did not expect the cameras
to change the behavior of trial participants.

"People take the judicial process very seriously," Mr. Heyward said. "There is
no unusual playing to the camera."

Mr. Briganti said, "Our experience with '48 Hours' has taught us that people
have come to expect cameras to be there at certain important moments of life."

Mr. Brill agreed with Mr. Heyward on the main reason cameras in the court are a
promising idea for television. "This is highly dramatic stuff." He cited his
plan to promote the channel with an advertisement featuring a moment of the
testimony of Marlon Brando during his son's trial on a murder charge.

"We're going to say: No scriptwriter is this good."

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 22, 1991, Saturday

CORRECTION:

An article on Wednesday about the creation of the Courtroom Television Network
omitted one system in Manhattan that will carry it. In addition to the Paragon
cable system, Manhattan Cable TV will carry the channel beginning July 1.


                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Inquiry Finds No Basis for P.O.W. Charge

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 160 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 19


An internal investigation has found "no foundation" for an Army colonel's
assertion that the Government has deliberately made a charade of the effort to
resolve P.O.W. and missing in-action cases stemming from the Vietnam War, the
Defense Department said today.

The charges were leveled by Col. Millard Peck of the Army, who resigned in
mid-April from his Defense Intelligence Agency job as director of the Special
Office for Prisoners of War and Missing in Action. He had bitterly accused the
Administration of making his office nothing more than a "dump to bury the whole
mess out of sight and mind."

The Administration's efforts to follow leads of sightings were a "charade" and a
"travesty," Colonel Peck wrote his superiors in a departure memo.

The colonel, who has since been reassigned, did not offer any evidence in his
memo that any of the 2,276 Americans listed as missing in action or unaccounted
for since the Vietnam War were alive.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              360 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Flights Are Set From Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 16; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 195 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 20


Northwest Airlines said today that it would begin flying to Vietnam next week,
becoming the first United States airline to do so since the Vietnam War ended in
1975.

Although the United States embargo on trade with Vietnam remains in effect,
Northwest has received permission from Washington to fly out Vietnamese
emigrants on a humanitarian basis, said James Reinnoldt, the airline's regional
manager in Bangkok.

Northwest, a unit of NWA Inc. based in Eagan, Minn., will operate Boeing 747
charter flights between Ho Chi Minh City and Bangkok under a contract with the
International Organization for Migration, Mr. Reinnoldt said.

The international organization arranges the medical processing and migration of
Vietnamese under the Orderly Departure Program operated by the United States and
Vietnamese Governments.

Each Northwest flight is to carry up to 380 Vietnamese who are being resettled
in the United States and elsewhere. Most will join relatives already settled in
the West. Ho Chi Minh City was called Saigon when it was the capital of the
American-backed South Vietnamese Government, which was defeated by the North
Vietnamese in April 1975.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              361 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Burleigh Wartes, Photographer, 58, For Documentaries

BYLINE: By ELEANOR BLAU

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 261 words


Burleigh Wartes, a cinematographer who worked on three Academy Award-winning
documentaries, died Tuesday at his home in Norwalk, Conn. He was 58 years old.

His family declined to give the cause of death.

Mr. Wartes filmed more than 100 documentaries, features and commercials in more
than 40 countries. His most recent work, "Superstar: The Life and Times of Andy
Warhol," was released commercially this year. He was also the photographer of
the films "Living Planet" and "On the Wing," both of which were shown at the
American Museum of Natural History in New York City, the Smithsonian Institution
and other museums.

The three Academy Award-winning documentaries for which Mr. Wartes was
cinematographer were "Gods of Metal," about anti-nuclear advocates, "The Gifts,"
about water pollution, and "Straight Talk," about high school students who were
taken to a penitentiary for warning lectures by convicts.

He won an Emmy for his documentary "For Export Only," about pesticides and
medicines prohibited or restricted in industrial countries but marketed freely
in developing nations.

Among his other films are "Style Wars," "Vietnam: An American Journey," "Who
Shot President Kennedy?," "Linus Pauling, Crusading Scientist" and "The Age of
Intelligent Machines."

Surviving are his wife, Samantha Heilweil; their son, Joshua; two sons from his
first marriage, David and Stephen, of Seattle, and two brothers, Jon and Chris,
also of Seattle.

A memorial service is to be held on Sunday at 2 P.M. at Saugatuck Congregational
Church in Westport, Conn.

NAME: Burleigh Wartes

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              362 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Stage, and Off

BYLINE: By Alex Witchel

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1076 words


Casting Call for Tony Nominators

There's a big shakeup going on within the Tony Awards Nominating Committee, the
group of 13 theater professionals who choose the nominees the rest of us watch
on television. Traditionally, the big complaint with the committee has been that
its members are too old and too cliquish, out of touch with younger talent. But
this year's committee also drew fire from the Tony Administration Committee --
the Broadway producers and theater owners who run the Tonys -- for its voting
procedures. Members of the administration committee accuse nominators of
unfairly filibustering for favorite candidates after an initial vote. Although
the committee's bylaws allow discussion after a vote, one nominator confirms
that this year changes were made in seven categories.

That was seven too many for the Administration Committee, which chooses the
nominators. After this year's ceremony on June 2, eight of the 13 nominators
received letters thanking them for their services, which would no longer be
required. One member of the Administration Committee, speaking on condition of
anonymity, says, "We wanted to send a message that the purpose of being a
nominator is to make the best nominations possible, not to go on extended ego
trips about personal favorites."

That's a bit harsh, says one nominator, who also insisted on anonymity. "We all
agreed to discuss after the vote, so if there was a glaring inconsistency we
could correct it. You need the chance to get an overall picture and avoid any
grave injustices. No one bludgeoned anyone about personal favorites. It was done
with the best of intentions."

Those bumped include Jean Dalrymple, a retired producer; the actress Rosetta
LeNoire; the playwright Jeffrey Sweet; Robert Marx of the New York Public
Library for the Performing Arts; Leonard Harris, a former television critic;
Leonard Fleischer of Exxon, and Maurice Levine of the 92d Street Y. Remaining
are Carole Rothman, co-artistic director of the Second Stage; Suzanne Sato of
the Rockefeller Foundation; the costume designer Alvin Colt; the theater
historian Mary Henderson, and the playwright Eve Merriam.

Who's the new blood? The only one confirmed is Arthur Gelb, former managing
editor of The New York Times and president of the New York Times Company
Foundation. Others who have been approached are Howard Stein, retiring chairman
of the graduate theater department at Columbia University; the author Martin
Gottfried; Fran Kumin of Theater Communications Group; the composer Jerry Bock;
the actor George Irving; Stuart Little of the Theater Development Fund, and Ted
Chapin of the Rogers and Hammerstein Foundation. Mr. Chapin and Ms. Kumin are
the only two not old enough to vote for Dwight D. Eisenhower.

Is this indeed an improvement? Mr. Marx says, "I'm a believer in rotating any
kind of panel."

Manhattan Theater Club Attractions

Amid the constant moaning that the theater is dead, Manhattan Theater Club has
announced its 20th-anniversary season, which should lift some of the doom and
gloom of the post-Tony lull.

First up is Shirley Lauro's "Piece of My Heart," which was the must-see last
spring at the Humana Festival of New American Plays at the Actors Theater of
Louisville. Allen R. Belknap will again direct the play, about six women who
volunteer to serve in Vietnam. Next, the artistic director, Lynne Meadow, will
direct the American premiere of Alan Ayckbourn's "Small Family Business," about
a man who takes over a family-run furniture business, which won the 1987 Evening
Standard Award for Best Play in London. The two other main-stage productions are
still undecided, although Terrence McNally's untitled new play could go either
there or to the theater's Stage II.

Stage II will open with "Beggars in the House of Plenty," a new play written and
directed by John Patrick Shanley, which Ms. Meadow describes as "a darkly comic
story of an Irish family." Peter Parnell's "Imaginary Life," about a playwright
who rewrites the major scenes in his life, follows in January, directed by Don
Scardino.

Also planned for Stage II is "Ground Hog," a play with music by Elizabeth
Swados, about a "street person" who sues the City of New York. Subscription
information: (212) 645-0905.

Neil Simon May Shun Broadway

Don't be surprised if you start hearing about "Jake's Women" again. The play,
the only one by Neil Simon ever to close out of town before coming to Broadway,
was resurrected in a reading on May 31 at the Promenade Theater. In attendance
were both Broadway and nonprofit producers because, says one who spoke on
condition of anonymity, Mr. Simon may want to skip his usual Broadway route.
Because many of the characters exist in Jake's imagination, they are seen
onstage with characters who are actually there, and Mr. Simon is not sure
Broadway audiences will get it. The show had two directors last season at the
Old Globe Theater in San Diego, starring Stockard Channing and Peter Coyote.
Though Mr. Simon did vast rewriting, he still avoided New York.

But response from the reading was positive. Alan Alda replaced Mr. Coyote as
Jake and seemed to impress everyone. Ms. Channing read her original role of
Jake's wife; Mercedes Ruehl played his sister; Joyce Van Patten reprised her
role as Jake's shrink; Sarah Jessica Parker played his daughter, and J.
Smith-Cameron played the deceased wife. Gene Saks, who directed "Yonkers," was
there, too. Although the producer, Emanuel Azenberg, did not return calls, word
is that any production may have to wait because Mr. Alda is to play the Stage
Manager in "Our Town" early next fall in London.

New Song in 'Bye Bye Birdie'

Think you know the whole score of "Bye Bye Birdie" by heart? Bet you don't. The
composer, Charles Strouse, and the lyricist, Lee Adams, just wrote a new song
called "A Giant Step," for the national tour starring Tommy Tune and Ann
Reinking, which started in May and is scheduled through January. Mr. Strouse
says he always thought that the show needed an extra song in the second act, and
that Mr. Tune had asked for one so "he could express himself as a dancer."

That's also how he expressed himself on the "Tonight" show Monday night, when he
repeatedly plugged "Bye Bye Birdie." But neither he nor Jay Leno, the show's
host, once mentioned "The Will Rogers Follies," for which Mr. Tune won Tony
Awards for direction and choreography. How quickly they forget.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: Lynda Barry's "Good Times Are Killing Me," at the Second Stage through
June 30, will move to the Minetta Lane Theater on July 29. David Mirvish, with
the Second Stage, will co-produce the play about a young girl, played by Angela
Goethals, above, growing up in Chicago in the 1960's. The Minetta Lane's
longtime tenant, "Other People's Money," closes on June 30.
Photo: 'Good Times' Moving On

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              363 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
And Now, a Real Courtroom Series

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 26; Column 4; Weekend Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 744 words


With "Verdict" at 8 tonight, CBS becomes the first network to turn cameras in
the courtroom into a prime-time series. Many outside the television industry who
supported the fight to crack the courtroom barrier saw it as an opportunity to
open up the workings of the law; skeptics predicted that victory would bring
just a new batch of real-crime shows that would clobber the finer points of law
with the blunt instruments of murder and mayhem. The first half-hour of
"Verdict" lends support to the skeptics but offers glimmers to the hopeful.

Tonight's program -- "No actors, no scripts, no re-enactments!" an authoritative
off-camera voice declares -- focuses on murder and sex, that irresistible
prime-time combination. The defendant is a professional con man whose specialty
was lovelorn women. "He stole widows' hearts," says Richard Schlesinger, the
evening's reporter, "and then he stole their money." As "Verdict" begins,
Raymond Harry Stone, already serving a 14-year sentence for fraud, is on trial
for the murder of Anita Dalfuss, an acquaintance whose remains were found in a
wooded area near San Diego.

Mr. Schlesinger's reporting is punchy. He presents a quick sketch of the
defendant's technique through the recollections of several women who loved and
lost (the interview with Mr. Stone himself reveals none of the charm they found
in him), and presses both prosecutor and public defender on apparent weaknesses
in their cases. The prosecution is not able to produce any evidence on how the
woman died; the defense has to convince the jury that although Mr. Stone is a
criminal, he is not a violent criminal.

Attention throughout is less on the judicial system than on the defendant and
his victims. Still, the story is smartly told by the same people who bring you
"48 Hours," and courtroom tactics are illuminated along the way. An interesting
issue, debated at the bench, has to do with the defense attorney's assertion to
the jury that there is no evidence that her client is violent, his possible
implication in another murder not having been allowed into evidence.

Human interest rather than legal procedure is also emphasized in a future
episode, the manslaughter trial of a Vietnam veteran who contends that he is
suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of his experience in
Vietnam. "My head was empty," he keeps saying. Expert witnesses disagree on
whether the condition caused him to shoot a man five times. The opportunity to
discuss the role of expert witnesses in criminal trials gives way to standard
interviews with the defendant's wife and the murdered man's mother.

Next week brings a sharp portrait of a Florida woman accused of drugging a widow
and stealing her money. Other coming attractions: a father who is charged with
responsibility for his 10-year-old son's accidental shooting of a friend and a
reputed drug dealer charged with ordering the murder of an anti-drug crusader.
If future cases are laid out as efficiently as tonight's and next week's, they
should keep people watching. Whether "Verdict" will use its access to the
courtroom to do more than that is not yet clear to this juror.

CNN Specials
Today and Sunday

Two of CNN's welcome expansions of its round-the-clock news are on view this
weekend. Today at 10 A.M. and 10 P.M., the cable channel presents a one-hour
special on famine in Africa, the culmination of a week of grim reports from
Ethiopia, Somalia, Mozambique and Malawi. And on Sunday at 9 P.M. comes "The
Nuclear Graveyard," a half-hour look at the technical and political obstacles to
Washington's efforts to find a place to bury 100,000 tons of radioactive waste.
The feeling of people in towns near proposed sites is summed up by a sign:
"Hell, no, we won't glow!"

'20/20'
ABC
Tonight at 10

Tonight's edition of "20/20" carries a report on Albania's legacy of a
half-century of isolation and repression. While tens of thousands of Albanians
have fled to Italy, where they are making do in camps, millions remain trapped
in what a relief worker calls a man-made disaster. Food is scarce (one woman
tells of having to stand in line at 3 A.M. to buy powdered milk); work is hard
(women are seen plowing fields by hand); the political situation is unsettled.
It's a timely program: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d begins his first
visit to Albania today.

Verdict
Produced by CBS News; Andrew Heyward and Al Briganti, executive producers.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard Schlesinger, left, a CBS news correspondent, and Judge
Herbert Exarhos, in "Verdict." (CBS)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              365 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 23, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Southeast Asia

SECTION: Section 5; Page 12; Column 5; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 155 words


To the Editor: In March my wife and I, through Adventures in Paradise, a branch
in New York of a Bangkok travel agency, traveled in Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam.

After spending two days at the Oriental Hotel in Bangkok waiting for visas, we
proceeded to Vientiane, Laos. Thence to Phnom Penh, where we found a modern
hotel, the Cambodiana, which overlooked the Mekong River Delta. We also spent
four days in Siem Reap touring Angkor Wat.

In Vietnam we struggled through the tunnels of Cu Chi, saw the beach at Danang,
took a sampan trip on the Perfume River in Hue and visited the tomb of Ho Chi
Minh in Hanoi.

We hope that our government will establish relations with Vietnam and Cambodia
soon so that Americans can travel there more readily. Meanwhile, Adventures in
Paradise makes it possible. The agency is at 155 West 68th Street, Suite 525,
New York, N.Y. 10023; (212) 595-5782.

BERNARD LEVERE
Teaneck, N.J.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              366 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 23, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Did the Pentagon Papers Change Anything?

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 290 words


To the Editor:

A postscript to A. M. Rosenthal's celebration of The Times's publication of the
Pentagon Papers 20 years ago (column, June 11):

A few months after publication of the secret study of the Vietnam War ordered by
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, I talked to Neil Sheehan, the Times
reporter in Washington who brought the papers to the paper. Wasn't he
disappointed? How did President Nixon have the nerve to go on talking about
"Hanoi breaking the Geneva agreements," since the true story was now on record?

He answered (I took it down), "As far as I know, no one in this Administration
read the P. Papers. A very high official told me that commissioning the study
had been a sign of weakness in McNamara. One should simply execute policy, he
said." I asked, "Well, what then about The Times itself?" Sheehan: "What about
it?"

I: "Times semantics still depict a war between one attacking country and one
defending country."

He: "A news story is just a piece of a whole story. The strength and the
weakness of daily journalism is its specificness. A journalist cannot turn
himself into a propagandist."

I: "But he is one now, for a Government line that was exposed as, let us say,
unreal."

He: "No doubt an American journalist like all other journalists uses terms that
reflect his social background. To me, what is of first importance is how the
Pentagon Papers help us keep our freedom to publish."

I: "Meanwhile, back in Vietnam."

He: "The Vietnamese are warriors. They have to do it themselves and they will.
They defeated the Mongols. The spirit of man is stronger than all machines."

HANS KONING
New Haven, June 12, 1991

The writer is author of "Nineteen Sixty-Eight" (New York, 1987).

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              367 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 23, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Over 40, Not Blond

BYLINE: By Susan Brownmiller;  Susan Brownmiller, the author of "Against Our
Will: Men, Women and Rape," was a television news writer at ABC in the 1960's.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 686 words



FIGHTING FOR AIR
In the Trenches With Television News.
By Liz Trotta.
395 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $22.95.

Television newscasters come and go with such alarming frequency that a couple of
seasons can pass before it dawns on a viewer that a familiar face has been sent
to limbo. Liz Trotta was one of the early success stories of women in broadcast
news, a reporter for Newsday who in 1965 was tapped for NBC's New York station
on the basis of an investigative series on taxi dancers.

She went on to win her spurs as a roving foreign correspondent for the network.
A tough-minded journalist of conservative political opinions who cared more
about beating the competition than about her hair and her wardrobe, she popped
up regularly on "The Huntley-Brinkley Report" and its successor, "NBC Nightly
News," during the 1970's from hot spots around the globe, delivering her
"stand-uppers" in the two minutes and 20 seconds that television executives
consider long.

Vietnam was her abiding passion. She had campaigned hard to get the assignment,
winning it only after her NBC bosses put their heads together and came up with
the wisdom that a woman war correspondent might be an interesting gimmick in the
networks' own competitive wars. The muddy jungle trails and nearby civilities of
the hotels in Saigon became, she says, her Brigadoon, a magical never-never land
where she swallowed her fear of death and finally got to be one of the guys. She
was a seasoned reporter, as opposed to a star, and she remains an unembarrassed
defender of American right and might.

An early mentor, George Barrett, a reporter at The New York Times, had warned
her what it would mean to be an international correspondent: "leaving airports
with no one to say 'Goodbye,' and arriving at airports with no one to say
'Hello.' " Careering across continents, she jostled with her colleagues to greet
captured American pilots as they were released by Hanoi or to grab a word with
the embassy hostages after they were freed in Teheran, shipping her film by any
means possible in the troglodyte era before satellite feeds.

Along the way she picked up three Emmys and an unshakable reputation for being
difficult to work with. The phrase "Trotta is trouble" began to dog her, one
suspects with validity after reading her snappish accounts of her many tangles
with fellow workers. Ms. Trotta is still settling scores in her aptly named
memoir, "Fighting for Air." John Chancellor, who once had the ill grace to call
her "Mme. Nhu," comes in for a drubbing, as do other lesser and forgotten lights
who stood in her way or failed to appreciate her talents.

After a humiliating demotion from network back to local news, in 1979 Ms. Trotta
jumped ship to CBS, where things weren't any better during the uncertain period
when a poorly advised Dan Rather, taking over as evening anchor, was attempting
to erase the memory of Walter Cronkite.

It didn't help her chances that by the time she switched networks she was over
40 years old and not blond. Worse, under the criteria for female correspondents
established by the head honcho for news in the early 80's, a California
rainmaker named Van Gordon Sauter, her crisp delivery failed to suggest sexual
pleasure. She was fired in 1985 during an infamous bloodletting season of
cutbacks. In fitting irony, her boss got axed a few months later.

Ms. Trotta has written a sour memoir, a kind of companion piece to Julia
Phillips's "You'll Never Eat Lunch in This Town Again," minus the deadly drugs
and humor. It is revelatory, in the post-feminist era, to get the inside poop
from a gritty woman of ambition who had her triumphant innings in a high-powered
game that (was it only a matter of time?) she eventually lost.

For those of us who watch the news more seriously than we watch a movie, the
tragedy is that electronic news gathering and Hollywood have come to share so
many of the same values. Not for nothing, Ms. Trotta writes, did her colleagues
in the newsroom joke that one network executive always carried the title of vice
president in charge of fear.

NAME: Liz Trotta

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Liz Trotta in Vietnam, 1968. (Yvon Cornu/NBC)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              368 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 24, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Factions Call Truce on Eve of New Talks

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 545 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 23


The Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government and the three major guerrilla forces
opposing it agreed today to an indefinite cease-fire that is similar to a truce
established earlier this year and then largely ignored.

Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's exiled leader and the head of one of the
guerrilla groups, announced the cease-fire after meetings this weekend in
Thailand with the Cambodian Prime Minister, Hun Sen, and commanders of the two
other guerrilla factions, the rightist Khmer People's National Liberation Front
and the Khmer Rouge, whose brutal reorganization of society in the 1970's killed
more than one million people.

"We accept a continuous cease-fire, a cease-fire without time or limit," the
Prince told reporters on the eve of a new round of the peace talks to end
Cambodia's 12-year-old civil war. "We can say that there is no more war in
Cambodia, at least on paper."

Leaders of both the Hun Sen Government and the guerrillas have been more willing
to declare breakthroughs in the peace process in recent months than actually to
make peace.

Skepticism Is Voiced

"You find yourself wanting to believe them when they say peace is at hand," a
Western European diplomat said. "There is still too much rivalry and too much
deep suspicion and fear among these groups. I will believe there is peace when
the guns are thrown down on the streets of Phnom Penh."

In September all four factions agreed on a United Nations-sponsored peace
settlement that called for an indefinite truce and free, internationally
supervised elections.

But the cease-fire appeared to fall apart almost as soon as it went into effect
May 1, with each faction accusing the other of major violations.

After the last round of peace talks all but collapsed this month in the
Indonesian capital, Jakarta, the Communist Khmer Rouge, the largest and
best-armed guerrilla group, announced that it did not feel bound by the truce,
and that the civil war could begin again in earnest.

It was the killing in the Khmer Rouge era that continues to hamper the Cambodian
peace process.

Khmer Rouge Return Opposed

Mr. Hun Sen, whose Vietnamese sponsors invaded Cambodia and forced the Khmer
Rouge out of power in 1979 and who was himself a Khmer Rouge military commander
until he broke away from the group two years earlier, has warned that his
Government will not go forward with any settlement that would permit the Khmer
Rouge to return to power.

When he arrived at the peace talks in Jakarta, Mr. Hun Sen seemed to doom the
negotiations even before they began when he called for creation of a
Nuremberg-style court to try Khmer Rouge leaders for genocide.

The Khmer Rouge shot back by vetoing a draft peace proposal offered at the talks
that would have made Mr. Hun Sen the deputy chairman of the Cambodian Supreme
National Council, which was established under last year's peace agreement to
guide the country until elections.

Prince Sihanouk, who organized the talks scheduled to begin Monday in the Thai
resort of Pattaya, said today that the warring factions were still divided on
who should lead the 12-member Supreme National Council and how the other seats
should be divided.

Even so, he said he was hopeful of a compromise at the talks.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cambodia's exiled resistance leader, Prince Norodom Sihanouk,
announcing the cease-fire agreement yesterday in Bangkok. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              369 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 24, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

In a Huge Deal, Schwarzkopf Sells Memoirs to Bantam

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 9; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1145 words


After a hotly contested auction, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf has sold the world
rights of his planned book to Bantam Books for a sum estimated at over $5
million.

In a statement yesterday, Bantam said the four-star general, who commanded the
allied forces in the Persian Gulf war, would begin work on his autobiography
immediately after his retirement from the Army on Aug. 31. The writer who will
work with him on the book, which has no title yet, has not been chosen.


Marvin Josephson, the general's agent, said that competition among publishers
for the book had been intense, but that the final choice was made between Bantam
and Random House Inc. A senior editor at Random House said the company had bid
$5 million, suggesting that Bantam paid more.

"Random House was very keen, and I would say it was a very close thing," Mr.
Josephson said. "But in the end, Bantam's was the best overall deal."

The Privy Parties

Linda Grey, the president and publisher of Bantam, declined to disclose the
terms of the agreement. "That is a matter between Bantam, the general, his agent
and the I.R.S.," she said.

Whether the Schwarzkopf advance is an actual record for an autobiography is not
known, but if it is not No. 1, it is certainly near the top. Random House
recently purchased Marlon Brando's autobiography for a hugh sum; Alfred A. Knopf
was said to have paid more than $4 million for Katharine Hepburn's, and Simon &
Schuster reportedly paid more than $6 million to former President Reagan for a
two-book contract, including his autobiogaphy. Like the Schwarzkopf book, all
these were sold for world rights.

Bantam said the book, a complete autobiography, would be published in the fall
of next year. But Mr. Josephson said that while it was the "desire, hope and
determination" of the author to complete the book by then, General Schwarzkopf
had not committed himself contractually to that date. The agent declined to say
what the contractual date of delivery for the manuscript was.

"If the general needs more time, he will give it more time," Mr. Josephson said.
A fall 1992 publication would mean that General Schwarzkopf and his co-writer
would have to complete the book in less than a year.

The Publisher and the Author

Ms. Grey said, "We expect that the book will reflect the author's extraordinary
persona: straight-talking, uniquely informed and definitively authoritative."

Bantam's statement reported the general as saying: "I very much look forward to
the opportunity to tell the in-depth story of Operation Desert Shield-Desert
Storm as I lived it, and to reflect on the emotions, the people and the events
that led to our victory. I'm delighted to be working with Bantam Books, whose
confidence in me I hope to reward with a book of high interest and enduring
value."

Apart from this reported statement, the general was not available for comment.

After returning from Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, in April, General Schwarzkopf, who is
56 years old, is completing his assignment as head of the Pentagon's Central
Command, which is based in Tampa, Fla.

He has committed himself to reflecting at length in the book on the profound
changes in the Army that have taken place during his 35-year career. Ms. Grey
said he had also promised "extensive support of the book" when it is published.

Gambling on Celebrity

Bantam is to publish the book simultaneously in the United States, Canada,
Australia and Britain.

For the house, the acquisition represents a multi-million-dollar gamble that the
general's appeal as a hero will be enduring and that the American public will
not become surfeited with tales of him.

Stuart Applebaum, a vice president, said he expected the work to attract readers
from "Wall Street to Main Street." As well as offering revelations on the gulf
war, the book is expected to offer many insights to those attracted by what some
have termed "the Schwarzkopf school of management," a reference to the general's
style of leading through personal inspiration.

Bantam has already published an instant paperback biography of the general
called "Schwarzkopf: An Insider's View of the Commander and His Victory" by
Lieut. Col. Robert D. Parrish, retired, and Col. N. A. Andreacchio. The book did
not sell well.

Several other books about the general have been, or are about to be, published.

The Celebrity-Biography Era

Bantam is a commercial house with a reputation for innovative marketing and for
making a success of autobiographies of celebrities. Most notably, in 1984, it
published "Iacocca: An Autobiography," by Lee A.  Iacocca with William Novak.
The book sold 2.4 million in hard cover and 3.5 million in paperback, and
ushered in the era when it has become almost de rigueur for celebrities to write
their life stories. A year after the Iacocca book, Bantam published "Yaeger: An
Autobiography," by Brig. Gen. Chuck Yaeger and Leo Janos, the story of the Air
Force pilot's life. It sold 1.2 million in hard cover. Bantam also published the
memoirs of President Jimmy Carter.

Mr. Novak is said by some publishers to be a contender for the job of writing
the general's book. So too is C. D. B. Bryan, an author who has a long
association with the general and wrote a profile of him in The New Republic this
year. Mr. Bryan also wrote the book "Friendly Fire," an account of an incident
in Vietnam in which a soldier in General Schwarzkopf's battalion was killed by
supporting artillery fire.

The Schwarzkopf deal is the company's boldest project since Paul D. Neuthaler
took over as chief executive of Bantam Doubleday Dell in September of last year.
Compared with the chief executives of other major houses, like Alberto Vitale of
Random House Inc. or Richard E. Snyder of Simon & Schuster, he has adopted a low
profile.

Opting for the Commercial

For Bantam, after a comparatively quiet period, the project is a powerful signal
that it remains a force to be reckoned with in major book auctions. For General
Schwarzkopf, the choice of Bantam over either Random House or Alfred A. Knopf,
both divisions of Random House Inc., means he selected what some would regard as
commercial muscle over literary prestige.

Bantam Doubleday Dell is owned by Bertelsmann A.G., the German media giant. Of
all European countries, Germany was one of the most critical of the gulf war;
although General Schwarzkopf's family is of German origin his popularity there
has been comparatively slight, according to several publishers.

Mr. Josephson, the agent, said the deal gave Bantam world audio rights to the
book, as well as serial rights, but not the movie rights. Bantam said that
General Schwarzkopf had promised to promote the book vigorously after it is
published. The publisher also said it would like the general to read the book
himself for the audio version.

NAME: H. Norman Schwarzkopf

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              370 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodian Factions Agree to Halt Arms Imports

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 500 words

DATELINE: PATTAYA, Thailand, June 24


Cambodia's warring factions signed an agreement today to stop receiving foreign
arms, the latest step toward ending the 12-year-old civil war in the country.

The agreement also formalized the truce declared on Sunday between the
Vietnamese-installed Government and the three guerrilla groups that have been
fighting to overthrow it. But the quest for peace still faces major obstacles.

Previous truces have fallen apart, and the new pact left many issues unresolved,
including how to halt the fighting and disarm the combatants.

"The declaration is one thing, the implementation is another," said Prince
Norodom Ranariddh, son of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's exiled leader and
the head of one of the guerrilla groups.

U.N. Peace Plan

The 12 members of the Supreme National Council, made up of representatives of
the Phnom Penh Government and the guerrilla factions, signed a five-point
agreement during talks at the beach resort of Pattaya near Bangkok. The council
was established under United Nations auspices to guide Cambodia until elections
are held.

The council seeks to carry out the peace plan drafted late last year by the
United Nations Security Council, but talks have been mired by bickering over the
role of the United Nations and other issues. Under the peace plan, the United
Nations would be heavily involved in Cambodia's administration and military
affairs before elections were held.

The rebels have accepted the plan, but the Government has rejected aspects of
it, specifically the requirement of demobilization before elections. The
Government is demanding measures to prevent any takeover attempt by one of the
guerrilla factions, the Khmer Rouge. More than a million people were killed or
died during brutal forced resettlement under the Khmer Rouge rule of Cambodia,
which lasted from the spring of 1975 until Vietnam invaded the country in late
1978 and installed the current Government in 1979.

Prince Sihanouk today denounced Prime Minister Hun Sen's reservations about the
United Nations peace plan. The Prince said a United Nations representative had
told him that the Security Council would not monitor the cease-fire or other
agreements unless its entire plan was accepted.

Role for Sihanouk

"Sihanouk is putting the squeeze on Hun Sen," said one diplomat, who spoke on
condition of anonymity. "He knows that Hun Sen knows you cannot have a
cease-fire and cessation of arms without the U.N. plan."

In addition to the truce and the ban on receiving foreign weapons, the agreement
signed today provides that Prince Sihanouk will direct future meetings of the
Supreme National Council and lead a council delegation to the United Nations.

The Khmer Rouge leader, Khieu Samphan, welcomed the agreement "as a token of our
willingness and sincerity to proclaim the acceptance of the cessation of
hostilities throughout Cambodia and the end of outside military assistance under
effective supervision and control of the United Nations."

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              371 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Anonymity: a Tool Used, and Abused

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 964 words


Promises of confidentiality to news sources are the grease that helps make the
wheels of journalism turn, especially in investigative reporting.

From leaked documents to tips, from "off the record" interviews to "background"
briefings, the offer of anonymity in exchange for useful information is a
fundamental element of the craft of journalism as it is practiced today.

"I don't think we can function without it," said Robert M. Steele, director of
the ethics program at the Poynter Institute for Media Studies in St. Petersburg,
Fla. "It's an essential tool to use at the right time and in the right place."

The revelations that have provided some of journalism's proudest moments have
depended on anonymous sources. For instance, the Pentagon Papers, a classified
study of the nation's role in Vietnam, was leaked by an anonymous source to The
New York Times. And "Deep Throat," perhaps the best-known anonymous source,
central to The Washington Post's articles about Watergate, remains unidentified
by Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein after nearly 20 years.

Potential for Abuse

An editor's willingness to allow a reporter to quote a confidential source in an
article is a vote of confidence in the reporter's judgment and integrity that
puts the news organization's credibility on the line each time it happens.

And journalists have sometimes gone to jail rather than violate their pledges of
confidentiality.

But the issue of confidentiality, and a perceived overreliance on unidentified
sources, has long worried many journalists, who recognize its potential for
abuse and avoid its use whenever possible. A source -- or unscrupulous reporter
-- could potentially use anonymity to wound enemies, help friends or distort
reality in any number of ways without being held accountable.

Janet Cooke, a reporter for The Washington Post, won a Pulitzer Prize for
articles about a child in the hands of a heroin dealer that was based entirely
on unidentified sources. Under pressure, she admitted fabricating the article,
and the Pulitzer was returned.

Making Implied Promises Binding

The Supreme Court's decision in the Cohen v. Cowles Media Co. case yesterday
held that promises of confidentiality by a reporter are enforceable contracts.
The decision may have a great impact on the way reporters work by turning a
gentleman's agreement -- albeit a serious one -- into a legal covenant.

"There are all kinds of implied promises every time a journalist speaks to a
source," said Leon Friedman, a First Amendment lawyer in New York.

In general, confidential sources fall into two broad categories: visible and
invisible.

The visible source is the person in an article who is identified as speaking on
condition that he not be identified.

Typically, the visible source has agreed to speak "off the record," which is
generally understood to mean that the comments may be quoted, but not attributed
to an identified person.

Off Even Off the Record

The invisible source does not appear in the article at all, but is instrumental
in its publication. This source could be a whistleblower disturbed with
malfeasance, or a courthouse gossip carefully cultivated by a reporter in hopes
that friendship will lead to information.

Documents from such a source are usually described simply as "obtained by" the
newspaper.

In another guise, the invisible source may provide a "background" briefing, a
common practice at the highest levels of Government in Washington and in the
military.

Within the constrictions of confidentiality, most news organizations try to
provide as much information about an anonymous source of information as
possible, to assure readers that the unnamed person speaks with authority.

A visible source, for example, might be identified as a senior executive at the
company in question.

When the Source Is the News

Even invisible sources are dragged partially from the shadows upon occasion. In
political campaigns, for example, opposing factions often anonymously supply
reporters with information that might embarrass the opposition. Typically, a
political operative will seek assurance from a reporter that the information not
be identified as coming from a rival camp.

In the Cowles case, Mr. Cohen, after being promised anonymity, gave a reporter
information damaging to the other candidate on the eve of an election. But the
editors judged that his leaking the information was more newsworthy than the
information Mr. Cohen had provided and identified him.

The case has already prompted some newspapers to review their guidelines
regarding how confidentiality is promised.

Frank Sutherland, editor of The Tennessean in Nashville, said his reporters are
now required to notify anyone asking for confidentiality that the reporter is
obliged to tell a senior editor the name of the source. Mr. Sutherland said the
decision can then be made whether the source's information warrants a commitment
to confidentiality. If it does not, he said, the information is not reported.

In Practice, Less Protocol

But as a practical matter, interrupting an interview to engage in a detailed
negotiation about confidentiality is less likely than a hurried assurance by the
reporter that an identity can be kept secret.

"When you're sitting over a meal with a source, nobody is going to say, 'Excuse
me, I'm going to go call my editor,' " said Fredric N. Tulsky, chairman of the
Investigative Reporters and Editors organization and a reporter for The
Philadelphia Inquirer.

Mr. Tulsky added that this year The Inquirer won the organization's top prize
for investigative reporting about mishandling of funds at Cumberland Farms Inc.,
thanks in part to the use of documents from a person who was never identified.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dan Cohen, who sued two Minnesota newspapers for breaking their
promises to keep his identity as a new source secret, in Minneapolis yesterday
after the Supreme Court ruled that reporters' promises of confidentiality are
legally enforceable. (Steve Woit for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              372 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BRIEFS

SECTION: Section D; Page 5; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 340 words



* American Telephone and Telegraph Co. said it would call for restoration of
direct telecommunications service with Vietnam at a House Foreign Affairs
Subcommittee hearing today.

* Bank of North America said that the Resolution Trust Corp. had accepted its
bid for three Broward County, Fla., offices of Ambassador Federal Savings & Loan
Association. Terms were not disclosed.



* Boeing Co., Seattle, said construction of a $190 million plant to build tail
sections for its new 777 wide-bodied jet would start this year on a 500-acre
site south of Tacoma, Wash.

* British Petroleum Co., London, said it had acquired 24.9 percent, or 2.5
billion shares, of Petroleos del Mediterraneo, the Spanish state-owned oil
company.

* Daimler-Benz A.G., Germany's biggest industrial group, said it planned to
invest more than 2 billion marks, or $1.11 billion, in eastern Germany by the
middle of the decade.

* Engelhard Corp., Iselin, N.J., a specialty chemicals company, will open new
diesel-engine testing plants in Union, N.J., and at joint-venture sites in
Numazu, Japan, and Hanover, Germany.

* FMR Corp., Boston, a mutual fund company, is leading a group that has
decreased its stake in Kemper Corp., Long Grove, Ill., an insurance and
financial services company, to 3,634,878 common shares, or 7.65 percent of the
total outstanding. The group said it sold a net of 506,166 shares between May 30
and June 14 for $35.15 to $38.06 each.

* Fluor Corp., Irvine, Calif., an engineering and construction company, said its
Fluor Daniel unit was awarded a $220 million contract by Petroleos de Venezuela,
the national oil company of Venezuela.

* Suisse Microelectronique et d'Horlogerie S.A., Switzerland's largest watch
maker said it had held talks with Volkswagen A.G., Europe's largest car maker,
on possible joint production of an environmentally friendly car.

* Universal Corp., Richmond, Va., a diversified company, said it would spin off
its Lawyers Title Insurance Corp. unit to shareholders.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              373 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1226 words



INTERNATIONAL A3-16

Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany will meet Mikhail Gorbachev before the meeting
of the leading industrial democracies, hoping to persuade the Soviet leader to
make reforms that could bring Western aid.  Page A1

Hard-liners in the Soviet Parliament again attacked President Gorbachev's reach
to the West, charging that Soviet moves were not being reciprocated from abroad.
A16

The Prime Minister of Yugoslavia, in a gloomy 11th-hour speech, appealed for
Slovenia and Croatia, the country's two most prosperous republics, to halt plans
to declare themselves independent on Wednesday. A16

Walesa vs. Parliament: Voting system is at issue A13

Property taken by the Sandinistas as they left office would be returned to the
Nicaraguan Government under a proposed law. The plan has gained popular support
but brought a violent response from some Sandinistas. A1

Vietnam's ruling Communist Party declared that it had no intention of giving up
its absolute hold on power even as the party continued to encourage a sweeping
liberalization of the Vietnamese economy. A3

Cambodian factions agree to halt arms imports A3

Sigiriya Journal: A Versailles, 600 feet up on a rock A4

U.S.-North Korea pact on return
 of American remains A6

Mt. Pinatubo: Fertilizer for future farmers? A7

About 1,200 mines off Kuwait's coast were cleared by an international flotilla
of minesweepers months earlier than expected. The cleanup reopened those waters
to commercial shipping, a senior Navy official said. A10

The restoration of electricity in Iraq after the allied bombing of power plants
is in a state of constant crisis. The problem may indicate that the return of
basic services was a temporary and illusory achievement. A10

Military exports to Iraq come under scrutiny A11

Life bleak for Jordanians who fled Kuwait A9

A "democratic coup" in Congo took place during a conference on the nation's
future. The meeting forced the Government to dismiss the Cabinet, rewrite the
Constitution and schedule the nation's first free elections. A8

NATIONAL A18-26, D23

A barrier for state prison inmates seeking to appeal convictions or sentences in
Federal courts was put in place by the Supreme Court. The ruling overturned a
landmark of modern habeas corpus doctrine. A1

The First Amendment is not a shield from lawsuits against news organizations
which promise to keep the name of a source secret but later disclose it, the
Supreme Court ruled. A1

The use of anonymous news sources who provide information is a fundamental
element of journalism as it is practiced today. The practice has long worried
journalists, who recognize a potential for abuse.  A20

A suit against a defense contractor, the Northrop Corporation, was settled for
$8 million. The suit was brought by former employees who said the company
falsified tests on parts for a Cruise missile. A18

A proposal to combat child poverty and guarantee health care for children was
made public by a Federal commission. The plan includes increased spending and a
$1,000 income tax credit for each child. A18

Abortion foes say poll backs curbs on advice A23

Washington Journal: Choosing Ethiopian eatery A18

A vote of confidence for John Sununu came from President Bush as the White House
sought anew to dampen speculation the chief of staff was in danger of losing his
job because of his travels on unofficial business.  D23

An agreement on the anti-crime bill was reached between Democratic and
Republican leaders in the Senate. The agreement would expand the number of
Federal crimes punishable by death.  D23

Defendant in bombing case defends lies in court A26

Tobacco company must stand trial D23

Videotaped Bush speech booed by teamster convention D23

A taxpayer bailout of many banks might be a strong possibility. Many economists
feel that weak banks, including some of the nation's largest, have overstated
the amount of capital they have to absorb loan losses. D1

REGIONAL B1-5

The struggle over the city budget in New York continued as leaders groped their
way through a maze of proposals to cut spending, raise taxes or find savings
just seven days before the new fiscal year begins. A1

A lost transit job, a fight with wife, a suicide leap B4

Pushing today's burden into tomorrow B4

Bridgeport has cut its work force so deeply that it is caught in a bind between
the state's labor laws and welfare laws that threatens to leave the city both
dirtier and poorer. B1

A plan to avoid over 4,000 layoffs of state workers was proposed by the
Democratic leaders of the New Jersey General Assembly. The budget plan was
immediately criticized by Gov. Jim Florio. B5

The new Queens District Attorney is expected to announce that he will seek the
dismissal of the most serious charges against four of the five police officers
indicted in the killing of a car-theft suspect, officials said. A1

Many prison guards had become lax before last month's inmate uprising at the
Southport Prison because the officers wanted the prison's experimental program
to fail, New York's top prison official said. B1

The largest source of slug tokens used by fare cheats in New York City subways
was raided, the authorities said. The police also seized from the New Jersey
factory slugs for phones, parking meters and toll booths. B3

Woman delayed identifying St. John's student, lawyer said B3

The first baseman took off for Ohio, the first on the Washington Heights High
School baseball team to leave. The others are now facing the hard edge behind
their baseball dreams: escaping Washington Heights. B1

A college program devoted to fishing is a romantic curiosity in the CUNY system.
It is also the nation's only such program to train people to fish, operate
charter boats and work in other commercial fishing fields.  B1

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

Science Times

Recreating a dinosaurC1

Concrete goes high-tech C1

Loss of genetic diversity imperils crop advances C1

Science Watch C2

The Doctor's World C3

Science Q&A C8

Personal Computers C9

Arts/Entertainment

Mayor's film office may be cut C13

BBC series on Hollywood C13

Music: Bobby Short celebrates New York C16

Dance: Paul Taylor's new work C13

Word and Image:TV film about gay black men C13

Fashion Page B6

Cruise wear for Europe

Perry Ellis's Americana

Obituaries D24-25

Rufino Tamayo, artist D25

Dexter Keezer, pioneer in economic projections D24

Kevin O'Connor, actor, director and teacher D24

Sports B7-12

Baseball: Twins shut out Yanks B7

Tabler's turn to be Jays' hero B8

Mets' dwindling pitching B9

Basketball: Rutgers recruit leaves questions behind B7

N.B.A. Notebook B11 Boxing: Notebook B9

Colleges: A step toward halting abuses B10

Golf: Two-stroke lead for Thomas B11

Tennis: Seles fined $6,000 B7

Weather forces Wimbledon to wait B10

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A24

Fight crime, not liberty

D'Amato waffles on weapons

Aid to Salvador can wait

Karl E. Meyer: Berlin

Letters A24

A. M. Rosenthal: Praying in London A25

Russell Baker: Scipio, to Hannibal A25

Jean Harris: Abortion -- an inmate's view A25

Norman J. Ornstein: Reforming campaign reform A25

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              374 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Vietnam Party Vows to Maintain Absolute Power

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 916 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, June 24


Leaders of Vietnam's ruling Communist Party declared today that they had no
intention of giving up their absolute hold on power even as the party continued
to encourage a sweeping liberalization of the economy.

Their statement, delivered by Nguyen Van Linh, the party leader, was replete
with the anti-imperialist language of an era gone by in most of the rest of the
Communist world. A transcript of his remarks, made at the opening session of the
party's national congress in Hanoi, the capital, was made available here.

We affirm once again our wish to follow socialism under the clear-sighted
leadership of the party," said Mr. Linh, 75 years old, who has told colleagues
that he plans to resign at the end of the four-day congress along with several
other aged Politburo members. "Socialism is the only right direction."

Mr. Linh acknowledged that there was "a crisis in theory and in practice" in
socialism, as evidenced by the developments in Eastern Europe. But he insisted
that Vietnam would not follow the path of the Eastern Europeans.

Party's Seventh Congress

The gathering in Hanoi this week is only the seventh congress since Vietnam's
Communist Party was formed in 1930 by Ho Chi Minh and a handful of colleagues,
and at this congress party leaders are expected to map out policy for the rest
of the 1990's, if not for the next generation.

At the last congress, in 1976, the party adopted its own version of perestroika,
called "doi moi," or economic renovation, which has led to sweeping free-market
reforms.

Yet even as it has yielded much of its power in the market place, the Communist
Party has refused to give up authority in the political sphere -- a situation
that will continue, Mr. Linh said.

Attacking "pseudo-democrats" and "demagogues" who have called for a multiparty
system in Vietnam, Mr. Linh told the 1,200 party delegates that Vietnam would
not do what the new Eastern European democracies -- this nation's once faithful
Communist allies -- had done.

'Imperialist Forces' Blamed

Acknowledging that a crisis existed in socialism, he charged that "imperialist
forces" were behind events in Eastern Europe, and said economic and social chaos
that accompanied the revolutions in Eastern Europe would not be allowed here.

"Incorrect political renovation leads to political instability," Mr. Linh said.
"An unstable political situation would create difficulties and obstacles for the
entire renovation process."

"In the present condition of our country, it is not objectively necessary to
establish a political mechanism of pluralism and multiparty government," he
said. "Socialism is the only right decision. For our country there is no other
way to have freedom and happiness for the people."

Mr. Linh, who is the architect of the new economic program in Vietnam and who
advocated the force of private capital long before it became fashionable
elsewhere in the Vietnamese Government, said a multiparty system would hinder
the economic reforms made since 1986 by unleashing "forces of reaction," adding
"this is something our people would never accept."

Other Parties Possible

He said it was possible and even desirable for Vietnam to open up politically,
so long as the Communist Party retained ultimate authority. "Whether there is
democracy or not does not depend on whether there is one party or many parties,"
he said.

"Under the former puppet regime, there were many parties, but no one would say
there was democracy," he said, referring to the American-backed Government that
had its capital in this city, then named Saigon, and that was defeated by the
Communists in 1975.

There had been suggestions by party officials this year that because of deep
divisions in the Vietnamese leadership over the direction of the country, Mr.
Linh might remain in power beyond this week's congress.

But Western diplomats said today that Mr. Linh's failing health might force the
issue. If he does step down, Mr. Linh is expected to be replaced by Do Muoi, a
party loyalist who is now No. 3 in the 12-member Politburo. The switch would be
part of what is expected to be a much larger shakeup in the Politburo, including
the replacement of several aged members -- the average age now is 71 -- by party
officials who are younger but no less doctrinaire.

In his speech to the congress, Mr. Linh called again for an improvement in
relations with some of this country's former enemies, including China and the
United States.

The United States has said it will not restore diplomatic relations with Vietnam
until several conditions are met, including an end to the civil war between the
Vietnamese-backed Government of Cambodia and guerrilla groups trying to
overthrow it.

By withholding recognition of Hanoi, the United States has prevented Vietnam,
one of the poorest nations in Asia, from receiving international development aid
and from luring Western investors.

Vietnam appeared one step closer today to ending the American economic embargo,
with word that the warring factions in Cambodia had accepted a cease-fire and
had agreed to stop receiving foreign arms.

The Associated Press quoted Vietnam's Deputy Foreign Minister, Le Mai, as saying
Hanoi welcomed reports of a peace agreement.

"If such news is true, we think this is encouraging," Mr. Le Mai was quoted as
saying at a news conference in the Vietnamese capital. "It's true that it's a
step forward for peace."

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 25, 1991, Tuesday

CORRECTION:
An article yesterday about the Vietnamese Communist Party congress misstated the
year of the last one. It was 1986, not 1976.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Nguyen Van Linh, Vietnam's Communist Party leader, speaking
yesterday at the opening of the party's congress in Hanoi. The party declared
that it had no intention of giving up power. Mr. Linh has told colleagues that
he plans to resign at the end of the four-day session. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              375 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 22 words


An article yesterday about the Vietnamese Communist Party congress misstated the
year of the last one. It was 1986, not 1976.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              376 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A Korean War Parade, Decades Late

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 843 words


There was a parade through the Canyon of Heroes on lower Broadway yesterday, but
no need this time for the abstruse municipal calculus of crowd measurement (the
spectators could be counted). It was, somehow, a simpler scene: The confetti
could be measured (by the pound, not the ton). And paunchy, graying men strutted
where the giddy footfalls of euphoric, battle-fresh young soldiers still echoed.

Thirty-eight years late, veterans of the Korean War finally had their New York
parade.

When the war ended in 1953, the troops who fought in Chosin and Panmunjom came
home to silence -- no peppy marching bands, no patriotic speeches, no one asking
them to autograph their T-shirts. But yesterday, they did not bother to ask what
took so long.

"It's been 40 years, but this is like a dream," said Jack Murray, who was a
combat engineer in Korea and is now a lawyer in Arlington, Va.

'Finally Being Recognized'

"We're finally being recognized," said Danny Ross, a letter-carrier from
Flushing, Queens.

The recognition has not come easily. Sandwiched between World War II and
Vietnam, the Korean War has long been a muddle of contradictory memories. Three
long years of fighting and more than 53,000 casualties left Americans uncertain
about whether it was a victory or a defeat, a heroic stand against Communism or
a tragic stalemate. With the larger issues so blurry for so long, younger
generations have forgotten about North Korean and Chinese mistreatment of
prisoners.

But yesterday, the 41st anniversary of the day on which the fighting began, the
memories came flooding back as the marchers headed down Broadway and converged
on Battery Park for the dedication of a war memorial. John Carlin, who shivered
through his first night in the war zone, remembered how he expected to freeze to
death. He remembered trying to take Korean hills with Americanized names like
Vegas, Carson, Reno, Boulder City.

But most of all, there was the memory of no parade, no celebration when it was
all over.

'An Unpopular War'

"This was long overdue," said John von Praunsberg, an insurance investigator
from Merrick, L.I. "I guess it was an unpopular war. It wasn't considered a war,
just a police action. But to the fellows who were there, it was a war, and we're
here not for us but for the guys we left in Korea."

Still, unlike the troops who fought in the Persian Gulf, the Korean veterans
were not treated to the roar of a cheering crowd or cascades of confetti. There
was some applause, and there was some confetti. But the city Sanitation
Department did not even bother to estimate how much. The police department,
which put the gulf war parade crowd in the millions, said 250,000 turned out for
the Korean veterans' parade -- not that many more than would be on the same
streets any other day.

"It's almost a non-event," said Joe Sullivan, a retired stockbroker from
Manhattan who served in Korea in the Marines and the Navy. "It was too late
coming."

Yet there they were, following in the footsteps of Lindbergh, the Apollo
astronauts and American troops home from World Wars I and II, some 9,000 Korean
veterans, twice as many as the parade organizers were expecting.

They were also once again following Gen. Douglas MacArthur, who led troops in
Korea and had his own parade through Manhattan on April 20, 1951. The Korean
veterans, who maintain that yesterday's festivities were the first parade to
honor those who fought in their war, do not count the MacArthur parade, even
though some 7.5 million people turned out for it and the city had to dig out
from under 2,850 tons of paper.

"That was a MacArthur parade," said Irwin R. Schwartz, the executive director of
the New York Korean Veterans Memorial Commission. "That was going on while the
war was going on. That had nothing to do with the troops."

To the lunchtime crowds yesterday, seeing white-haired men commemorating a war
from the 1950's was something of a novelty.

"Way before my time," said Raymond Thompson, a clerk born nine years after the
Korean War ended. "I don't know too much about it."

A Long Wait

"The saddest part was the ones who had been P.O.W.'s," said Zernobia Richardson,
a co-worker. "They had this look on their face. There were only six of them."

The parade lasted an hour and ended in Battery Park with the dedication of the
new memorial, for which the commission had raised $800,000 in contributions, Mr.
Schwartz said. Mayor David N. Dinkins and former Mayor Edward I. Koch were on
hand for the unveiling, as was Ambassador Tong-Jin Park of South Korea. But
somehow, the Korean War veterans could not forget the gulf war that the American
forces called Desert Storm, the instant recognition that came with it and the
decades it took them to get their parade.

"My personal feeling was, God, they got it fast," Mr. Schwartz said. "Some guy
came over to me and said, is that the memorial for Desert Storm? I said, 'Do me
a favor, walk the other way. We've waited 40 years. Desert Storm can wait a
couple of months.' "

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: About 9,000 Korean War veterans turned out yesterday to march in
a New York City parade they said was the only one to honor the troops since the
end of the war. Frankie R. Acquaviva, who kissed the flag on a newly dedicated
memorial at Battery Park, said he fought on Pork Chop Hill. (Angel Franco/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              377 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Shifting Causes: Updates From the American Left

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 978 words



Political Protest and Cultural Revolution
Nonviolent Direct Action
in the 1970's and 1980's
By Barbara Epstein
Illustrated. 327 pages. University of California Press. $24.95.

Uncommon Martyrs
The Berrigans, the Catholic Left and the Plowshares Movement
By Fred A. Wilcox
249 pages. Addison-Wesley. $18.95.

Political protest by individuals against the power of the state is as American
as apple pie and handguns. Depending on one's sympathies, protesters have been
considered either ordinary troublemakers and eccentrics or extraordinary heroes
and heroines. Henry David Thoreau, praised for his pursuit of the simple life at
Walden Pond, was arrested and spent a night in jail in 1846 for not paying
several years' poll tax (the next morning, he was thrown out of jail when he
refused to leave). Thoreau didn't want his money to go to a government that
supported the Mexican War. He wasn't alone; Lincoln was a Mexican War dove, too.

Like many of the current protesters who are treated respectfully in an
enlightening new book, "Political Protest and Cultural Revolution," by Barbara
Epstein, a history professor at the University of California in Santa Cruz,
Thoreau fought for his principles with his pen and his person, unarmed. In his
1849 essay, "Resistance to Civil Government" (posthumously retitled "Civil
Disobedience"), he advocated passive resistance. Not all of his friends admired
his grandstanding. Ralph Waldo Emerson confided in his journal, "Instead of
being the head of American engineers, he is captain of a huckleberry party."

Professor Epstein notes that she has also spent time in jail because of
political activism. In 1983, she and a thousand others were arrested for
blocking the road in front of the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, where the
University of California conducts nuclear weapons research. Not every author can
make this claim in a caption for a book jacket photograph: "Barbara Epstein,
under arrest, being escorted to a police van, San Francisco, 1990."

But "Political Protest and Cultural Revolution" is neither a personal nor a
hortatory book. It's a scholarly study about an underreported subject: what
happened to the civil rights and antiwar protest movements of the 1960's and
70's and how have they evolved? Professor Epstein quickly learned that the new
protesters no longer represent any large organized left; she says the earlier
Marxist or socialist orientation seems "dated and all but lifeless."

What replaced the unifying fervor against the Vietnam War was a new
concentration on the perils of nuclear war and the endangered environment. At
the same time, the feminist movement became a natural ally in political activism
for equal and personal rights. New cultural groups developed, willing to take to
the streets, engage in nonviolent actions against military and nuclear
installations, and go to court or even to jail for their beliefs.

The model for the nonviolent direct action movement was the Clamshell Alliance,
founded in New Hampshire in 1976 after the Public Service Corporation announced
its intention to build a nuclear power plant in the town of Seabrook. The
movement brought together ecological advocates, antiwar veterans, Quaker women
and counterculture students.  Other environmental groups sprang up against
nuclear power. The largest was the Abalone Alliance, which opposed the Diablo
Canyon nuclear plant on the central California coast. Like the Clamshell, the
Abalone held an escalating series of occupations, resulting in thousands of
arrests. These direct-action groups broadened the constituency for civil
disobedience.

"The influence of feminism in the direct-action movement has grown with the
prominence of women's groups and actions," Professor Epstein writes.

The author's analysis doesn't answer the question of how a politics of cultural
radicalism can intersect with the struggle for political and institutional
change. Nor does it take into full account the effectiveness of the Sierra Club
on similar issues or of Ralph Nader's research groups that expose the regulatory
shortcomings of government and industry. Nevertheless, "Political Protest and
Cultural Revolution" is an original work that reveals how the disparate elements
of direct action offer a different set of values for the country.

In "Uncommon Martyrs," Fred A. Wilcox, the author of "Waiting for an Army to
Die," about the use of the defoliant Agent Orange in Vietnam, writes about
individuals who have turned up the pressure several notches against nuclear and
war-making plants. His heroes are members of the Catholic left, especially
Philip and Daniel Berrigan, the radical priests who became national
personalities through books, documentaries and plays because of their opposition
to the Vietnam War, and the Federal Government's unsuccessful effort to still
their voices.

Mr. Wilcox writes that the Berrigans and a small group of colleagues continue
their self-appointed mission through the Plowshares Movement. The name, of
course, is derived from the biblical injunction to beat swords into plowshares.
But the Plowshares Movement uses civil disobedience for a larger purpose: to
"expose the criminality of nuclear weaponry and corporate piracy." To do so,
they have entered defense plants, pounded warheads with hammers, ripped
blueprints, and poured vials of their own blood over nose cones and documents.

"Uncommon Martyrs" is something of a hodgepodge of biographical information,
notes on religion, superficial reporting and worshipful admiration. But the book
may well provide background for readers unfamiliar with the work of the Catholic
left, the Plowshares Movement in the United States and Western Europe and the
Berrigans. The author says the Berrigans continue to live in voluntary poverty
and own no property, and still mount the barricades.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              378 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Asmara Journal;
Pupil of G.I.'s Does Well, as a Rebel

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 868 words

DATELINE: ASMARA, Ethiopia, June 21


For Sephat Ephrem, the wiry 40-year-old chief of staff of the Eritrean
guerrillas who defeated the Ethiopian Army, sitting in the headquarters of his
enemy is a sentimental homecoming.

Mr. Sephat was a youthful visitor at the headquarters in the 1960's when what
are now shabby buildings and overgrown gardens served as an American
communications base, before the leadership of the Ethiopian Army moved in.
Indeed, his science teachers were Americans assigned to his school from the
headquarters, called Kagnew Station.

"We had very lovely years with the G.I.'s in school," said Mr. Sephat, who 19
years ago gave up his pharmaceutical studies to join the Eritrean People's
Liberation Front. "You could ask your teachers to buy you something at the PX --
Timex watches, ring folders, Wrangler trousers. They were telling us many things
about the Vietnam War."

Mr. Sephat and his senior colleagues, many of them sons of the middle class of
Asmara, the Eritrean capital, have been fighting their own war for the last two
decades; an older generation of rebels persisted for a decade before. They
finally won on May 24 when the Ethiopian Army generals fled by helicopter from
Kagnew Station and the soldiers put down their guns.

Washington's Change of Heart

Now Mr. Sephat's fighters patrol the streets of Asmara wearing Ethiopian
soldiers' hats decorated with loops of black boot laces confiscated from
prisoners of war.

The Eritrean front's victory was among the more decisive, and surprising, by
modern-day African rebels. The guerrillas had long been dismissed because their
goal -- the separation of the province of Eritrea from the rest of Ethiopia --
seemed impossible.

In Washington, there was distaste not only for the Soviet-backed Government of
Lieut. Col. Mengistu Haile Mariam, but also for the Eritrean front's own Marxist
philosophy. And Washington held to a general policy opposing separatist
movements in Africa.

But as the Eritrean front moved away from Marxism and American famine relief
provided a window to Eritrea, American diplomats met with the rebels and in the
end mediated between them and the Government. So when Mr. Sephat and his
soldiers walked into Asmara on May 24, sealing the front's control of Eritrea,
Washington reversed itself and acknowledged Eritrea's right to
self-determination.

Mr. Sephat is credited by his colleagues with being the Eritrean front's main
strategist in battling the 350,000-member Ethiopian Army in the last few years.
As well as being the chief of staff, he carries political influence within the
front as a member of its nine-man Politburo.

A Coordinated Battle Plan

More than 125,000 Ethiopian troops, the cream of the army, were stationed in and
around Asmara. The rest of the army, mainly peasant conscripts, were fought by
the younger rebel group, the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front,
who were largely trained by the Eritrean front.

In January, the two groups developed a coordinated battle plan that ended in
last month's victory, Mr. Sephat said. The Ethiopian People's Revolutionary
Democratic Front captured Addis Ababa, the Ethiopian capital, days after the
Eritrean front took Asmara.

The Eritreans battled an Ethiopian Army fortified by $12 billion of Soviet arms.
The Eritrean front, Mr. Sephat said, was dependent solely on captured enemy
weapons.

"Our main problem was that we had no help from the outside world," he said. "We
had to figure out how to get equipment."

Military experts credit the Eritrean front, which its leaders say numbers about
100,000 front-line, technical and administrative fighters, with unusual
self-reliance in terrible terrain and dramatic successes in seizing Soviet arms.
But they also believe that the Eritreans received money from Arab governments as
well as Eritreans abroad.

To build up its equipment, Mr. Sephat said, the Eritrean front fought all its
battles with the objective of capturing specific weapons. Three years ago, in
the desolate hills around Afabet, north of here, the guerrillas trapped more
than 10,000 Ethiopian soldiers in a valley and captured three Soviet advisers.

"Our main aim was to get their artillery pieces," Mr. Sephat said. "Their whole
battalion of 130-millimeter artillery. We got the lot."

At the battle for the port of Massawa in early 1990, the Eritrean front captured
hundreds of Soviet tanks, he said.

Force to Remain Intact

All along, Mr. Sephat said, the front was helped by what he called flaws among
the Amharas, the dominant ethnic group in the top ranks of the Ethiopian
military.

"As intellectuals, they have the best people in Ethiopia, but they are not very
good fighters," Mr. Sephat said. "And in the Mengistu Government they only had
people who would work with whisky."

Now that his soldiers have prevailed, Mr. Sephat has no intention of disbanding
them, even though the Government in Addis Ababa is now supposed to be friendly.

Mr. Sephat offered an analogy with Israel. "We have the same fear, we still have
to survive," he said. "International law has not been kind to Eritrea. We have
paid enough sacrifice. We have to protect our victory by still being vigilant."

NAME: Sephat Ephrem

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Eritrean rebels patrolling in Asmara wore Ethiopian soldiers'
hats decorated with loops of boot laces taken from Ethiopian prisoners of war.
At left, Sephat Ephrem, the chief of staff of the guerrilla fighters.
(Photographs by Jane Perlez/The New York Times)

Map of Ethiopia highlighting Asmara

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              379 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Hero Honored 23 Years Late

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 750 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 26


It has taken more than 23 years, but on Thursday the Army will award the Silver
Star to the widow of an Army captain who was killed in Vietnam while risking
enemy mortar fire to save his badly outnumbered troops.

The awarding of the medal of valor, one of the service's highest honors, will
bring an end to Brenda Reed's emotional campaign of perseverance and devotion to
her husband, Capt. James Eddie Reed. For the past three years the Army has
resisted awarding the medal because no one recommended the honor immediately
after Captain Reed's death, as is customary. An oversight by Captain Reed's
field commander delayed the process until 1988.

The quest took Ms. Reed to the jungles of Vietnam, to tiny towns throughout
America in search of men who had fought alongside her husband, and to the
streets of the San Francisco Bay area, where she petitioned strangers to write
letters to the Pentagon in support of her cause.

When all seemed hopeless, Ms. Reed found by chance, in the very bureaucracy she
was fighting, a sympathetic ear with influence: a senior civilian Army official
who is the son of Gen. Mark W. Clark, the World War II hero. In a rare move, he
overturned the ruling of the Army board that acts on such matters and ordered
that Captain Reed receive the Silver Star.

An 'Extraordinary' Man

"Eddie Reed was an extraordinary young man who was not only valorous but also
highly loved by his men," said William D. Clark, the principal deputy assistant
secretary of the Army for manpower and reserve affairs, a highly decorated
Korean War veteran who authorized Captain Reed's medal.

Captain Reed was killed on Feb. 1, 1968, during the Tet offensive, when North
Vietnamese forces shelled an old French island fortress in the Mekong Delta that
his 125-man infantry company was trying to hold.

His company outnumbered 10 to 1, Captain Reed radioed for help but was told by
battalion headquarters that no reinforcements were available. With North
Vietnamese mortars bombarding the fort, Captain Reed mounted a parapet to help
aim return fire. Moments later, an incoming round exploded near him, killing the
25-year-old captain and three of his lieutenants. But his directions allowed the
besieged American troops to knock out the North Vietnamese mortars.

Ms. Reed, who was 21 years old when her husband was killed, said that several
months after his death the Army sent awards that her husband had earned in
earlier battles -- two Bronze Stars and two Purple Hearts -- but there were no
commendations from the Feb. 1 firefight.

It was not until four years ago, when her son, James Jr., entered college on an
R.O.T.C. scholarship, that Ms. Reed began reviewing her husband's personnel file
and unit records, and discovered discrepancies in his case. She and her son
traveled to Vietnam, which revealed little, but publicity surrounding her trip
prompted surviving members of her husband's unit to call and tell her that
Captain Reed deserved an award for his valor on the night he died.

Captain Reed's battalion commander, Col. Anthony P. DeLuca, pressed Ms. Reed's
case and recommended her husband for a posthumous Silver Star. The Silver Star
is the Army's third-highest honor, behind the Medal of Honor and Distinguished
Service Cross. Colonel DeLuca had been pinned down in other battles on Feb. 1,
and in the resulting chaos never recommended Captain Reed for the Silver Star.

In 1988, Ms. Reed submitted statements from four witnesses to the Army Board for
the Correction of Military Records, a civilian panel responsible for reviewing
promotions, retirement dates and other personnel issues.

When Army investigators balked and told Ms. Reed her case could take more than
four years to resolve, she gathered signatures and started a letter-writing
campaign from her home in Oakland, Calif., to force the Army to speed its
review.

With her appeals nearly exhausted, Ms. Reed called Mr. Clark, who agreed to
convene a hearing of the records board. At the hearing last January, the
five-member civilian panel heard testimony from several witnesses.

"He not only risked his life on that occasion, he risked his life on several
other occasions," said Hildebrando Madrigal, a former lieutenant who was
monitoring the radio at battalion headquarters on Feb. 1.

Despite the testimony, the board voted 4 to -1 to deny the award. On Feb. 28,
though, Mr. Clark reversed the ruling and awarded Captain Reed the Silver Star
for gallantry in action.

NAME: James Eddie Reed

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: It took more than 23 years for the Army to award the Silver
Star of valor to Capt. James Eddie Reed, who was killed while trying to save his
troops in Vietnam. His widow, Brenda, touched his name engraved on the Vietnam
Memorial in Washington. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times); Capt. James Eddie
Reed in 1967.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              380 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1206 words



INTERNATIONAL A3-13

Tension in two Yugoslav republics mounted as the army failed to dislodge
Slovenian militias claiming independence from the federation. In Croatia, Serbs
stormed a Croation police station, killing three.  Page A1

U.S. voices regret on Yugoslav crisis A10

Soviet troops raided a phone center in Lithuania and cut off communications with
the outside world for several hours today, stepping up the war of nerves over
the republic's independence drive. A8

Soviet reformers scramble for unity A8

Iraq is trying to conceal equipment used for manufacturing nuclear explosives,
the Administration charged at the United Nations. Officials showed
reconnaissance photographs to back up their claims. A12

Kuwait lifted the death sentences on all people convicted of collaboration with
Iraq and commuted the terms to life in prison. The decision appears to reflect
growing sensitivity to criticism of the martial-law courts. A13

Egypt and P.L.O. seem to stiffen opposition to Israel's terms A6 French
investigators tie Libyans to '88 bombing of a Pan Am jet A10

A plan to move 300 black pupils in South Africa from a squalid and overcrowded
school to an empty one once used by whites a half-dozen miles away was foiled by
policemen using armored cars and trucks. A3

Asmara Journal: Pupil of G.I.'s scores high, as rebel leader A4

Renewal of China's trade privileges, which is being pushed by President Bush, is
in serious trouble in Congress, with approval almost certain to be tied to
conditions China vehemently opposes. A8

Frozen military aid to El Salvador will be freed up to help the nation's army
acquire spare parts and medicines at a time when the guerrillas are preparing to
step up the fighting, State Department officials say. A3

A Neanderthal skeleton in France has provided proof that prehistoric humans
lived in Western Europe as recently as 36,000 years ago, well after the first
modern humans are believed to have appeared there.  A6

Convictions overturned in I.R.A. bomb factory case A7

NATIONAL A14-27, B7, D28

A program of housing for poor people is turning into profits for big real estate
investors, led by one of America's business giants, General Electric. The
program sells apartments from failed savings and loans. A1

The nation's largest bank merger may be in the works. The NCNB Corporation, a
fast-growing banking powerhouse from the Southeast, is negotiating to acquire
another large Southeast banking company. A1

Guards have chauffered John Sununu on business, political and personal errands
in the New York area, according to officials and documents. The guards were
assigned to Federal buildings in New York.  A1

Sununu curbing travels to mend image of arrogance, aides say B7

Washington at Work: Jesse Jackson is back, or at least he wants to be for the
next Presidential election. He is moving to capitalize on recent events, sowing
hope among followers and agita among some Democrats. A1

Spending for 1988 campaigns set a new record A17

Even after truce, political feud in Virginia goes on A19

The banning of abortion counseling at federally financed family planning clinics
was prohibited in a bill passedin the House. Abortion opponents hope to reverse
the action by sustaining a threatened veto. A24

Senate supports new curbs on inmates' rights A25

House Democrats reach accord on transport bill A20

Cultural diversity issue raised at House hearing A15

Twenty three years late, Vietnam hero honored A26

Computer failure disrupts phones in Washington area A27

Computer programmer charged in sabatoge plot A16

Zachary Taylor was not murdered with "arsenic or other deadly substances" almost
141 years ago as a historic novelist has widely theorized, medical officials
said. The 12th President died of natural causes. A14

Who shot Huey Long?  A14

California nears budget deadline $14 billion short A14

New study warns of risks of yo- yo dieting D28

U.S.-Soviet Mars flight is proposed to cut costs D28

REGIONAL B1-6

New York City's budget stalemate worsened as state officials weighed with
renewed urgency proposals for long-term recovery that could avert some of the
pain and spread the rest over several years. A1

Union chief's defeat tied to anger at Cuomo B4

Reporter's notebook: In Hartford tax talks, calm reigns B4

A rare glimpse inside a cocaine gang was provided recently when Federal
undercover agents infiltrated a drug-trafficking group and arrested many key
players. Two people were lured right into a Federal office. A1

They were rich and generous thieves, two cultured men who lived among the best
of Philadelphia society and donated large sums to hard-pressed cultural
institutions. But everything they had, they stole. A1

Three volunteer ambulance rescuers in New Jersey were charged with aggravated
manslaughter in an attack on a mentally retarded homeless man who may have
irritated them with too many calls for help. B1

Lawyer charged with conspiracy in election case B1

Youth portrayed as vicious mugger is arrested on assault charge B3

Scores on an annual reading test rose in New York City schools, mirroring their
rebound in mathematics. Chancellor Joseph Fernandez said it was another sign his
administration has begun to turn the schools around. B1

The delicate politics of public toilets may have finally borne fruit: Mayor
Dinkins has given his blessing, officials said, to an experiment to test six
self-cleaning European toilet kiosks on sidewalks around the city. B1

State shuts down North Hempstead landfill B2

Times Square Journal: Crusader says farewell to flock B3

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

The Home Section

Sunset for the old-style pool C1

When remodelers are archeologists C1

Making child care America's business C1

Parent & Child C2

Young fathers talk diapers and teething C5

A family affair: paying for the wedding C10

A Gardener's World C11

Arts/Entertainment

Lincoln Center announces Out of Doors festival C13

Theater: Shaw's "Getting Married" C14

Music: The Bolshoi's "Yevgeny Onegin" C13

A tribute to Sarah Vaughan C13

Dance: Robbins's "Mother Goose" C16

Word and Image: The late-night TV sweepstakes C13

Two horror novels C17

Obituaries D29

Roland Van Zandt, writer on the Catskills

Michael Heidelberger, a pathologist

Sports B8-15

Baseball: Mets and Viola outlast Expos, 7-4 B9

Another victory at Fenway for Yanks B11

Base-stealing duo gives Expos new identity B11

N.B.A. Draft: Knicks take U.N.L.V.'s Greg Anthony B9

Nets select Anderson of Georgia Tech with No. 2 pick B9

Column: Vecsey on Wimbledon B9

Golf: Pressure is on American team B12

Tennis: Weather strikes again t Wimbledon B14

Gambling: Congress hears views on sports lotteries B15

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A28

The poorest Americans: II

Federalism, despoiled

Karl E. Meyer: Columbus

Letters A28

Anna Quindlen: Trim fat at the top A29

William Safire: Sununu blames the Jews A29

Srdja Popovic: Psychodrama in Yugoslavia A29

Nardi Reeder Campion: Fifty years of sex A29

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              381 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vet Street Peddlers Deserve a Chance

SECTION: Section A; Page 28; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 150 words


To the Editor:

The Civil War-era law permitting disabled veterans the right to peddle goods on
any street, to which you refer in "Fairness on Fifth Avenue" (editorial, June
18), is both just and wise in its acknowledgment of the hard reality at the end
of the parade.

The selling floors of Tiffany's, Saks Fifth Avenue and Cartier's contain few, if
any, unpretty survivors of battle making a living. The predominantly Vietnam-era
vets who peddle outside have a viable alternative to homelessness and
destitution.

A New York native, I too appreciate the special cachet and elegance that
prominent Fifth Avenue merchants contribute (along with their tax dollars) to
Manhattan commerce.

However, a vet selling a fake Rolex or a Bart Simpson T-shirt is not the
competitor of Cartier's or Saks Fifth Avenue. He just doesn't advertise in The
Times.

ADAM HONIGMAN
New York, June 18, 1991

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              382 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 28, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 89 words



Hanoi Seeks Economic Aid

Hanoi's new Communist leader used his first news conference to plead for
international help to end Vietnam's long years of poverty. Page A7.



A Warning to Iraq

Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d accused Baghdad of trying to hide nuclear
supplies, and American aides said Iraq could still be hit. Page A3.

America West Bankruptcy

America West Airlines filed for bankruptcy and said it would discontinue some
flights, including service to La Guardia Airport, on Sept. 7. Page D1.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              383 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 28, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM APPEALS FOR FOREIGN HELP

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 855 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, June 27


Vietnam's ruling Communist Party announced today that it had elected a new
leader, Do Muoi, a 74-year-old party loyalist who used his first news conference
to plead for international help to end Vietnam's long years as a "poor and
backward nation."

Mr. Do Muoi's remarkably blunt request for aid for his tattered nation came as
the party replaced more than half of its policy-making group, the Politburo. The
new, younger members, while no less committed to the party's absolute power,
appeared to be more likely to support moves toward a free market in Vietnam.

Western diplomats said the selection of Mr. Do Muoi as the party's General
Secretary probably meant that Vietnam would continue or step up its efforts to
expand economic and diplomatic relations with former enemies in the developed
world, especially with the United States, which has refused to lift a 16-year
trade embargo on Hanoi.

Mr. Do Muoi, replaces Nguyen Van Linh, 76, who told colleagues during the
Communist Party Congress in Hanoi this week that he was stepping down as General
Secretary because of age and poor health.

Praise for Retiring Leader

Mr. Linh was hailed at the party congress for his role as architect of a series
of market-oriented reforms -- known as renovation -- that ended decades of
economic planning in Vietnam.

Despite the praise for Mr. Linh, not all of his close associates survived
today's party leadership changes.

Among those removed from the Politburo was Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, a
Linh ally who had been criticized in the party for pushing too hard for
political changes like those that have convulsed the Soviet Union. A new Foreign
Minister has not been named. Another one of those dropped from the Politburo was
Interior Minister Mai Chi Tho, one of the nation's most powerful men.

Mr. Do Muoi, who was Prime Minister under Mr. Linh and who has adopted Mr.
Linh's pro-market economic views, vowed today that economic liberalization would
remain the party's "keynote" concern, even as the party continued to retain
total control of political life in Vietnam.

'The Only Correct Path'

"Our party and our people are unshakably determined to follow the path of
socialism, the path chosen by President Ho Chi Minh, our party and people, the
only correct path," he said in a closing speech to the four-day congress.

At a later news conference with Vietnamese and foreign reporters, Mr. Do Muoi,
without prompting from the press corps, described Vietnam as a "poor and
backward nation -- there's no need to explain it."

He said his Government would seek to expand ties with other nations to help
Vietnam "escape" from years of economic stagnation. For the same reason, he
said, the nation would avoid foreign military adventures.

Although he did not say so explicitly, Mr. Do Muoi appeared to suggest that
Vietnam would not repeat anything like its 1979 invasion of neighboring
Cambodia, in which the Vietnamese-backed Government of Premier Hun Sen was
installed.

U.S. Terms for Better Ties

The United States has said that it will not improve relations with Vietnam until
Hanoi presses Mr. Hun Sen to sign a United Nations peace plan that calls for
free elections in Cambodia and a role for rebel groups that are trying to topple
the government. The American embargo has deprived Vietnam of badly needed help
from the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and private investors.

In many ways, Mr. Do Muoi's remarks today amounted to an admission that
Vietnam's revolution has failed to provide the country's 66 million people with
anything like a reasonable standard of living.

Despite the advances under the renovation policies, Vietnam remains one of the
poorest nations in Asia, with an annual per capita income estimated last year at
less than $500.

According to an official biography released today, Mr. Do Muoi was born on Feb.
2, 1917, to a peasant family in Hanoi. While working as a house painter in 1936,
he joined the budding Vietnamese nationalist movement and three years later was
admitted to the Communist Party of Indo-China.

In 1941, he was arrested by the French colonial government in Vietnam and
sentenced to 10 years in prison. He escaped in March 1945 and, according to the
biography, rejoined the party and pursued the struggle for Vietnamese
independence.

Named to Politburo in 1982

After the war, Mr. Do Muoi held a series of posts in the Communist Party. He was
elected to the Politburo in 1982 and named Prime Minister in 1988.

As General Secretary, Mr. Do Muoi will lead a 13-member Politburo. Of the other
members, eight will be new to the panel. With their addition, the average age
for a Politburo member fell from 71 to close to 60.

"Have no doubt that the new members are absolutely committed to having the
Communist Party remain in power," said an Asian diplomat, speaking on condition
that he not be named. "I think you will find, however, that these are younger
men who are better schooled in modern economic theory, and that will be a great
help as Vietnam tries to dig itself out of this economic mess."

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              384 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 28, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1098 words



International A3-10

A divided Yugoslavia took to arms as the Yugoslav army used force to take
control of several frontier posts from the Slovenian authorities. Slovenian
officials estimated dead and wounded at more than 100 on both sides.  Page A1

Poland's shift to capitalism picked up momentum as the Government announced a
new plan to transfer a fourth of state industry into private hands within six
months and give a stake to every adult citizen. A1

South Africa's atom bomb research will cease, the Government said, as it
announced that it would sign the treaty limiting the spread of nuclear weapons.
South Africa cited the decline in superpower tensions for its decision. A1

Vietnam's ruling Communist Party selected a new leader, Do Muoi, a 74-year-old
party loyalist, who asked for international help. As the request would indicate,
the new leader may support moves toward a free market.  A3

An attack on Israeli tourists by Muslim militants in Kashmir left one Israeli
dead and one missing and presumably captured. During the attack the Israelis
managed to kill at least one of their attackers. A8

United States officials accused Iraq of trying to hide its remaining nuclear
technology, and began discussing the use of military force against Iraq's
armaments to pursuade the country to say what it holds. A7

Libya denies link to airline bombings A3

Kuwait jail terms ratified by Crown Prince A6

National A12-16

Thurgood Marshall will retire after 24 years on the Supreme Court. Justice
Marshall, a living hero of the civil rights movement, watched with mounting
anger as the court became dominated by a conservatives. A1

Thurgood Marshall's retirement ends the legal career of a man blessed, in the
words of one scholar, with "heroic imagination." Scholars say his achievements
in civil rights -- as a lawyer and a justice -- have forever changed America.
A13

Prosecutors in death-penalty cases will be allowed to introduce evidence about
the murder victim's character and the effect of the crime on the victim's
family, the Supreme Court ruled, reversing earlier rulings.  A1

High court ruling comforts family torn by two murders A15

Justices uphold limits by courts on lawyers' comments A15

Mandatory life sentences for possessing illegal drugs are not "cruel and unusual
punishment" the Supreme Court ruled, upholding that punishment for a man
convicted in Michigan of having two pounds of cocaine.  A15

A proposed civil rights compromise was delivered a setback as Senator John
Danforth, a Missouri Republican, said that the White House would not budge on a
key issue and that there was no reason to continue talks. A12

Debate on gun control stalls crime legislation A16

Brain able to alter activity after an injury, study finds A12

Reports of Lyme disease reach a plateau at 8,000 A16

Telephone technology questioned after failures A16

Stanford doctor to face charges of harassment A12

Sununu calls Jewish leaders to dispel "misperceptions" A16

Lake Erie Journal: A dive to solve a treasure mystery A12

Regional B1-6

New York City's budget stalemate continued, as the City Council passed a budget
that rolls back $465 million in proposed tax increases. Council leaders and
Mayor Dinkins say they hpe to agree on a budget. A1

News analysis: Mayor Dinkins has a simple goal through the budget ordeal:
survival. As he struggles with a City Council trying to limit property taxes,
the Mayor would consider a victory the adoption of service cuts he called
unbearable a month ago. A1

Ruling threatens Albany's plan to defer salaries B4

New York's new legislators picked a bad time to learn the ropes. They approved
tax increases and spending cuts, only to have much of their handiwork vetoed by
the Governor. But there were some triumphs. B1

Radioactive waste at what price? For onerural community in upstate New York the
offer of $4.2 million in benefits is tempting enough to have the town vote on
whether to accept a dump for low-level radioactive waste.  B1

Four New York City police officers, accused in the death of a car-theft suspect,
had the charges thrown out by a judge at the request of the new Queens District
Attorney. Relatives of the dead man objected vehemently. B3

Vault manager accused of stealing $16.3 million in bonds B3

Improvised, and illegal, phone booths are appearing in Elmhurst, Queens.
Customers hop into cars with smoked glass windows to make calls on cellular
phones to far-off places. The phones have been tampered with so bills are sent
to an unsuspecting phone-owner. B1

McCall says he will push for more minority teachers B1

Doctors of Long Island beating victim are hopeful, but wary B3

Official may face charges on youth drinking B6

Two months as a star witness at Mafia bid-rigging trial B5

Business Digest D1

Weekend

What to do that's free C1

Theater: On Stage, and Off C2

"Othello" in the park C1

Film: At the Movies C8

Music: Dexter Gordon tribute C14

Dance: Russian ballerina in opera C3

Art: African-American abstracts C15

Postwar sculpture from Germany C16

Art in Review C21

Auctions C25

Restaurants C20

Word and Image: Biography of Jean Rhys C24

"Desert Storm" replay C26

Law Page B8

At the Bar

To neighbors, a once-venerable club is now affront to law

No contract, a promise can be legally binding

Obituaries D19

John Jacob Kelberer, former head of Aramco

Jacques Correze, Nazi collaborator and cosmetic official

Dr. Henry Ross, a surgeon

Sports B9-17

Baseball: Mets sweep Expos B9

Franco shows his stuff B11

Yanks complete sweep of Red Sox B9

Hitches in signing Taylor B11

Pirates win with four in 9th B10

Basketball: Post-draft ruminations B17

And Anthony makes three Knick guards B17

Anderson pulls up to Nets bench, for now B17

Boxing: Tyson-Ruddock tonight B12

Columns: Anderson on the draft B9

Lipsyte on the fight B12

Football: Jets and top pick agree B11

Golf: McHaffie leads women B11

SportsPeople B13

Tennis: Edberg and Sampras survive monsoons B9

TV Sports B12

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A26

Control borrowing, and pain

The Court's symbol, and loss

Yugoslavs need to talk

New start for the school board

Letters A26

Anthony Lewis: The Court we elected A27

A. M. Rosenthal: Israel says yes A27

Andrew J. Pierre: How to curb Mideast arms sales A27

Peter Diamond: Health care for everyone A27

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              385 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Soviet Trade Bloc Is Out of Business

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 699 words

DATELINE: PARIS, June 28


The nine member nations of Comecon, the Soviet-led trading bloc, signed an
agreement today to put the organization out of business.

The ceremony in Budapest today was a formality because the members had
previously agreed to disband Comecon, which had become an anachronism with the
collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe. Trade within the bloc had already
largely collapsed.

As soon as Eastern European countries began ousting their Communist governments
in 1989, they started campaigning to dismantle Comecon, which was one of the
pillars of Soviet domination of its allies.

Moscow pushed to establish the organization in 1949 to bind Eastern Europe
economically and politically to the Soviet Union, but Eastern European officials
long complained that it held back their economic progress.

A 50% Drop in Trade

Trade between Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union has plummeted by about 50
percent since Jan. 1, when Comecon nations started trading on a hard-currency
basis rather than in Soviet currency. This drop in trade has pushed the region
deeper into recession and aggravated the problems of moving toward a market
economy.

Comecon, whose formal name is Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, consists
of the Soviet Union, Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Mongolia, Poland,
Romania and Vietnam.

The Soviet Union used Comecon as a tool to promote economic coordination, but
many Eastern European economists and officials said Moscow's efforts to export
its centrally planned concepts bogged down their economies.

The agreement today designates a committee to determine over the next 90 days
how to liquidate assets owned jointly by the member nations. In addition, the
committee is expected to determine how member nations should be compensated for
their investments in Soviet gas and oil pipelines.

Another pillar of the Soviet bloc, the Warsaw Pact, is to be dissolved Monday in
a ceremony in Prague.

The three countries that pushed hardest for shutting down Comecon -- Hungary,
Czechoslovakia and Poland -- are struggling to figure out how to rebuild their
trade with each other, the Soviet Union and the West.

Alternatives Considered

Some officials have proposed a free-trade zone within Eastern Europe to
stimulate trade, like a rudimentary European Community. But some Eastern
European leaders, eager to join the European Community, balk at forming a league
of poor European nations.

"Closer economic ties between Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary, perhaps as a
free trade area, certainly make sense," said Jan Stankowski, a Comecon expert at
the Institute for Comparative Economic Studies in Vienna. "But they certainly
won't choose any organization that contains remnants of Comecon."

Vietnam, Cuba and Mongolia favored a successor organization, to be tentatively
called the Organization for Economic Cooperation, but Eastern European nations
rejected such an idea, instead proposing an organization, comprising just the
European members, that would examine how to end the region's trade collapse and
how to move toward a market economy.

"Creation of another Comecon is out of the question," Poland's Foreign Minister,
Krzysztof Skubiszewski, said. "We propose something else which would be a
temporary form of multilateral information and consultation between the European
states of the former Comecon."

Looking West for Growth

The ministers did not make a decision about a successor organization.

For future growth in trade, Eastern European officials are generally looking
toward the rich Western markets, rather than toward the Soviet Union or other
Eastern European nations.

"There is a crisis in trade with the Soviet Union," said Anita Tiraspolsky, an
Eastern European specialist at the French Institute for International Relations.
"As for the Eastern European nations, there has always been very little trade
between them. They traded principally with the Soviet Union and East Germany."

Many Eastern European nations hope to rebuild trade with the Soviet Union.
Because of their nation's dearth of hard currency, many Soviet officials are
pressing for two-way agreements, based largely on barter.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              386 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Potshots at Gulf War Intelligence

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 481 words


Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf took a broad swipe recently at U.S. intelligence in the
Persian Gulf war.  Intelligence assessments, he told Congress, were belated and
fudged. Had he relied on them to choose the right moment to attack, "we'd still
be sitting over there waiting." And, he added, exchanging target data between
the Air Force and Navy was "a very cumbersome process."

Intelligence assessments were certainly imperfect. But only the last flaw is
easily fixed. Other errors are unavoidable amid war's inherent uncertainty. For
someone with the general's long experience to misassess the assessors this way
invites the question, what is he trying to accomplish?

The general rightly recognizes the need to improve electronic data exchange
between the services. That problem stems from one of the war's signal successes.
Never before had America's two air forces, the Navy's and the Air Force's,
conducted truly joint air operations. Indeed, they used to deny each other
targeting data. Electronic communication between them has yet to catch up with
the new spirit of comity.

Counts of enemy ground forces were difficult to divine. Military intelligence
figured 545,000 Iraqi troops were in the Kuwaiti theater, nearly 200,000 more
than turned up. And it still can't explain why the Iraqi chemical threat never
materialized. But such errors are common in assessing enemy troop strength.
Military intelligence greatly underestimated the North's strength in Vietnam,
for example, and significantly overestimated Warsaw Pact strength in Europe.
Such failure lends itself more readily to finger-pointing than fixing.

Assessments of battle damage in the gulf war were affected by limitations of
technology. Air Force analysts in the theater relied on cameras mounted on
attacking aircraft that record hits better than damage. They tended to
exaggerate the impact of bombing. Analysts back in Washington relied on
satellite photos: if they couldn't see damage for sure, they didn't count a hit
as a kill. And cloud cover delayed their conclusions.

The general accuses analysts in Washington of thinking "they were in a better
position to judge battle damage assessments" than "the theater commander -- who
. . . in the final analysis has to make the ultimate assessment." But General
Schwarzkopf did make that assessment, which makes his second-guessing all the
more puzzling.

Perhaps it was his way of justifying himself to overeager hawks who found him
too hesitant to plunge into a potentially costly ground war and then, once the
war was under way, too reluctant to destroy Iraq's Army and march all the way to
Baghdad. But it was prudent for the general to have waited at the start and then
to have stopped the slaughter when he did, to avoid a quagmire. Had he said so
straightforwardly, General Schwarzkopf might better have served himself and the
country.



LOAD-DATE: June 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              387 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 30, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Through the Wars, It's 'For the Boys'

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1886 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


Vietnam is up the hill. Korea is down the road. And World War II took place in
an airplane hangar months ago.

"For the Boys," whose filming has turned a fire-ravaged canyon in California
into Fire Support Base Fuller in Vietnam, spans three wars, six countries and an
uneasy peace. In the foreground of the scene being shot, a U.S.O. troupe headed
by James Caan and Bette Midler sings and dances its way across the middle of
this century.

The movie is a gamble for almost everyone involved.

Making an epic is inherently dangerous, and 20th Century Fox is spending
considerably more than $30 million on a musical that can work only if its
tour-of-the-battlefields aspect is tamed by its characters. Fox is riding the
box-office gusher produced by "Home Alone," so money is not the problem. But Joe
Roth, the studio's chairman, was warned not to take a chance on "For the Boys."
If this big-budget movie should fail when it opens at Christmas, the aroma of
success that envelops Mr. Roth will be dissipated.

For the actors and the director Mark Rydell, the stakes are personal. James
Caan, who became a star as Sonny Corleone in "The Godfather" in 1972, lost
almost a decade to drugs and despair. His first two comeback movies, "Gardens of
Stone" in 1987 and "Alien Nation" in 1988, barely caused a ripple. But his last
role was the kidnapped writer in the 1990 box-office hit "Misery." Two hits in a
row will propel him to the crest of the comeback trail.

Bette Midler doesn't have to worry about hits. She can simply dither and slither
her way through a Touchstone comedy. But she wants to be taken seriously. "Her
reviews for 'Stella' and 'Beaches' killed her," says a friend who spoke on
condition of anonymity. "For the longest time she has wanted to return to 'The
Rose,' where she could act and sing up a storm." Twelve years ago, Ms. Midler
won an Academy Award nomination for 'The Rose,' her first film. That movie was
directed by Mark Rydell.

Since then, Mr. Rydell has directed only two movies. "On Golden Pond" (1981),
which dealt with old age and mortality, was a surprise blockbuster. "The River"
(1984), which pitted an American farm family against a flood and inflexible
bureaucrats, was a box-office failure. Six years without a movie is a long time.
In the way that things happen in today's itinerant movie world, Mr. Rydell spent
more than 18 months preparing a film version of Avery Corman's novel "50," only
to have the studio cancel the movie when Richard Dreyfuss pulled out of the
lead.

Mr. Rydell sees "For the Boys" as another chance to make a movie that has a
worthwhile theme. "In the last 10 years, there has been a lot more garbage and a
lot less pictures of substance," he says. "Pictures of substance are always
risky. To this day, the industry considers 'On Golden Pond' a freak. A general
contempt for audiences has crept into the motion picture business. At the heart
of 'For the Boys' is a sense of the absurdity of armed conflict as being the
solution to anything. I saw an opportunity to make a portrait of America in the
40's, during the right war, and in the 50's with the fracturing of our country
by McCarthy and the blacklist and the ambivalences of the Korean War. The
picture starts with patriotism and innocence and takes a very savage turn. The
title is ironic."

By the time "For the Boys" is finished, the film will have used 10,000 extras.
Mr. Rydell is almost unique among directors with his courtesy toward them. "It's
late in the afternoon," he says to the grunts who sit and lie on top of the
bunkers made of sandbags and corrugated iron. "Take it easy. Relax. You're
bored. Your captain, whom you like a lot, is taking a walk with his mother. This
is the end of the war. I want to get the sense you guys have been here for a
long time, 11 months."

Mr. Rydell is not a director who storms around his set wearing combat boots and
an attitude. "To me that was excellent," he says of a scene between Ms. Midler
and the 27-year-old actor who is playing her son. "Wonderful, Chris. We'll go
again." A moment later, he silences the bored extras who are playing bored
soldiers with a soft "Quiet. It's a tough scene. Give them a break."

Says the second assistant director, Liz Ryan: I've worked on a score of films,
but I have never before worked on a film where the director took time to speak
to the extras."

An actor himself -- mostly recently he played the gangster Meyer Lansky in
"Havana" -- Mr. Rydell has a skill for bringing out the best in actresses.
Marsha Mason in "Cinderella Liberty," Bette Midler in "The Rose" and Sissy
Spacek in "The River" won Oscar nominations. Katharine Hepburn (and Henry Fonda)
took home Oscars for "On Golden Pond."

But right now, he is concentrating on his son, Christopher Rydell, whom he has
cast as Ms. Midler's son. For this scene, it is March 1969. In the United
States, students are protesting the war. At Fire Support Base Fuller, which was
the northernmost United States base in Vietnam, boys of college age are
desperately trying not to get killed. It is the first time Ms.  Midler has seen
her son since he became a soldier against her will.

For most of this sun-baked day, James Caan is only a speck in the middle
distance, busy in the background setting up for the camp show he and Ms. Midler
-- Eddie and Dixie -- will present for the boys.

"When we were working in 1942, I was having a ball," Mr. Caan says. "I looked
forward to coming to work until a few weeks ago, when we hit Korea. Then
everything started to get mean and ugly. I'm an organic actor. If I'm supposed
to be tired on Wednesday, it's easiest not to sleep much on Tuesday night. And
those wars, Korea and Vietnam, were horrors."

Mr. Caan has always been an energetic actor, as revved up as a sports car motor
and cat-quick at anything physical. He learned to rope steers for a movie and
then won prizes competing against real cowboys. He still has a quick grin and a
quick wisecrack, and he learned to tap dance with almost no effort for "For the
Boys." But there is a forced quality to his energy now, the hint of a candle
that burned at both ends for too long.

"This kind of attention lets you know you're important again," he says as a
woman stands behind his chair and massages his neck. He is oblique about the
missing years. "If you look out the window every morning and don't like what you
see, it makes sense to drink or take drugs. If you like what you see, it
doesn't. Some guys can take a little bit. To me a little bit is too much." With
a flash of insight, he encapsulates himself: "I've never done a little bit of
anything."

At some point during those years, he gave away power of attorney. "I trusted an
accountant and was too lazy to take care of things. I lost $7 million. And I had
four days to come up with $247,000 or the Government was going to take my
house."

But that was then and this is now. "Obviously since 'Misery' I'm getting a lot
of phone calls," he says. "And acting is my job now, not my life. I see too many
young kids who make this fickle, whorish silliness their life." Mr. Caan is
raising his 14-year-old son by his second marriage, and he was waiting for his
third wife to give birth. A boy was born 24 hours later.

Mr. Caan has burrowed deep into Eddie Sparks, a man he describes as "most
himself when he's on stage." To Eddie, "everything is pre-seductive foreplay for
the final act, the performance. He has his girls, but his wife is a queen back
home. He does some terrible things, but it's all for the boys."

A great deal of care has been taken to distance Eddie Sparks from Bob Hope,
whose U.S.O. troupes are legendary. Eddie is Jewish, not Roman Catholic. And
rather than cracking one-liners, Eddie plays the straight man.

"For the Boys" began five years ago when Ms. Midler told Fox that she had always
wanted to do a movie about a U.S.O. performer. Neal Jimenez and Lindy Laub wrote
a script for All Girl Productions, the company Ms. Midler had formed a year
earlier with Bonnie Bruckheimer and Margaret South. By the time they got their
first movie, "Beaches," to the screen, the three partners in All Girl
Productions had learned a few bruising facts of Hollywood life. "Having Bette
Midler gives you access to anyone you want to meet," says Ms. South. "It doesn't
make it easier to get a movie made."

When Mr. Rydell was brought in to direct "For the Boys," Ms. Bruckheimer thought
the Jimenez/Laub script was ready to go. Mr. Rydell thought otherwise. After the
success of "The Rose," Ms. Midler had kept offering Mr. Rydell her movies. He
kept declining. "I don't make pictures unless they matter to me," he says. "It's
hard to be a director. Unless you believe in what you're doing, you'll never
last. A director is a monomaniac. It's 18 months minimum of leading 150 people
to a singular vision, shooting at a bull's-eye two years away; and only a
bull's-eye will work."

Mr. Rydell turned down "Stella," and he begged Ms. Midler not to make the film,
which was described by at least one major critic as melodramatic slop. He didn't
turn down "For the Boys," but he refused to make the Jimenez/Laub script.

Once again Ms. Midler put her trust in Mr. Rydell, who went to work with the
screenwriter Marshall Brickman with the intent of "telling the story about the
decay of America from World War II to the chaos of Vietnam."

Says Mr. Brickman: "A picture of this size is not like swimming across a river.
It's like jumping from stone to stone. This concept was so epic that you had to
arrive at some principle of exclusion. So we took Bette's character in real life
and tried to put it up on the screen."

"The scales fall from Dixie's eyes quite gradually," says Ms. Midler. "I wanted
Dixie to start with youthful enthusiasm. Not until she's much older does her
moral outrage come to the surface. I wanted to let her become a curmudgeonly old
broad like I intend to become."

In 1969, Dixie is 57 years old, and a makeup woman keeps dabbing at Ms. Midler's
face with a Q-tip that has been dipped into a bag labeled "Bette -- age
palette." She is repairing the latex that took three hours to put on this
morning and that stretches uncomfortably over Ms. Midler's skin, drying into
wrinkles and crow's feet. One of the four press agents on the movie -- they
separately represent All Girl, Mr. Caan, Mr. Rydell and Fox -- is upset at the
thought that photographs of an aging Ms. Midler might be published.

On top of the windswept canyon, Ms. Midler's 4-year-old daughter, Sophie, tries
to keep from giggling during a dramatic scene, burying her face in Ms.
Bruckheimer's chest. Ms. Bruckheimer has a 4-year-old son, who is also on the
set every afternoon. Ms. South's son is 3. The women producers have replaced the
usual junk food found on movie sets with fresh fruit and vegetables.

"We know that our crew have children to go home to," says Ms. Bruckheimer. "We
want the hours to be reasonable hours."

The sun is so strong it melts the makeup and leaves the extras with burned
faces. Everyone is sweating except Ms. Midler. "I'm from Hawaii," she says.
"This heat is nothing."

In the middle of a take, mascara runs into Mr. Caan's eye. "But, hey," he says.
"These things happen. This is the motion picture business."

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Bette Midler and James Caan as a U.S.O. song-and-dance team in
the forthcoming Mark Rydell film (Francois Duhamel/20th Century Fox) (pg. 11);
Mark Ridell on location, directing the film that uses 10,000 extras and spans
three wars, six countries and an uneasy peace (Francois Duhamel/20th Century
Fox); Bette Milder in action - beneath the surface, moral outrage. (Francois
Duhamel/20th Century Fox) (pg. 14)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              388 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 30, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Cash in the Curl

BYLINE: By Deanne Stillman;  Deanne Stillman lives in Los Angeles. Her play
"Pray for Surf" was one of two winners at the 1991 Theaterworks Festival at the
University of Colorado.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 21; Column 6; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4012 words


THE SKY WAS BLUE, THE sand was white, and Tom Carroll, one of the best surfers
in the world, was "getting tubed." The fans who had clustered on the beach for
the Marui Pipeline Masters Competition burst into applause as Carroll shot
through Hawaii's legendary Pipeline, but something else was going on over at the
judges' stand. "Better put on your caps," said the contest director, "here comes
the guy from Coors." Offshore, the wave ejected its rider, and a spray of salt
smoke rose overhead; on the beach, the judges dutifully donned their promo caps.
The location may have been the North Shore of Oahu, the time midday, but in an
age of commercially driven metaphysics, it was Miller Time, Schaefer City, the
Silver Bullet Express. . . . Hey, dude, this Bud's for you.

Beer and surfing have always had one thing in common: foam. More recently they
joined hands for the 1990 Pipeline Masters surfing contest, known informally as
Pipemasters and sponsored by Marui, a Japanese department store. But Marui and
Coors were hardly the only companies buying advertising at Pipeline. Many
contestants bore the names of their own sponsors, either on their equipment or
wet suits: names like Quiksilver and Billabong (clothing), Gorilla Grip,
Trac-Top, Astrodeck, Bubble Gum Wax and Sex Wax (traction aides for the top of
your board), Aleeda, Victory, Rip Curl and Wavelength (wet suits), Ray-Ban
sunglasses, Laguna Surf & Sport, KNAC (a Long Beach, Calif., heavy-metal
station) and, perhaps the only patron who did not buy his way into the contest,
Jesus. At times, it seemed as if the waves themselves were telling you in one
way or another that Kilroy Was Here.

As older surf devotees remember, surfing -- tied with baseball for first place
in the mystical-subtext department -- was not always a commercial proposition.
Whether you called it art, religion or dropping out, there was a time when
people surfed strictly for love. For those who believe in origin theories, it
all started in Hawaii, where, according to one ancient legend, there lived a
shark woman named Mamala who surfed "where the winds blew strong and whitecaps
were on waves." This may well be an early reference to the North Shore of Oahu,
sacred waters for the serious surfer -- site of Sunset, hailed by Surfer
Magazine as "the embodiment of Hawaiian power and challenge," and of Waimea Bay,
where, as Hemingway might have put it, men ride mountains and ride them truly.
And then there is . . . Pipeline.

Pipeline, also known as the Banzai Pipeline, crashes in massive, perfect curls
over deadly coral reef.  Even professional surfers have been carried away on
stretchers after reading the wave incorrectly. It is a killer. What goes on in
this consecrated curl? "It's the drop," says Phil Edwards, the first
non-Hawaiian ever to surf Pipeline, referring to the near-vertical wave face and
its time-bending speed. "Once you drop in," Edwards explains, "it's almost too
late."

Gerry Lopez, considered by many of his peers to be the King of the Pipeline,
sees it differently. As he tells it, there's a very complicated tune being
played inside the tube. "You're as close to a state of pure mind as you can get,
short of meditation," he says. "You've done all your thinking before you get
there. You just experience it. There is no thought involved. It's such a brief
moment, but time seems to stretch, as it does in all situations of extreme
intensity."

When pressed further on the mysteries of Pipeline, Lopez dashes from the patio
into his three-decker Pipeline house (it rumbles when the waves really crank)
and emerges with one of those blown-up "you are there" tube photos. It shows him
blissed out inside the barrel, as usual. "Stand back and look," he says, bracing
the photo against a sliding door.

He outlines the curl of the wave with a finger. "See this old Hawaiian?" he
says, tracing the face of a Polynesian Neptune. Not really. "Come back later and
take another look," he says, then slips back into the house with the photo of
Pipeline the way it used to be -- big, hollow, and no product labels inside.

FOR MOST AMERICANS, surfing crested in the mid-60's with the beach-blanket
movies, Gidget, Jan and Dean, the Beach Boys and the documentary "The Endless
Summer." Then the ancient sport seemed to float back out to sea for a few years.
It checked back in for a meeting with Tom Wolfe (who predicted in "The Pump
House Gang" that its hard-core practitioners would soon beach themselves),
decided to drop out again, resurfaced after Vietnam and channeled a message
through Robert Duvall in "Apocalypse Now" ("Charlie don't surf"), took another
hike and returned a few years later in the form of Sean Penn for some fast times
at Ridgemont High ("There's only two things I want out of life: some tasty waves
and a righteous buzz"), then paddled back out to sea, took a nap for a decade,
got another wake-up call from Hollywood, came back as "Teen-Age Mutant Ninja
Turtles" and shouted "Cowabunga!"

Here's what really happened. The Beach Boys are now beach men and everybody's
still surfing. In fact, so many people are ripping it up that anyone who
remembers the surf of yore complains that the waves are too crowded. "I haven't
surfed weekends at Malibu in years," says the legendary Lance Carson, the basis
for one of the lost souls in "Big Wednesday," the 1978 John Milius film about
surfing as Greek tragedy. "It's like the freeway out there." And it's not just
Malibu that's crowded; it's every decent surf spot in the world, especially the
North Shore of Oahu during winter, which is when the surf is supposed to be at
its prime.

Every winter since 1971, contestants have surfed for prize money in the
Pipemasters, organized by Fred Hemmings, veteran Hawaiian big-wave man. "At that
time," he says, "there were only a few Pipeline virtuosos, so it was my idea to
start a masters contest with the very best invited. Then, rather than having
their surfing reputations made by the editors of surfing magazines, their
reputations could actually be earned by performance in the water."

The longest-running professional surf contest in the country, the Pipemasters
forms part of surfing's Triple Crown. Along with the Hard Rock Cafe World Cup
and the Billabong Pro, also held on the North Shore, it gives a final flourish
to the world tour of the Association of Surfing Professionals, a marathon (18
events this year) with prize money totaling $2 million.

The scale and prosperity of the pro tour is quite a vindication for a sport that
Christian missionaries tried to squelch, alarmed that the Polynesians were
having too much fun in too few clothes. Today those who would spread the word
now ride the board for the Lord. There are at least 10 Christian surfing
associations in the United States, and an active contingent of born-again
surfers, some of whom carry boards emblazoned with the slogan "Jesus Is My
Sponsor."

Today, top male pros can earn $100,000 a year in prize money; the top women,
$30,000, on a tour with a total purse of $155,000. That doesn't include
endorsement deals. For top stars, multiyear deals can run into seven figures.
And there's always the "photo incentive" money -- up to about $1,000 -- that the
relevant sponsor pays to surfers who make the cover or an inside spread of
Surfer or Surfing Magazine. "When I think about everything I have, just because
I can stand on a surfboard," one Australian pro says, "I just laugh."

ACCORDING TO LOCALS, last December on the North Shore was the worst for surf in
20 years. Some blamed global warming, which reduces the intensity of the
Arctic-driven storms that churn the water. Others said it might simply have been
a recurring weather pattern, although not enough is known about weather of the
past to say for certain. But there was widespread agreement on one issue: the
1990 Pipemasters Tournament was held in conditions that had nothing to do with
Pipeline and everything to do with money.

When Pipeline cranks, the waves generally run 8 to 10 feet. This year, the surf
during much of the contest was in the three-to-five-foot range and sloppy --
what surfers call "garbage." The mighty Pipeline, which has been known to break
boards like matchsticks, resembled a wave pool powered by a Yugo. But the show
went on, resulting in poor performances by surfers who normally dominate at
Pipeline and good performances by those who specialize in small surf.

Gerry Lopez, for example, did not fare well. Because he was not on the circuit,
he was unseeded, and had to surf through the trials. "I don't really have the
contest mind-set," he says. "Surfing in a contest is more than just ability,
it's attitude. Contest surfing is a lot like method acting. You have to put
yourself in a serious state of mind about surf that isn't serious."

Another surfer who did not do well was 20-year-old Christian Fletcher, a
Southern Californian who surfs only contests that he likes, proclaiming that
"all pros are yuppies." Fletcher's family could be described as a gang of
well-to-do pirate surfers. Christian, his brother, Nathan, and his father,
Herbie, overflow with surf sound bites, all of them provocative, some of them
even half-true. Christian's blackguard style, a family tradition, impresses a
lot of fans, but some surfers regard him with the contempt normally reserved for
the Australians and their "make my day" demeanor. "You can't come from San
Clemente," says Aaron Chang, a top surf photographer, "and be Johnny Rotten."

In the past few years, Christian has brought a series of outlandish moves from
the turf, where he attempts to fly on a skateboard, to the surf, where he
attempts to fly on a surfboard. Few surfers are as adept as Christian at the
aerial, a maneuver in which the surfer actually becomes airborne for a moment
and comes back down the face of the wave. He also specializes in such other
skateboarding moves as "the frontside ollie, backside ollie, stalefish and
backside stalefish, which is a stalefish McTwist, which I'm hoping to rename the
McFletch as soon as I do it right." As Fletcher tells it, these moves are not
understood by judges and therefore are not awarded points, the reason why he
does not generally score well at contests.

Surfing is judged on the Olympic 10-point system. During each 20-minute heat,
surfers catch up to 10 waves; their scores are a total of their best four. Five
judges award points based on the number of maneuvers (tube rides, floaters, top
turns, bottom turns), length of ride and execution (performing as close as
possible to the breaking portion of the wave). As Bernie Baker, a Triple Crown
official, points out: "Aerials fit in only when connected with a prior or
subsequent maneuver. They seem to help the surfer who uses it as a final
maneuver, not just as a move in and of itself. But it's all very subjective."

Gerry Lopez agrees: "No two people ever see the same thing in the same way.
Although the judging system that they have now is probably the most effective,
it leaves unanswered questions, like why certain people lost. Judges are like
everyone else. They can't always recognize new things." Of course, points out
Pam Burridge, this year's female world champion, "When you win, they're all good
judges."

SURFING IS HARD TO judge because it's really more a dance than a sport. And as
with dance, esthetics count as much as quantifiable technical moves. To add a
further complication, style tends to be rooted in a philosophy of surf, which
tends to reflect an approach to life. You may be able to execute a floater on a
tri-finned thruster at Narrabeen, Australia, but can you noseride a longboard at
San Onofre, Calif.? Translation: just because you can "shred" a wave doesn't
mean you can really surf. Further explanation: there are many kinds of
surfboards, but basically they are variations on two themes -- shortboards and
longboards, with a board length of nine feet defining the boundary between the
two, as well as certain design features. Shortboards are thinner, with pointed
noses; longboards have rounded noses.

Board choice reflects one's world view. In the beginning was the word and the
word was longboard, according to old-school surfers, who often have long hair,
and believe in going with the flow. They surf for love, an approach known as
"soul surfing." Atop their "sticks," longboard demigods like Phil Edwards and
Lance Carson, now middle-aged, show a grace and spiritual centeredness that make
surfing not so much a balancing act as a ballet.

The new breed, many of them under 30, surf for money. They tend not to pursue
the soul-surf ideal of letting the wave ride you. They believe a wave is there
not only to be ridden, but to be ripped, carved, shredded and "Mansoned." The
best board for this type of surfing is a three-finned thruster, a shortboard
that first appeared in 1981, just in time for the Reagan decade.

The introduction of the three-finned thruster helped consolidate Australian
domination of the pro tour during the early 80's. The board itself has come to
symbolize a cocky, "aggro" attitude. Just as folkies blamed the electric guitar
for corrupting their cherished music, so surfing purists blame the shortboard
for the decadence of surfing. The shortboard, the argument goes, made it
possible to perform flashy maneuvers on waves that in the old days were too
small to rip, which is why it's so crowded out there. The shortboard is light,
so anyone -- even a girl -- can carry it to the beach without too much trouble,
which is why it's so crowded out there. The shortboard is the McDonald's way to
surf, which is why it's so crowded out there. . . . The shortboard also insured
that even garbage waves could not ruin a contest; on the contrary, small-surf
specialists could clean up when the waves were trashed-out. As a result, the pro
tour became a more dependable financial proposition.

The division between the two surfing camps is so profound that for years Lance
Carson endured the derision of shortboard wave jockeys because he decided to
fight rather than switch. "I just don't like the shortboard mentality," he says.
"It's generally about money and about making it look like you're doing more than
what needs to be done. I was the only guy for miles with a noserider. Everybody
was always yelling, 'Hey, Carson, you dinosaur!' "

This is more than some curmudgeon complaining about progress. In surfing, style
is everything, which is why judging it is so subjective. "Style used to be a
clan thing," says Bolton Colburn, former pro and currently curator of
collections at the Laguna Art Museum in Southern California. "You were given
access to the secrets of the tribe by local elders." In Colburn's view, certain
moves became "emblems of power and group identity." Today, he says, "indigenous
flair is being toned down by a global standard" -- a Paula Abdul style of
surfing that is long on technique and short on soul. "In my opinion," Colburn
says, "the high point of modern surfing style coincides with the high point of
American culture -- the late 50's. Cadillacs were modeled after spaceships and
surfboards were made of industrial wonder materials such as foam and
fiberglass."

The rift between these two antagonistic camps -- longboard and shortboard, art
and commerce -- has been bridged in quite dazzling fashion by the 1990 world
champion, Tom Curren, the American who wrested the title from the Australians
after dropping out of the circuit for a year.

Curren surfs for money; he has endorsement deals with Ocean Pacific and Rip
Curl. But his style is so patently born of a spiritual urge to surf that it has
withstood the pressure to conform. No matter that he didn't surf well at
Pipeline. The instant he paddled out, a hush fell over the beach as the crowd
focused on his almost palpable energy vortex. While the rest of the pack paddled
one way, Curren slipped out in the opposite direction. Then he stopped and
waited as the other contestants, succumbing to the pressure of the clock, surfed
in on inferior waves. Finally, he got one.

Displaying none of the emptiness of corporate surfing, but still executing all
the moves that judges like, he advanced up and down his board like a cat, like
Nureyev on a stage. The heat was a bust, but the ride was not; Curren had caught
the best wave of the day. As Derek Hynd, a surf journalist and coach, observes:
"Tom Curren is the ocean. He has the power to draw waves to him. I've seen it
happen. It's quite incredible, really."

THE DISAPPOINTING waves at Pipemasters seemed to reflect a momentary becalming
of the surfing industry. Many of the clothing companies that dropped in on the
wave of surf culture in the 80's have gone broke. The companies that survive are
the ones with actual ties to the surfing community. This has resulted in fewer
ad pages in Surfer and Surfing, fewer sponsors for touring pros and less prize
money on the '91 tour.

Lest this be interpreted as a triumphant tube ride for art, consider that
19-year-old Kelly Slater signed what is rumored to be the largest endorsement
deal in surfing history -- somewhere in the vicinity of $1.5 million -- with
Quiksilver, the company that made Tom Carroll the first "million-dollar surfer"
five years ago.

Slater is regarded by many in the community as the successor to Curren, an
American surfer who can continue to keep the Aussies in their place for a while,
down under in the No. 2 position. He is also regarded -- at least by his manager
-- as the straw that will stir the drink of commercial surfing in years to come.
The recent high-school grad has movie-star looks, earned straight A's, and just
says no to bad things. He's the90's answer to Corky Carroll, one of the first
surfers to land an endorsement deal when Jantzen swimsuits signed him up in
1966. Carroll was everybody's favorite beach animal, an icon at a time when
heroes said yes to the things you were supposed to say no to. Recently he
recorded his beaches-bucks-and-babes existence in a book, "Surf-Dog Days and
Bitchin' Nights."

While Carroll now runs motivational seminars and hopes for a TV series, other
surf pioneers can chalk one up for longboard consciousness. The venerated style
is now enjoying a comeback in certain enclaves on the West Coast. Both Phil
Edwards in San Juan Capistrano and Lance Carson in Malibu have returned to the
business of shaping longboards, due to a recent upsurge in demand for their
custom-made cruisers. And Herbie Fletcher is sponsoring a surf competition in
Cabo San Lucas, Mexico, next month that will include longboards.

Does this mean that the surf industry has exchanged its Coors cap for one that
reads "Have a Nice Day"? Or is it merely a new chapter in surf marketing? Some
of the major companies sponsor "soul surfing" junkets, flying famous surfers to
Fiji, Bali and other island paradises to surf for photo incentives on uncrowded
waves. Seizing the opportunity, Carson is introducing a "back to basics"
clothing line called Lance Carson Malibu, an antidote to the neon sunglasses,
neoprene beachwear, and velcro a go-go that typified the 80's.

Perhaps the ancient Hawaiian will have some answers. But a trip back to look at
the cryptic Pipeline photo turns up a young Hawaiian, Johnny Boy Gomes, a local
power surfer who explodes through the North Shore waves like a freight train. He
may not be the ideal advertisement for beach culture, but he knows how to wait
for a wave and what to do when he's inside one. What has he learned from his
journeys to the center of the tube? What does he like about the trips?
Basically, he's in it for the photo incentives. Photo incentives? Is that the
message inside the conch shell? Gomes is a street kid from Makaha, on the west
side of Oahu. Unlike other West Sides, like New York's and L.A.'s, Oahu's
doesn't sell style; it is style -- pure, simple and Hawaiian. For Gomes, surfing
is a way out, a route to a life that pays the rent and provides free boards and
wetsuits.

There are those who believe that money makes the escape act less artistic, that
surfing fell from grace the day some guy with a checkbook decided to subsidize
hanging ten. But according to Sam George, a columnist for Surfing Magazine, it
doesn't matter: "People have tried to sterilize surfing and sell it to the
masses. It won't happen. There's a defense mechanism. Surfing protects itself."

SURFSPEAK: A GUIDE FOR THE CLUELESS



Aggro (adj.): Aggressive. Used to describe the in-your-face,
barbarians-at-the-wave surfing style of the 80's.

Aloha (n): A warm, welcoming, clued-in spirit; frequently used by devotees of
the Hawaiian surfer Gerry Lopez, as in, "That guy has more aloha than anyone
you'll ever meet."

Barney (n.): A thoughtless, clueless oaf. Someone who "drops in on" (see below)
other surfers' waves, cutting them off.

Big-wave men (n.): Surfers who head for locations like Waimea Bay, on Oahu's
North Shore, where the waves can top 20 feet.

Crank (v.): To have good surf, as in "The point is cranking."

Drop in on (v.): To steal a wave after someone else is on it. Ex.: "There are
three things I never do in life. I never hang out with a guy whose board says,
'Wash Me.' I never eat pork jerky before a date. And I never drop in on another
guy's wave."

Duke (proper n.): Duke Kahanamoku (1890-1968), the first great surfer of the
modern era.

Epic (adj.): Awesome.

Filthy (adj.): Awesome, epic.

Gel out (v.): Relax; take a chill pill.

Getting tubed (v.): Surfing inside the tube, or curl, of a wave.

Gnarly (adj.): Messy, sloppy. Used to describe surf that is difficult to
navigate.

Goofy-footer (n.): A surfer who puts his or her right foot forward on the board.
(Opposite of regular-footer.)

Gun (n.): A surfboard designed for the higher speeds, bump, chop and currents
common to big waves. Its longer rail line, or edge, puts more of the board in
contact with the wave face. All surfers on the pro tour have one in their
"quiver" (see below).

Impact zone (n.): The shallow area where a wave breaks; not a good place to be.

Kook (n.): An outsider
who shows up on the
local beach.

Lineup (n.): Where you
go to wait for waves.

Longboard (n.): Generally
speaking, any board nine
feet or over. In the old days,
longboards were made
out of redwood and weighed
a ton. As surfing evolved,
"shapers" (see below)
began to make them out
of polyurethane foam, a
development heralded
in the 60's film "Cat on a
Hot Foam Board,"
which features Phil
Edwards, first surfer to
make the cover of Sports
Illustrated.

Manson (v.): To tear apart a wave with sharp moves known as cutbacks. (n.) A
surfer with a psychotically aggressive surfing style.

Noserider (n.): A longboard that allows you to hang five or hang ten.

Oval Office (n., archaic):
The area inside a
wave; the tube.
(syn.: green room,
crystal
cathedral)

Quiver (n.): A surfer's
assortment
of boards.

Regular-footer (n.): Surfer who follows the classical style of left foot forward
on the board.

Rip (v.): To shred, carve or Manson a wave.

Set (n.): A group of waves.

Shaper (n.): One who designs and carves surfboards from foam. Critical to
professional surfers, who sometimes take shapers along on the pro tour.



Stoked (adj.): Excited, pumped-up. Yes, they still say it.

Surfrider Foundation (prop. n.): A research and consciousness-raising
organization of environmentally active surfers, including Tom Curren and fellow
pro Gary Elkerton, as well as various surf companies. Surfers are often the
first to see pollution in the ocean, and the first to experience the effects.

Thruster (n.): A three-finned surfboard that normally ranges in length from 5
feet, 5 inches to 9 feet, 6 inches. It is now the standard board.

Wave-Trak (prop. n.):
Telephone number (900-
2GO-SURF) you can call to
find out where the waves
are around the world.
Derided by soul surfers
because it reduces the
search for the perfect
wave to a phone call.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: New wave: Christian Fletcher, above, specializes in skateboard
moves like the frontside ollie and the backside stalefish. (Jeff Divine)(pg.
21); Permanent wave: Gerry Lopez, left, a blissed-out soul surfer, says, "I
don't really have the contest mind-set." (Art Brewer)(pg. 20); The Fletchers -
Christian, Herbie and Nathan - a surfing dynasty with a renegade style. Surfers
looking for waves during early-morning practice at the most recent Pipemasters
competition. The 10-foot bone-crushers never showed up; surfers had to settle
for garbage. (Mark Richards for The New York Times)(pg. 23); Rising star Kelly
Slater, shown in the Pipemasters, recently signed by a clothing manufacturer to
what is rumored to be surfing's largest endorsement deal, about $1.5 million.
(Aaron Chang)(pg. 22); Tom Carroll, surfing's first million-dollar man,
celebrating his victory in the 1990 Pipeline Masters. (Aaron Chang)(pg. 42)

TYPE: Glossary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              389 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 30, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Headliners;
Honor Delayed

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 164 words


More than 23 years after Capt. James Eddie Reed was killed in a firefight in the
Mekong Delta, the Army has agreed that his final action was heroic. In 1988, his
widow, Brenda Reed, was going over Captain Reed's records and found
discrepancies in accounts of her husband's last battle. As her quest to learn
more was publicized, surviving members of her husband's unit contacted her to
say that Captain Reed deserved a commendation for the Mekong Delta fight, in
which exposed himself to enemy fire to help aim his unit's return fire. Ms. Reed
pressed the claim, but the Army rejected it because Captain Reed's commander,
who had been pinned down in another battle at the time, failed to immediately
recommend a citation. After several appeals, Ms. Reed contacted William D.
Clark, a deputy assistant secretary of the Army, who subsequently overruled the
boards that had denied Captain Reed a medal. This week Ms. Reed is to be
presented with her husband's posthumous Silver Star.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Brenda Reed (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company

                              390 of 390 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 30, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Nation;
Is the Vote, Too, Wasted On Youth?

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 4; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 907 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WHEN 18-, 19- and 20-year-olds won the right to vote 20 years ago today,
proponents heralded the ratification of the 26th Amendment as a sure remedy for
the alienation of the nation's youth. With a direct role in the political
process, they reasoned, young people would no longer feel disconnected.

"We will gain a group of enthusiastic, sensitive, idealistic and vigorous new
voters," Senator Edward M. Kennedy said at the time.

While the enthusiasm may still be there, it is not for voting. Turnout among
young people is shrinking with every election. The fact is, the vaunted youth
vote never became the electoral force that some expected it to be.

Unlike many of their elders, young people nowadays cannot be accused of
abandoning the political process. Most were never involved in the first place.

"You can't drag people in to vote," said Birch Bayh, the former Democratic
Senator from Indiana who helped draft the Constitutional Amendment with Mr.
Kennedy. "My disappointment goes not only to the fact that young people aren't
voting, but that neither are their parents."

The young, however, are the least likely to exercise their right to vote, the
most quantifiable form of political participation. Voting among youth dropped
sharply after a high of 48 percent in 1972. In 1976, the figure was 38 percent,
and 33 percent of 18- to 20-years olds said they voted in the 1988 elections, as
opposed to 57 percent of the population as a whole.

Sounding civic-minded alarms about these statistics are a host of public
interest and voter participation organizations, from the League of Women Voters
to the Y.M.C.A.

"This is more than a matter of abstract good citizenship," said Sanford D.
Horwitt, director of the citizens participation project for People for the
American Way, a liberal advocacy group. "This relates to real public policy." As
an example, Mr. Horwitt said, urban school systems face terrible budget problems
but often have low political priority at least partly because the young people
who have first-hand, recent experiences in public education tend not to vote.

Trying to explain the decline, many politicians and academics repeat the same
adjectives used in the 1960's by those who championed the youth vote: that young
people feel "disaffected" and "disenfranchised." But a New York Times/CBS News
Poll conducted on the eve of last November's elections found, in fact, that
younger people seemed to be less turned off by politics than were their elders.

Asked how often they could trust the Government in Washington to do what is
right, 28 percent of the 18- to 29-year-olds said most of the time, a response
given by only 20 percent of those 30 and over. And 37 percent of the 18- to
29-year-olds agreed that it makes no real difference who is elected, compared
with 45 percent of those aged 30 and over.

What's the Problem?

If they are not completely disgusted by politics, why are young people not
voting? Some argue that the issues now are not as compelling as, say, the
Vietnam War, and that members of the current young generation are too
self-absorbed.

Another reason, argues Senator Kennedy, is the dearth of inspirational figures.
"I think young people are thirsting for leadership," he said. "They want to be
asked to do things. I don't think during the last 10 years anybody has asked
anyone to do anything for any one."

An 18-year-old from Middletown, Del., named Drew, interviewed as part of focus
group on voter participation by People for the American Way, said he thought
teachers and parents were not doing enough to encourage young people to vote.
"As soon as you turn 18," he said, "it's not like you can just switch on our
'vote' modes and go out and vote."

There are also practical explanations: Young people are so transient that it can
be difficult getting them to the polls or registered in the first place, with
many confused over whether to list their residence with their parents or in
their college dormitory.

Hoping to increase voting among the young, a coalition of about 50 organizations
announced a campaign on Friday to institute voter registration drives in public
high schools across the country.

"We ought to have a vision," said Mr. Horwitt, a leader of the coalition, "that
everybody gets out of high school with a diploma in one hand and a voter
registration card in another."

But Curtis B. Gans, director of the Committee for the Study of the American
Electorate, a Washington group, argued that the most aggressive registration
efforts never translate into significant rises in turnout. "My judgment is that
in the absence of a deep recession, which would cause a temporary upsurge in
turnout, we're not likely to turn this around any time soon." In the meantime,
others are pressing for assorted schemes to entice young people to vote,
including lobbying for pending "motor voter" legislation that would allow a
person to register to vote in conjunction with obtaining a driver's license.

Patrick Lipper, executive director of Rock the Vote, a record industry group
based in Los Angeles, contends that the best way to stir young people
politically is on the issue of censorship of records. To advance that message,
the coalition has broadcast several public service spots on the MTV Network.

In one 60-second commercial, Madonna, while being spanked by two male dancers,
warns viewers: "If you don't vote, you're going to get a spankie."

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Who goes to the polls" shows percent of adults and of
18-to-20year-olds who say they voted, for 1972, 1976, 1980, 1984 and 1988.
(Source: Census Bureau)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
