
                               1 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Crime

BYLINE: By Marilyn Stasio

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 28;  Column 3;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1127 words


If there can be such a thing as a heartwarming suspense thriller, then Mary
Willis Walker has written a nifty one in UNDER THE BEETLE'S CELLAR (Doubleday,
$22.50), which opens with the unnerving image of a group of children buried deep
underground in a school bus. The 11 children and their driver are the hostages
of a religious cult in Austin, Tex., whose fanatical leader has been "purifying"
these "lambs" for 46 days, in preparation for some apocalyptic ritual on the
50th day of their captivity. When that reckoning comes, the author recalls
another horrifying image, "a sudden vision of the buildings in Waco going up in
flames."

Ms. Walker, who won the 1995 Edgar Award for best mystery with "The Red Scream,"
keeps shifting her story from darkness to light by alternating scenes of the
children's ordeal with the frantic efforts of Molly Cates, a magazine crime
reporter, to find some clue in the mad prophet's past that can help the F.B.I.
hostage team. Molly does a good job on her nerve-racking deadline assignment,
but despite awed references to "the insane energy and repressed violence" of the
doomsday prophet, he's too flaky to command true fear or dread. The real drama
is played underground, where the heroic bus driver draws on his war experiences
in Vietnam and every bit of his strength to comfort the children and prepare
them for what may well be the end of their world.

Joe R. Lansdale goes too far -- as a rule, an admirable quality in a genre
writer -- but he may have gone too far with the buddy-buddy routine between Hap
Collins and Leonard Pine, two East Texas roughnecks who tear up the scenery in
their second Hardy Boys adventure, THE TWO-BEAR MAMBO (Mysterious Press/Warner,
$19.95). Hap, who is white and straight, and Leonard, who is black and gay, are
so pleased with themselves that they never stop talking about their unorthodox
friendship or using it to bait the racists and bigots who swing from every tree.

The bottles start flying when Hap and Leonard visit a Klan stronghold called
Grovetown in search of a missing friend. Mr. Lansdale writes explosive fight
scenes, and Grovetown is a great place to pick a fight. Better yet are his
mocking character studies of redneck storytellers who can't wait to tell you all
about Tiny Joe Timpson's cats and the voodoo graveyard. But even these good ol'
goofs have to take off their hats when Hap spins his own Texas tall tale about
flesh-eating Christmas ants.

This is the raw and raunchy voice that the author stifles when Hap and Leonard
get carried away with the bragging, the racial banter, the insult jokes, the
sexual one-upmanship, the shoulder punching and the relentless backslapping.
Give it a rest, guys.

It's prom night -- do you know what your children are up to? If that question
scares you, better stay away from Faye Kellerman's JUSTICE (Morrow, $23), in
which a high school prom queen is strangled to death after a wild night of
drugs, drink and boisterous group sex.

Peter Decker, a Los Angeles homicide detective, who lies awake nights worrying
about his own children, coaxes a confession from the dead girl's date. "He's
cold, he's calculating, he's eerie," Decker says of this preternaturally
self-contained youth, the nephew of a Mafia crime boss. That the kid with the
"killer eyes" might also be innocent nags at Decker until he reopens the case. A
good thing, too, because the truth is uglier and sadder than the official
scenario of rampant teen-age lust.

Rina Lazarus, Decker's wife and helpmate in this series, is uncharacteristically
subdued here, which gives this sympathetic cop a rare chance to work
independently on a case that raises touchy issues like ethnic stereotyping and
religious prejudice. Free of the usual domestic distractions, Decker can also
concentrate on the emotional problems of Ms. Kellerman's uncommonly complex
young characters. The Mafia prince and his virginal girlfriend may be more
romantic than your average kid, but they're a nice change from the vicious,
inarticulate thugs who keep trying to pass for teen-agers in crime fiction.

Too much Proust can unhinge the mind, according to a French scholar and novelist
who takes malicious glee in dissecting the shabby ethics of her literary
cronies. In MURDER CHEZ PROUST (Arcade, $19.95), Estelle Monbrun (the pen name
of Elyane Dezon-Jones, who teaches French at Washington University in St. Louis)
assembles a convention of scholars for their annual wingding at Aunt Leonie's,
the very house where Proust dunked his madeleine. The academics are poised to
grapple with "Problematics of the Pluritext," but on the eve of the symposium,
the ambitious, unscrupulous woman who presides over their society is bludgeoned
to death.

Inspector Jean-Pierre Foucheroux, who comes from Paris to investigate, is brainy
enough to survive in this crowd. (He bristles sharply at a "questionable use of
the subjunctive mood.") But he is given the humble job of sorting out the many
suspects and waiting for the killer to make a stupid blunder. Ms. Monbrun, whose
every genre cliche seems to survive in David Martyn's translation, shows more
subtlety in lifting from "Remembrance of Things Past" Proustian themes like
childhood isolation, romantic obsession and the rigidity of social class, and
attaching them to the duplicitous intellectuals she satirizes with such
impertinent wit.

"Who would want to kill an unfaithful, obnoxious, woman-beating, gun-smuggling,
embezzling, insurance-cheating shyster?" That's what a Florida private eye named
Harry Rice needs to find out in THE HARRY CHRONICLES (Thomas Dunne/ St.
Martin's, $21.95), an easygoing caper by Allan Pedrazas, which was picked by the
publisher and the Private Eye Writers of America as the best first private-eye
novel of 1994.

Harry is the proprietor of the Sand Bar, a funky beach joint where the locals
drag themselves after servicing the snooty tourists all day. You know the place:
sandy grit on the floor, stuffed swordfish behind the cash register, paddle fans
dangling from the ceiling and some ruminative drunk at the bar who thinks he's
Steinbeck. The Sand Bar isn't the only laid-back place to hang out in this
story. There's also Cuban Frankie's, Minnie's Good Guys Diner, Sara's
neighborhood bar and a nudie dive known as the Promised Land. The author, who
lives in Fort Lauderdale, has both a healthy regard for the indigenous
life-forms found in such places and a great ear for the talk they talk.

These are valuable assets, because the flimsy story (something about a stolen
gun collection or a collector who steals guns) wouldn't hold up in a high
coastal wind. But so long as Harry maintains his sweet temper and his
friendships with gabby bartenders, this new sleuth has an edge.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing:

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THIS WEEK;
Just Cash, Please

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 15;  Column 5;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Dead Presidents," directed by Allen and Albert Hughes, tells of
a broke and unhappy Vietnam veteran (Larenz Tate), who, with his friends, robs
an armored car in an effort to make a fresh start. Opening on Wednesday. (K. C.
Bailey/Hollywood Pictures)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By ELEANOR CHARLES

SECTION: Section 13CN; Page 17; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words



SCULPTURE FOR SALE

For a second year the University of Connecticut has organized an Invitational
Sculpture Show and Sale to be held at its Farmington Health Center, sponsored by
the center and the university's School of Fine Arts. Proceeds from the show will
finance purchases of new works for the UConn collection at the health center.

A sampling of the artists includes Glenna Goodacre, creator of the Vietnam
Women's Memorial in Washington; Lloyd Glasson, who is currently working on a
commission for the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford; George Lundeen, sculptor of
the bronze signature statue at the new Denver International Airport, and Mark
Lundeen, whose "Mighty Casey" is on the grounds of the Baseball Hall of Fame.

A preview party on Friday at 5:30 P.M. will cost $25 and give the public a
chance to mingle with the artists and make advance purchases. Regular viewing
hours on Saturday and Sunday are from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. and on Monday from 10 to
2. Admission will be $5.

On Saturday at 7:30 P.M. the artists will be treated to a New England clambake.
Tickets for the public are $50 and seating is limited. To obtain more
information or reserve preview and clambake tickets, call 679-1122.

HOW BOOKS LOOK

In conjunction with the current exhibition called "Honoring Words, the Art of
Book Design," on display at the Greenwich library through Oct. 19, two lectures
have been scheduled.

Martin Antonetti, librarian and chief administrator of America's oldest
bibliophile organization, the Grolier Club, will conduct the first program,
which includes a tour of exhibition, on Thursday at 6 P.M. in the library's
Hurlbutt Gallery. His talk is titled "From Kelmscott to Pennyroyal: Discovering
the Art of Modern Fine Printing."

Deborah M. Evetts, book conservator for the Pierpont Morgan Library, will give a
slide-talk on Oct. 12 at 8 P.M. in the library's auditorium on the subject of
"Bookbinding Design: Past, Present and Future."

Admission to both programs is free. The library is at 101 West Putnam Avenue
(Route 1); the phone number for more information is 622-7900.

COPPER AND BRASS

Twenty-two booths containing antiques displayed by dealers from Maine to
California will make up the ninth annual Washington Antiques Show. It will open
with a preview cocktail and informal supper party on Friday from 6:30 to 9:30
P.M. at Bryan Memorial Town Hall on Route 47 in Washington. Tickets at $50 may
be reserved by calling 868-2502.

Public show hours thereafter are on Saturday from 10 A.M.to 6 P.M. and Sunday
from 11 to 5, with an admission charge of $6.

Each year the show's proceeds are used to help support the Gunn Memorial Library
and Museum, and the paintings, artifacts and archives that it contains, all
relating to Washington and the northwest corner of the state.

This year the show includes some 16th- to 19th-century English and French copper
and brass, 16th-century prints, several of Moses Soyer's figurative works in
various mediums and 19th-century pottery heads used as banks, cups, candle
snuffers and window stops. And there is a selection of jewelry, garden furniture
and statuary, walking sticks, silver and furniture.

WILLIE RUFF

Willie Ruff, half of the Mitchell-Ruff Jazz Duo and a professor of music at
Yale, will have his French horn, his bass and his encyclopedic knowledge of jazz
at the Little Theater, 1 Lincoln Street, in New Haven on Thursday at 7 P.M.

The program is one of the Arts Council of New Haven's series of informal
sessions. Admission is $10 and the audience can ask questions about the music,
the technique, the instruments or whatever. Call 772-2788 for tickets or more
information.

RUSSIAN MATTERS

"The Twilight of the Romanovs" is the title of a series of talks by Dale Harris,
lecturer for the Metropolitan Museum of Art, exploring old Russia through its
music, ballet, art, literature and politics.

The first program on Thursday at 10 A.M. concerns "Fin de Siecle Russia:
Nicholas and Alexandra." Future subjects include the work of Tolstoy, Chekhov,
Stanislavsky, Nijinsky, Tchaikovsky, Rachmaninoff, Kandinsky and Chagall, among
many others.

Four weekly lectures in all will be held at the Darien Community Association,
274 Middlesex Road.

Tickets are $15 for individual lectures or $55 for the series. The phone number
for more information is 655-9050.

CULINARY PLEASURES

In the mood for a little baba ganougi? How about a bowl of Portuguese boatman's
stew, some maple walnut kugel, Hungarian porkolt, quenelles with Boursin sauce,
Russian salmon salad or a not-so-plain meatloaf?

These and dozens more dishes, from hors d'oeuvres to desserts, will be prepared
by Hartford chefs for sampling during the Hartford Symphony Orchestra's kitchen
tour today from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.

Owners of five homes with spectacular kitchens in the town of Avon will lend
their stoves, refrigerators and Cuisinarts to Brian Spilecki, chef of Max on
Main; Russell Pryzbeck of Russell's Creative Global Cuisine; Josh Chalmers and
Alan Thayer of Chalmers and Company, and Fran Marino of Max Amore, among others.

The tab is $20 and the money will assist the orchestra's educational programs
for children. Call 521-4124 for tickets and a self-drive map.

WALKING WEEKEND

It's time again for northeastern Connecticut's yearly Walking Weekend, scheduled
from Saturday through Monday and featuring 50 guided walks for grown-ups,
children, fitness mavens, sluggards, history buffs and nature lovers.

Walkers may follow the mile-long stagecoach road in Danielson, browse UConn's
animal farms in Storrs, bird watch at Pomfret Farms, challenge the Kentuck
Ledges in East Killingly for seven miles in four hours, admire the fall foliage
in a five-mile hike at the Mansfield Hollow Reservoir or take a night hike at
the Windham Land Trust.

Numerous historic sites and districts, old mills and industrial areas,
woodlands, burying grounds and architectural treasures are to be seen while
pumping up the circulatory system, almost all of them at no charge. For complete
information, call 928-1228.   ELEANOR CHARLES

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rosie Sandifer, one of the 50 artists whose sculpture is on sale
at the UConn Health Center in Farmington.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN PERSON;
The Pastor's Tale

BYLINE: By BARBARA STEWART

SECTION: Section 13NJ;  Page 4;  Column 1;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1729 words

DATELINE: MAPLEWOOD


AS a child in the tiny Pennsylvania village of Hummelstown, near Hershey, Barry
L. Stopfel was talented in a way that local people honored. Though only 11, he
was a gifted preacher, a charismatic member of the fundamentalist Brethren
Church. "I would weep and preach and witness," he said. "That kind of thing was
highly regarded in my little town."

Then the 60's happened. Mr. Stopfel drifted away from church and didn't return
for 20 years. When he did reclaim his childhood birthright -- the ability to
inspire others through preaching -- he had changed in ways the vanished boy
couldn't have imagined.

He'd become a New York City business executive, a fighter for social causes, an
Episcopalian. He'd become a gay man. And two years ago he became rector of a
suburban Episcopal church. St. George's in Maplewood, a dignified stone church
with stunning centuries-old stained-glass windows, has about 350 members --
singles, couples, with and without children, black, white and Hispanic. Most are
straight, some gay.

When a St. George's committee hired Mr. Stopfel in 1993, a few members -- three
or four families, say other parishioners -- objected to having a gay man as
pastor, and quit the parish. The vast majority who stayed seem to be his big
fans. In a reasonably prosperous and reasonably staid community, people who are
youngish, older and very old all sound startled when asked about having a gay
pastor. To them, he is simply their priest, a smart and soothing man who happens
to be gay.

But today, the 47-year-old Mr. Stopfel finds himself in the path of an
ecclesiastical hurricane -- not because he has battled for his rights but simply
because he is gay. A sizable part of the national Episcopal hierarchy -- 76 of
the church's 297 bishops -- recently signed a letter leveling a formal charge of
heresy against the bishop who ordained Mr. Stopfel as a deacon five years ago.
The accusation means that the bishop, Walter C. Righter, now retired and living
in New Hampshire, will be tried in a church court.

The Episcopal Church has no law, no canon, forbidding the ordination of gay or
lesbian priests. But in 1979 a church General Convention passed a resolution
stating that it is "not appropriate" to ordain a practicing homosexual.

Despite the accusation, as many as 35 bishops have ordained scores of openly gay
and lesbian priests during the past 20 years, according to Kim Byham, a lawyer
and former president of Integrity, an Episcopal gay and lesbian group. And
Bishop John S. Spong of Newark, a strong advocate of the ordination of
homosexuals, said, "I thought the battle was over by the time Barry came along."
Poorer urban parishes, like those in Newark and Paterson, have an especially
heavy contingent of gay and lesbian priests, he said.

The heresy accusation has startled and dismayed many church leaders and members.
The accusation pits conservative congregations, mainly in the South, against
more liberal ones. If the ordination of Barry Stopfel provided the basis for the
accusation, the real issue is the swing, the future, of the Episcopal Church. In
the church, as in the nation, conservatives, moderates and liberals are fighting
for control.

"This is not an attack on Barry," said William C. Wantland of Eau Claire, Wis.,
one of the bishops who initiated the heresy petition. "It's an objection to his
ordination. Our Lord said that sexual abstinence is required of Christians
outside of holy matrimony. They may be wonderful people, but sexual relations
outside of marriage are not permitted for Christians." Bishop Righter, he said,
"has chosen to disregard this command." And he added, "It's painful for
everybody."
 In his theology-book-lined study the other day, sitting beside an impeccably
behaved black labrador who dozed on the carpet, Mr. Stopfel considered the
charges. His ministry, he knows, is not threatened, for he answers only to the
church members who hired him, and his own bishop, Mr. Spong. But he is in the
uncomfortable position of seeing the man who ordained him, who allowed him to
fulfill his strongest ambition, having to go through a trial for it.

"Heresy is an ancient word -- it used to mean burning people at the stake," he
said. "Now it's being used against people who are trying to live their lives
with dignity and honesty. If they prevail -- if they are able to say, 'In the
name of God I find gay priests immoral and perverse' -- they will hold the
church institution hostage and will give the average person reason to continue
to justify bigotry."

Mr. Stopfel says this in a soft but ringing voice, ideal for sermons. He brings
the measured vocabulary of a preacher to his everyday conversation. As pastor,
he tends to the church's finances, counsels its members, writes sermons, teaches
doctrine and performs liturgies. He says his suburban parish offers him
diversity and challenge: St. George's attracts couples with children looking for
good public schools within commuting distance of New York City. It draws gay
professionals who also work in the city but want to come home to houses and
lawns.

"I am right where I want to be," he said.

He got there by way of Boston University and Columbia University Teacher's
College, where he marched for civil rights and burned his draft card, protesting
the Vietnam War. He became a marketing executive at American Express. He was one
of the first members of New York City's Gay Men's Health Crisis, the advocacy
group for people with AIDS.

In those days he had no interest in churchgoing. As a gay man, he suspected he
would not be welcome in most churches. Then he heard Paul Moore, New York City's
Episcopal bishop, preach, criticizing the city's unresponsive attitude towards
AIDS. "Bishop Moore was an amazing visionary," Mr. Stopfel said. "I thought, I
should check this church out."

A few years later, he attend an Easter service at Grace Church in downtown
Manhattan. "It rekindled my childhood stuff about religion and the ministry," he
said. In his mid-thirties, he left American Express to attend Union Theological
Seminary. He did pastoral work in the Newark Diocese and was one a select group
of prospective priests chosen for ordination.

Before being hired at St. George's, he was deacon at the Church of the Atonement
in Tenafly. During the many months of interviews for the St. George's job, the
vestry -- a sort of board of directors -- also met with Will Leckie, a business
executive and ordained minister who is Mr. Stopfel's partner of 10 years. Mr.
Leckie sometimes preaches at St. George's and church members say they like him
almost as much as the pastor.

In response to the heresy charge, the St. George's vestry composed a ringing
letter of support, saying, "We believe that God has called Barry to minister
with us, as our priest, and we will proclaim this fact to anyone who needs to
hear it."

But privately, many church members sound puzzled, confused and startled at the
charges brushing the leader of their church, their haven, the place where they
can remember what really matters and who they really are.

"You would expect someone of my advanced years to be dubious about having a gay
priest," said Susan Mangasarian, 85, who has lived in Maplewood 47 years. But
she added: "The church is just alive with him around. He's made it a warm,
caring, welcoming place. It's amazing what he's done very quietly in his own
way."

She spoke of his way with children, and so did Patti Savoulidis, a vestry
member. "When we hired him, he fitted the bill," she said. "Sexual orientation
was not No. 1 on our list. What was important to me was his interest in teaching
children. He's a great preacher and he uses humor in the darkest moments. I
mean, it's the person and his qualities. It's so sad these bishops are concerned
with doctrines and not with people."


A Vibrant Church, 2 Big Headaches

The Episcopal bishops who gathered last week in Portland, Ore., for their
national convention did not talk much about the heresy accusation against one of
their number, said James Solheim, the church's communications director. But not
because they'd forgotten.

"It's the elephant in the room no one wants to talk about," said Mr. Solheim.
"It's simmering underneath the surface."

Kim Byham, former president of Integrity, a gay and lesbian Episcopalian group,
says there is talk that the 76 bishops who signed the heresy petition against
Bishop Walter C. Righter for ordaining a gay deacon will drop the charges in
exchange for a moratorium on ordaining homosexuals and a ban on blessing
same-sex marriages.

But even if the other 221 bishops agree, it appears that since the petition was
properly signed and submitted as required by church law, the trial -- called a
presentment -- cannot be withdrawn.

Mr. Byham estimates that at least 35 bishops have ordained scores of openly gay
and lesbian priests. And Mr. Solheim said that if Bishop Righter is convicted of
heresy under the church's laws, and other bishops are charged for the same
offense, the church would be "tied up in litigation for generations."

Only once before in the church's 206-year history has a bishop faced such a
serious charge -- in 1924, when another retired bishop declared Communism to
have superseded Christianity. He was tried, convicted and stripped of his rank.

The other elephant at the bishops' convention is the case of Ellen F. Cooke, a
church treasurer and Montclair resident, who was accused last February of
embezzling $2 million from church coffers. Ms. Cooke and her husband, Nicholas,
an Episcopal priest, have moved to McLean, Va. Law-enforcement officials are
investigating the charges; the church is considering a civil suit. "The Ellen
Cooke thing shook us to the core," said Mr. Solheim. "It was a total betrayal of
trust -- truly evil. It's an incredible -- and expensive -- warning sign to
parishes and dioceses."

Despite these widely publicized difficulties, the Episcopal Church is
experiencing "tremendous vitality," he said. In the past four years its
membership has increased to 2.5 million nationwide (43,000 in the Newark
Diocese). Many more people want to be priests than are needed. In Newark, only
five or six new priests, out of about 35 prospective candidates, are ordained
each year, which allows the church to be very selective, said Bishop John S.
Spong of Newark.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The ancient word heresy, says Barry L. Stopfel, is now "being
used against people who are trying to live their lives with dignity." (Norman Y.
Lono for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE MONUMENT GLUT

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 14;  Column 3;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 59 words


Soldiers sacrifice the prime of their youth, may die or be maimed, often without
even knowing the purpose of their missions. A soldier's faith in his country is
that great. The men who died in Vietnam, Korea and World War II died cold,
exhausted and often alone. If soldiers do not deserve monuments, then who does?

JOE CHUNG
West Point, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE MONUMENT GLUT

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 12;  Column 6;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 123 words


Reston's esthetic dismay at the overcrowding of the Mall is pretentious. The
proximity of the Korean and Vietnam War memorials to the Lincoln Memorial does
anything but "dilute the importance of Lincoln and the American Civil War." The
"nasty, inconclusive, foreign wars" are equally a part of our country's history.

In answer to the question "What happened to the American hero as scientist? As
religious leader? As artist or musician?" I would remind him of the Smithsonian
Institution, the National Cathedral, the National Gallery and the Kennedy
Center. These institutions effectively preserve and honor the accomplishments of
cultural leaders and artists better than any stone monument could.

MELINDA L. WATT
Brooklyn

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE MONUMENT GLUT

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 12;  Column 5;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 119 words


In "The Monument Glut" (Sept. 10), James Reston Jr. hits the nail on the head. I
suppose all memorials can't be grand like the Lincoln, or as powerfully
evocative as the Vietnam, but if they miss, they miss by a mile, and then what
are they but large tchotchkes?

I have thought, facetiously, that if there were a memorial commission to suit
me, we should add to Frederick Hart's Three Servicemen a bronze of the famous
photograph of a hippie inserting daisies in reservists' rifles. Or perhaps a
nice bronze group of sign-bearing hippies from one of the antiwar marches on
Washington. And why not have Bill Clinton and Robert McNamara serve on such a
commission? Heh, heh.

CAROL AXELROD
McLean, Va.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Co-Author of Gen. Powell's Book Is Given a Part as the Story Goes On

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 22;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1261 words

DATELINE: GUILDERLAND, N.Y.


As Colin L. Powell first tried to talk out his life story, the Vietnam years
would slip feebly away, downplayed in clipped military-speak, until the person
listening and inquiring and composing had to challenge the military man's
resistance to those memories.

"He had an emotional shield around him concerning that experience," said the
listener, Joseph E. Persico, co-author of the retired four-star general's
autobiography, a creative role that has proved to be as much political midwife
and spin doctor as biographer.

Between them, the two men collaborated on a 643-page vehicle-turned-juggernaut
that teases the nation with the thought that Mr. Powell may run for President in
a fresh chapter of the life that Mr. Persico still cannot shake.

The general continues to call the writer almost daily from the road, with tales
of book-signing fun and endurance in "that voice, an amalgam of New York
City-wise kid and Boy Scout," Mr. Persico said.

"He did two Vietnam tours, and he gave me bare bones," the writer recalled about
the most difficult part of the collaboration. "He'd say 'regimental adviser in
'63' and 'battalion exec in '68.'

"And I said: 'Wait a minute. That's it? You served in the Army during this
country's most controversial war and its most sundered period since the Civil
War. You saw friends die. You can't let it go like this.' "

As it turned out, the general did not. The reams of tape-recorded memories that
Mr. Persico elicited across 20 months of visits to Mr. Powell's simple basement
den in McLean, Va., grew richer in detail, as did the finished book, "My
American Journey," with two chapters on the war.

"He started explaining his frustration at what he saw," Mr. Persico said. "The
Army's unwillingness to challenge the political leaders as to just what was
expected out of this conflict. The whole attitude of inflation of success, of
body counts. All the factors he felt undermined the Army's credibility and his
own sense of self-worth. This came eventually pouring out of him."

Not since Elvis Presley was an enlisted man has a soldier mustered out to such
waiting celebrity and exploited it so well, by chapter and verse. The book has
been selling at an industry-shocking rate, as readers follow General Powell all
the way back from Gulf War strategist to South Bronx Shabbos goy, the lad who
earned a quarter on Friday nights turning on and off the synagogue lights for
Orthodox Jews.

There is even an owning-up anecdote that rings of George Washington's cherry
tree. "Father, I did it," he admitted from the assembled gathering of teen-age
summer campers when an angry priest asked who had sneaked beer onto the grounds.
Mr. Persico cites that as a formative lesson in the rewards of honesty, not the
conscious limning of a campaigner's profile.

"In all the time we worked together, never once did he say to me, 'Now don't
forget this is a campaign Bible that we have to shape,' " said Mr. Persico, who
has written biographies of Nelson A. Rockefeller, Edward R. Murrow and William
J. Casey.

Mr. Persico knows more than a little about politics because he was the
speechwriter for Mr. Rockefeller as New York Governor and Vice President.

"And, naturally, we never did anything so incautious that it would foreclose a
political future," Mr. Persico said about General Powell's osmotically
transferred subtleties. "Interest in the book fuels interest in his political
future, and vice versa. It's hopeless to deny they're joined at the hip."

"I would intrude" in urging the general to run for President, Mr. Persico
conceded. He received no clear answer as he made the case, in talent and
history, for a popular black hero who was seeking the White House.

"It would be cosmic," Mr. Persico said. "And he said, 'There're other things I
can do.' And I said, 'Nothing comparable.' "

In the collaboration, the writer made weekly flights from his apartment here in
the Albany suburbs to the Powell home, the two men working in the den and
carefully securing their labor, particularly the taped interviews, which were
entrusted for transcription only to Mr. Persico's wife, Sylvia, and daughter
Vanya Perez.

"I knew absolutely nothing about Colin Powell other than what everybody else
knew: this stern-visaged guy with the pointer before the chart who was cutting
off armies and killing them," said Mr. Persico, who received the assignment on
the Random House book after the general had interviewed and selected him from
among a list of writers.

"I would have speculated he was black middle class, out of West Point," Mr.
Persico said of his subject, who turned out to be a humbler working-class
R.O.T.C. graduate of City College in Manhattan and, like Mr. Persico, the son of
a seamstress.

"We clicked early, both of us compulsive workers, and we were drained at the
end," Mr. Persico said, noting that after 10-hour workdays he faxed pages of
fresh questions to the general's home near midnight and was awakened at dawn by
pages of replies. "The guy's an interesting combination of easygoing style and
sterling-steel ambition."

The writer saw his job as capturing the general's voice, "almost like tuning in
a frequency on the radio," and letting the general modulate its tone. "He'd tell
me how he was refused service in a hamburger joint in the South, and I'd write
and edit that, maybe change something to make it more book-readable," Mr.
Persico said. "We'd go over that chapter and hit that passage, and he would want
to add or rephrase something. Then, I might rephrase what he rephrased. So, in
the end, who wrote it? It was a very tight collaboration."

Mr. Persico, a well-reviewed biographer whose favorite writer is George Orwell,
said General Powell had written beautifully of his young days in New York,
describing stickball and his immigrant father coming home from work.

"The guy speaks in sentences that form paragraphs that turn into pages," Mr.
Persico recounted.  "You could lift whole passages of what he said and just
lower them into the book."

On the other hand, the general had to be talked out of dwelling on some of his
proudest Army moments, from inspection awards for platoon excellence as a junior
officer to structural changes in the Army as Pentagon chief after the cold war.

" 'What, you don't want more about Force Structure and Joint Publication 1?'
he'd say, his feelings hurt," Mr. Persico recalled. "And I'd just snore in
reaction. I told him, 'We have to keep in mind a person reading your life.
Picture a rather bright ninth-grade social-studies teacher, probably a woman, in
Winnetka, Ill.  How much does she want to hear about Force Structure?' "

It helps to be hero-proof, Mr. Persico said, in facing Mr. Powell's charm, which
includes a biting humor and a mix of calypso and Yiddish accents that the writer
found the general cautiously toning down on the page. Warnings of irascibility
were not borne out in 20 months.

General Powell even went forth quietly to buy the sandwiches (hero sandwiches).

"You keep working," he told Mr. Persico, whose writer's labor beyond
interviewing and selecting material was in "getting narrative fire out of how
you juxtapose things."

"I'm exhausted, exhilarated," Mr. Persico said as he declined to discuss his
fee. He now wonders, along with much of the nation, how Mr. Powell's life will
turn out.

"We had a conversation where I told him he had to run, that even if he didn't
succeed, it would be defeat in a noble cause," Mr. Persico said.  "And he just
looked at me and said, 'But I like to win.' "

NAME: Joseph E. Persico

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Joseph E. Persico, the co-author of retired Gen. Colin L.
Powell's autobiography, in his study at his home. (David Jennings for The New
York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

At the National Archives, Technology Has a Flip Side

BYLINE: By WILLIAM H. HONAN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 27;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1301 words


Last spring, at the National Archives and Record Administration on the
Washington Mall, the people's memory suffered some minor lapses.

A 15-year-old electromagnetic tape containing White House electronic messages
began to melt as it ran on a machine that spins a reel 10 times faster than
earlier models.

Later, archivists discovered that some CD-ROM computer disks, whose laminated
surfaces were supposed to seal the information on the disks for a century, were
beginning to decay after only 10 years.

On one level, these were little more than annoyances to researchers. On another,
they raise serious questions about the growing reliance on technology to
preserve history.

Only a few years back, scholars, scientists, business leaders and archivists
were heralding the information revolution and extolling computers whose
previously unheard-of memory banks would transform the world.

Well, that revolution has changed things. In fact, the National Archives is
currently experimenting with a new electronic indexing technique that may give
researchers access to more than 300,000 cubic feet of records.

But what the earliest prophets of these high-technology marvels failed to
foresee is that the tapes, disks, drives and software that make electronic
records accessible keep being modified, updated, worn out and replaced. "You can
get an optical disk that may last for a hundred years, but in ten years you
won't be able to find a drive to read the thing," said Kenneth Thibodeau,
director of the Archives' Center for Electronic Records.

The concern is that "the long-term memory of our modern institutions" is in
jeopardy, as a leading Canadian archivist, Terry Cook, wrote in the January 1995
issue of Technology Review, the national magazine of the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.

Nowhere is this more keenly felt than at the National Archives, whose holdings
are so vast as to compel its reliance on high technology.

All told, the Archives controls between four billion and five billion Federal
documents, including the original copy of the Constitution, official Air Force
reports on U.F.O. sightings, Lee Harvey Oswald's address book and the casualty
lists used to create the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.

Only a fraction of this material is housed at the colonnade-fronted building on
the Mall. Much of it has been shipped to Archives II, the Pentagon-sized,
state-of-the-art center that opened in 1994 in College Park, Md. And plenty more
is stuffed into the National Archives' 13 regional archives, spread from
Anchorage to Atlanta, and into nine Presidential libraries.

Add to this the steady burgeoning of virtually all Federal records, the
Congressional mandate on the Archives to make its holdings readily accessible
and the ruling of a Federal court in 1993 that the Bush Administration had been
"arbitrary and capricious" in permitting the destruction of White House
electronic mail and that Federal guidelines must be applied to determine whether
such material should be delivered to the Archives for permanent retention.

"We have no choice but to make use of the new technology," said John W. Carlin,
former Governor of Kansas, who has headed the Archives since June. "I would
anticipate that by the turn of the century, more than half of our records will
be electronic."

On the positive side, the new technology can help researchers by collecting and
compressing vast quantities of information and making it easier to sort through
and store. At present, archivists acknowledge that they will probably never be
able to account for every single tape or disk, let alone every piece of paper,
under their control. Consequently, they try to gain what they call "intellectual
control" and "physical control" of their holdings.

"Intellectual control means that we know we possess certain types of material,
such as records of the Social Security system," said Lynn Bellardo, director of
the Archives' policy and planning division. "Physical control means we know
generally where they are.

"But there's a great difference between having that and having the item-level
control that you see in, say, the Library of Congress," Ms. Bellardo cautioned.
"We may have a mile-long series of boxes, and the contents are described only by
a single paragraph in our finding aid. That's a long way from being able to
direct a researcher to the exact box containing what he's looking for."

To make these holdings more accessible to researchers, the Archives last March
marshaled its elecronic resources and undertook an ambitious pilot project
called the American West.

Peter Hirtle, coordinator of the Archives' public-access initiative, said the
project would help researchers focus their efforts.

"We're attempting," he said, "to combine electronically under the heading 'the
American West' the finding aids to a cluster of related record groups, including
the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the Bureau of Land Management, military posts and
Federal courts. Those documents occupy more than 300,000 cubic feet of space.

"Let's suppose a researcher is interested in the history of a military post
somewhere in Idaho. If the project is successful, that researcher should be able
to use this new finding aid to tell him that somebody once wrote the history of
that post and that the document is located at our Seattle regional center. That
will save him from making a trip here to Washington and going from building to
building, and it will save us from having to service his request.

"The object," Mr. Hirtle continued, "is to empower the researcher. It's a
learning experience for us. We want to get our feet wet and see what problems we
run into. It's due to be completed next year, and if it works, and if we can get
the funding, we can expand it to eventually include everything we have."

The Archives has made a number of other toe-in-the-water electronic advances.
Last year it went on line with electronic versions of some publications like an
introduction to genealogical research, information about how to use the
archives, the daily table of contents of the Federal Register, selected
documents and about 1,000 of the most commonly sought still photographs -- like
the shot of President Richard M. Nixon shaking hands with Elvis Presley.

All this can be had free of charge by researchers who have a computer with
access to the Internet.

The Archives is also providing an e-mail address -- inquire@nara.gov -- which
researchers may use free of charge to make inquiries without having to write a
letter or visit Washington.

And last June, the Archives completed the installation of a wide-area network
that uses telephone lines to permit staff members to communicate with one
another easily.

"The purpose is to have us think of ourselves as a nationwide organization,"
said Ms. Bellardo. "If somebody wants some information about Lyndon Johnson,
through e-mail we can instantly communicate with the L.B.J. Library in Austin
and get the answer without delay."

As for coping with the impermanent nature of electronic gadgetry and software,
Mr. Thibodeau, the National Archives' director of electronic records, said the
first step was to recognize that "we're on a moving threshold" because the
technology continues to change.

The second step in the preservation of electromagnetic materials -- the Archives
now receives almost a million megabytes a year -- is to copy everything on 3480
data tape, a standard product similar to audiotape, which officials believe is
both durable enough and well enough positioned in the market so that it will be
around for 10 years.

"We figure we're safe for a decade," Mr. Thibodeau said. "That means that in 10
years we expect to have to copy everything onto something else, but we don't
know what that will be."

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 718 words



International 3-13

BRITAIN GOES METRIC
Today, throughout Britain, is what the authorities are euphemistically calling
"M-day." M does not stand for mayhem. But judging from what you hear, it might
just as well.  1



DEMOCRACY ON TRIAL IN KENYA
A political dissident's trial in Kenya is seen by many as a sign that President
Daniel arap Moi may be sliding back from his commitment to democratic reform.  3


SOUTH AFRICAN DEBTORS FREED
South Africa's highest court has ruled that the imprisonment of debtors is
unconstitutional, ending a system that sent thousands of people a year to
prison.  4

NO REPRIEVE FOR CROATIAN SERBS
Two months after a Croatian offensive drove thousands of Serbian troops and
civilians from the Krajina region, Serbian villages continue to burn.  6

TENSION OVER TIBETAN LEADER
This past summer, perhaps the most urgent matter for Tibetans has been the
political standoff with Beijing over the latest reincarnation of the Panchen
Lama.  10

ARAB-AMERICAN'S DEATH QUERIED
The United States has demanded an investigation into the death of a
Palestinian-American grocer from Dallas who died in the custody of Palestinian
police.  12

An Algerian shot by police was tied to terrorist acts in France.  6

The United States has picked a site for its office in North Korea.  9

A Senate report criticized a 1993 Army raid in Somalia.  13

National 14-28

THE TENNESSEE EXPERIMENT
Tennessee's experiment in managed health care stands as an example of the risks
and opportunities of overhauling health care at the state level.  1

PANEL ADOPTS G.O.P. HEALTH PLAN
Republicans scored a major victory when the Senate Finance Committee approved
their plan to make immense changes in Medicaid and Medicare -- changes that the
President immediately condemned.  1

MILKEN BACK IN BUSINESS
After serving a prison term, paying a fine of more than $1 billion and being
barred from the securities business for life, the junk bond financier Michael R.
Milken is counseling corporate leaders as they make deals to reshape the media
and entertainment industries. 1

DISPUTE OVER LOAN GUARANTEES
Democrats criticized a Senate bill that would cut Federal student loan programs
by almost $11 billion and hand over nearly $2 billion in Federal funds to
nonprofit agencies that protect banks against losses from student defaults.  18

WESTERN RENEWAL
The rebirth of an old hotel in Carson City, Nev., has also restored vitality to
what was a skid row neighborhood near the state Capitol.  14

WITNESS BELATEDLY RECANTS
Twenty years after his testimony helped convict a man who now awaits execution,
a witness in a murder case says he lied.  14

AN UNEXPECTED ALLY
As the District of Columbia, long a Democratic stronghold, tries to climb out of
its financial crisis, it is a Republican, Newt Gingrich, who is playing a
leading role.  17

GETTING POWELL TO TALK
The writer who worked with Colin L. Powell on his autobiography had to press the
general to discuss his wartime service in Vietnam.  22

Metropolitan 29-36

BOARD REVERSES CHANCELLORVOTE
In a dramatic reversal that followed a day of maneuvering by Mayor Giuliani, the
Board of Education voted to reopen its search for a new Chancellor of New York
City's public schools, spurning the candidate a majority had chosen only 24
hours before.  1

Jerry F. Cammarata, a new Board appointee, cast the swing vote.  33

A LONG-AWAITED PAPAL VISIT
Sixteen years after his last trip to New York, Pope John Paul II returns for a
four-day visit that will take him on a whirl of meetings, ceremonies and Masses
with crowds of biblical proportions.  1

BUILDER'S FALL HALTS PROJECTS
When a Connecticut road builder abruptly halted work at 19 sites and was
admitted to a hospital for the mentally ill, questions emerged over whether the
lowest bid is always the best bid.  29

CHILDREN AS INTERPRETERS
With immigration at a postwar high in the United States, millions of children
are thrust into awkward positions of power within their families. Serving as
their parents' English interpreters, they also translate unfamiliar customs.  29


Obituaries 36

Alexander Clark, Broadway actor.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

After a Long Climb, Emerging at the Top

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section C;  Page 13;  Column 2;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1173 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Oct. 2


It has been a long, arduous journey for Carl Franklin, a journey in which the
46-year-old movie director and former actor teetered for years on the edge of
financial disaster, endured harsh personal ordeals and remained committed to a
career that seemed to be going nowhere.

"Just starting to come out of it," he said the other day with a laugh.

The comment is a bit of an understatement. His latest and biggest film, "Devil
in a Blue Dress," starring Denzel Washington as Easy Rawlins, the main character
in the mystery novels of Walter Mosley, opened to strong reviews last week. (In
The New York Times, Janet Maslin called it "an unusually vibrant film noir" that
depicts the dense, vanished black culture of Los Angeles, circa 1948).

The film, which follows "One False Move," his acclaimed thriller about three Los
Angeles cocaine dealers who flee to an Arkansas town, has placed Mr. Franklin in
the top tier of film makers. It delights him that his emergence has been so
sudden that, when "One False Move" was released in 1992, most studios were
unaware that he was black. In fact he's a rarity in Hollywood: a black man who's
been offered films without racial themes.

"Most of the stuff that has come to me has been mainstream and not black
material," said Mr. Franklin, seated in a cafe in the Farmer's Market in the
Fairfax area, a sprawling collection of coffeehouses and food stalls where he
often eats breakfast and meets friends. "I've gotten action stuff, I've gotten
dramas, I've gotten quirky art projects. I've been in touch with Geena Davis
about projects, with Dustin Hoffman, with Warren Beatty, with Willem Dafoe."

Mr. Franklin is not boasting. His talent, especially for dark, elegant films, is
unquestioned. In "Devil in the Blue Dress," which he adapted from the Mosley
novel, Rawlins, who has been fired from his job and has house payments to make,
finds himself drawn into a web of blackmail, murder and sleazy city politics.
The film's antecedents are the novels of James M. Cain and Raymond Chandler,
with overtones of "Chinatown," Roman Polanski's classic L.A. noir.

The big difference in this film is that many of the key characters are black,
and Mr. Franklin thoroughly identifies with them.

"I love film noir, but this film is really social realism married to film noir,"
he said, sipping a late afternoon cappuccino in an empty, outdoor cafe. "It's
about people I know, people I grew up with, a guy, Easy Rawlins, who's a veteran
of World War II, who's working at an 8 to 5 job, who bought a little house,
who's established a kind of superficial version of the American dream.

"Then he loses his job and gets introduced into the subterranean world where the
American dream truly exists. He gets introduced into a world where crooked deals
are made and there's all this dirty laundry of the movers and shakers. It opens
his eyes, and he manages to navigate these waters, coming out reasonably morally
and physically intact."

Mr. Washington decided he wanted to work with Mr. Franklin immediately after
seeing "One False Move."

"I had wanted to play Easy Rawlins for a while," the actor said in a telephone
interview, "and then I saw 'One False Move' and I said to myself, 'This guy Carl
Franklin is right.' The film was just different. It was scary. It was odd. There
was a certain realism about it, but it was also surreal."

Mr. Washington called Mr. Franklin "a real actor's director, maybe because he
has acted." He went on: "He gets under the skin of the actors. He knows actors.
He keeps experimenting. He never, ever, goes after the obvious."

Mr. Franklin said that in his early life in the blue-collar shipyard town of
Richmond, Calif., 12 miles from San Francisco, he had been surrounded by
struggling and resilient black men like Easy Rawlins.

Mr. Franklin is the son of a brick mason who died suddenly, before he was born,
and a cleaning woman who was partially blinded by laundry solution and is barely
able to work. He attended the University of California at Berkeley in the
1960's, intending to become a lawyer or teacher, but stumbled into acting when a
teacher asked him to read for a role in Strindberg's "Miss Julie."

In 1971 he moved to New York, where he played minor roles in "Cymbeline" and
"Timon of Athens" for Joseph Papp's Shakespeare in the Park. He also appeared in
several plays at Lincoln Center and at the Arena Stage in Washington. But he was
constantly broke, and living in New York left him uneasy and lonely. He returned
to California, doing stage work and some television, including "Fantastic
Journey," "McClain's Law" and "The A-Team."

"Most of my roles were doctors and cops," he said. "I did them to pay the bills.
I kept getting really disillusioned with acting, but I needed those jobs because
I was married, I had two children." Three, counting his stepdaughter.

By the mid-1980's Mr. Franklin was, he acknowledged, at loose ends. He had been
divorced once, and his second marriage was collapsing. He made plans to produce
and write a film that resulted in his mortgaging and losing his house.

In 1986, in a desperate attempt to stay in the film business and learn to write
and direct, Mr. Franklin applied to the American Film Institute.  "There were
stories I wanted to tell," he said. "And I found that I enjoyed watching people
do things that I couldn't do. There was something about it that I really
enjoyed: coaxing people, having them surprise themselves about what they could
do, having them reach a threshold and then breaking through."

He earned a master of fine arts degree in directing at the film institute and
began working as a feature director for Roger Corman's Concorde Films. "They
called me on a Thursday and asked me to turn in a treatment by Monday, something
that had to be shot in the Philippines," Mr. Franklin recalled. He spent five
months directing the movie, about the Vietnam War. "I won't tell you the name of
it," he said with a smile.

Returning to Los Angeles, he completed his thesis film, "Punk," about a black,
fatherless youngster who is terrified of a molester. The film drew the attention
of Jesse Beaton, an independent producer who became Mr. Franklin's partner. It
was Ms. Beaton who brought him "One False Move," which was written by Tom
Epperson and Billy Bob Thornton, who was also one of the costars. When that film
was released, Mr. Franklin was shooting "Laurel Avenue," an acclaimed series for
HBO about a black Minnesota family struggling with poverty and drugs.

In its first weekend, "Devil in a Blue Dress" was No. 3 at the box office,
behind "Seven" and "Halloween: The Curse of Michael Myers." It was a
disappointment for Mr. Franklin and for Tristar Studios, where the film was
made.

"Somehow the response in the theaters is not commensurate with the amount of
people seeing it," he said. "It's an adult film, not an action film. Our hope is
that mature audiences will go to see it. Maybe it'll build."

He laughed. "You never know about the movie business, do you?"

NAME: Carl Franklin

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Carl Franklin, the director of "Devil in a Blue Dress," on the
Sony Pictures lot in Culver City, Calif. (Kim Kulish for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Negotiator Says Cease-Fire In Bosnia Is Unlikely Soon

BYLINE: By CHRIS HEDGES

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 986 words

DATELINE: ZAGREB, Croatia, Oct. 3


The lead American peace negotiator in the Balkans conceded today that it was
unlikely that a nationwide cease-fire in Bosnia, which was to follow the
cessation of hostilities around Sarajevo, would be implemented soon.

But the official, Assistant Secretary of State Richard C. Holbrooke, played down
the inability to reach a cease-fire agreement, vowing that the war would not
"impede our negotiations on peace."

"I don't think it's an impasse," he said in an interview. "I think both sides
want a cease-fire. But the details of how it's arranged are tricky and
important."

"The relationship between fighting and negotiating over the last 40 years --
Korea, Vietnam, the Middle East and elsewhere -- is a long and complicated one,"
Mr. Holbrooke said. "You can talk about peace while fighting goes on, as
happened in Vietnam for five years. It is wasteful and stupid, but sometimes
people simply insist on gaining battlefield advantage."

But senior United Nations officials questioned the possibility of moving the
peace efforts forward without a cease-fire. They warned that if the Bosnian
Government, or the Serbs, seized more territory, it could disrupt a proposed
51-49 percent territorial split that has been roughly matched by recent
battlefield results. And they said that without a cease-fire it would be
impossible to push through the mechanisms to govern Bosnia jointly.

"How do the Americans plan to implement a peace plan with a war going on?" asked
a senior United Nations official, who insisted on remaining unidentified. "The
ability to establish the constitutional principles the Americans seek is
predicated on the establishment of a cease-fire. It is as much a starting point
as a finishing point."

As if to underscore the fragility of recent diplomatic moves, Bosnian Army
forces in Sarajevo lobbed several artillery rounds into the Serb-held town of
Trnovo, south of the city, in violation of a pledge that the Sarajevo Government
would not take military advantage of the American-brokered deal that saw the
Serbs withdraw their heavy weapons from around the city.

Bosnian Serb radio said the Bosnian Government was also shelling Vogosca, north
of Sarajevo.

The reports prompted a Serbian request that they be allowed to move their heavy
weapons back around Sarajevo to defend their positions, and elicited a vigorous
protest from the United Nations.

"We have protested to the Bosnian military the outrageous attack coming from
inside the exclusion zone and will continue to protest this at the highest
diplomatic levels," said Alexander Ivanko, a United Nations spokesman. "The
Bosnian Serbs are now complying with our requests. If the Bosnian Government
does not stop, then we will have to look at other options."

Mr. Ivanko would not say what those options might be. It would be awkward for
the United Nations to recommend that the Bosnian Army be hit with NATO air
strikes of the kind that pounded the Bosnian Serbs for two weeks early in
September.

Paul Beaver at Jane's Defense Information Group in London noted that it would
also be hard for the United Nations to resume air strikes on the Bosnian Serbs
if their redeployment of big guns near Sarajevo was viewed as a defensive move.

"This is exactly what the U.N. didn't want to happen after all the headway in
recent weeks," he said. "The last thing they wanted the Bosnian Government to do
was take advantage of the moving out of Bosnian Serb heavy weapons. After all,
the United Nations promised the Bosnian Serbs that would not happen."

"This is a real possibility now," Mr. Beaver said, speaking about a return of
the guns. "The Bosnian Government has given them a fine excuse."

Last month, Bosnian Army troops and the Bosnian Croat militia, backed by the
Croatian Army, took more than 1,500 square miles of Serb-held territory in
northwestern Bosnia. But the Bosnian Serbs have begun a counteroffensive and are
making "slow and steady progress," United Nations peacekeepers say.

Mr. Holbrooke met on Monday with Bosnian Government officials in Sarajevo. He
met President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia in Belgrade today.

The United States team is scheduled to go back to Sarajevo on Wednesday,
accompanied by the European Union mediator, Carl Bildt.  On Thursday the Foreign
Ministers of Bosnia, Serb-dominated Yugoslavia and Croatia will meet in Rome.

Mr. Holbrooke acknowledged that diplomacy had achieved little in Bosnia so far.
"To a certain extent," he said, "things have been determined on the battlefield,
with the important exception of Sarajevo. And Sarajevo is, after all, the key
territorial issue. It makes more sense to the United States for the fighting to
stop on the basis of the current 50-50 split of the country and negotiate from
that basis, with mutually agreed upon adjustments. However, if they wish to
continue fighting while we negotiate, that can happen too."

As part of the effort to end the war, negotiators for the Croatian Government
and the local Serbs met in the town of Erdut on the Croat-Serbian border and
agreed to a set of vague principles to begin talks over the eastern Slavonia
region, the last area in Croatia held by Serb insurgents.

Croatia, which recaptured a large swath of its territory from the Serbs in
August, last week threatened to retake eastern Slavonia by military force if the
peace discussions failed.

But while Mr. Holbrooke said that a Croatian attack against eastern Slavonia
would be "very disruptive to the process," such an attack was not his most
pressing concern.

"The biggest concern I have about the whole negotiation is that we reach a peace
settlement and in a few years, after a decent interval, the Serb part of Bosnia
attempts to separate and secede -- Anschluss," he said, referring to the
incorporation of Austria by Germany in 1938.  "We will not negotiate a
slow-motion takeover by Serbia of the Serb portion of Bosnia."

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Bosnia and Herzegovina showing location of Trnovo and current
areas of control.


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 862 words



International A3-8

PEACE ON TAIWAN ISLANDS

Though tensions are rising between China and Taiwan on larger issues, the
dispute over the islands of Kinmen and Matsu, once a major irritant, has
subsided. A3

BRITISH LABORITE ROUSES PARTY

At the annual conference of the British Labor Party, the party leader, Tony
Blair, shifted his emphasis from remaking the party to remaking the country. A4

ALGERIA PREPARES ELECTION

Although Islamic militants have threatened to kill voters, Algeria's Government
announced nominees who will be on the presidential election ballot next month.
A4

ATTACK WOUNDS MACEDONIAN

The Macedonian President, Kiro Gligorov, a close ally of the United States, was
gravely wounded in a car-bomb attack that killed his driver, officials said. A8

A nationwide cease-fire in Bosnia is said to be unlikely. A8

A money shortage is impeding tribunals on war crimes. A8

Calcutta Journal: A tradition faces end of the road. A4

National A9-15, A22

CONCERN ABOUT MEDICARE PLAN

Breaking a long silence, the American Medical Association said it was concerned
about Republican plans to overhaul Medicare.  A1

NOT GUILTY

O. J. Simpson was found not guilty of killing his former wife and a friend,
ending one of the most widely watched trials in the nation's history.  A1

FREEZE FRAME

At the moment the verdict was read, the whole country, it seemed, stood still.
A1

OPINIONS EVERYWHERE

Whether it was cheering or disappointment, everyone had a reaction to the
verdict.  A1

A SUSPECT NO MORE

O. J. Simpson left court free of criminal charges, but not of the side effects
of the case.  A10

LAWYERS AFTER A MARATHON

In the aftermath, lawyers on both sides of the case were emotional, for
different reasons.  A11

SIGNS FROM THE JURY

When the time came for the reading of the verdict, the jury in the Simpson case
spoke loudly with small gestures.  A11

A TELEVISION DAY

As television recorded the surreal day, sometimes the most effective
broadcasters were the ones who said nothing.  A12

DEAL-MAKERS' DELIGHT

With the end of the trial, book agents and others looking to turn the case into
gold got to work.  A10

A PRESIDENTIAL VETO

President Clinton vetoed a bill to pays for Congress's administrative expenses,
saying he would not approve the lawmakers' budget while other spending measures
were incomplete.  A22

DISSECTING A HEAT WAVE

Federal researchers have been trying to figure out why at least 500 people died
during a heat wave in Chicago last summer.  A9

REPUBLICAN AND GAY

Some gay Republicans are finding that they are encountering the most hostility
not from fellow party members, but from other homosexuals.  A9

RULING IN MAGAZINE CASE

A judge's ruling in a case involving an attempt to prevent Business Week from
publishing an article has set the stage for an appeals court battle.  A9

PROSTATE CANCER FINDING

A low-fat diet could help fight prostate cancer, new findings by researchers
suggest.  A14

Education B9

In Michigan, a high school designed for the high-tech future.

At the State Univeristy of New York, a plan for remedial education.

Metro Digest B1

CONSIDERING QUESTIONS OF FAITH

Like many area Catholics, the Reidy family of the Bronx will be touched by the
Pope's visit this week. It is a chance to think in a quiet, personal way about a
religion that so permeates their lives that they rarely have the chance to step
back and consider it. A1

Arts/Entertainment C13-20

A British art show expands into a festival of African culture.  C13

Theater: Cocteau Rep's "Waiting for Godot." C20

Film: "Lamerica." C13

"The Addiction." C16

"Kicking and Screaming." C16

Music: "Otello" at the Met.  C13

Dance: Peggy Spina.  C20

Books: Early days at the C.I.A.C19

Book Notes C19

Television: Shows about women on television.  C20

The Living Section C1-9

Virtual pornography. C1

 Battling bias in restaurants.  C1

Romancing the avocado. C6

Health Page C11

Personal Health: Active elders outstrip youth on fitness goals.

Rates of eating disorders outdistance earlier estimates.

Business Digest D1

Sports B10-15

Baseball: Yankees win Game 1.  B11

Braves Edge Rockies.  B41

Basketball: Nets sign O'Bannon.  B15

Columns: Vecsey on the Playoffs B11

Football: Hampton expected to miss one game.  B15

Hockey: Devils trade Lemieux.  B14

Obituaries B8

Judy Dearing, costume designer.

Henry Smith, congressman during the Vietnam and Watergate eras.

Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21

Editorials

The Simpson verdict.

A Pope for modern times.

Long night in Nigeria.

Plans to fly blind on the economy.

Letters

Thomas L. Friedman: The French ostrich.

Frank Rich: The L.A. shock treatment.

Scott Turow: Simpson prosecutors pay for their blunders.

Donald C. Alexander: Hired guns for the I.R.S.

Chronicle B2

Crossword C16

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Henry Smith, 85, Congressman In Vietnam and Watergate Eras

BYLINE: By RONALD SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 4;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 382 words


Henry P. Smith 3d, who served in the House of Representatives for 10 years,
representing the 36th District in Niagara and Erie Counties in western New York,
died on Sunday in Georgetown University Hospital in Washington. He was 85 and
lived in Washington.

The cause was cancer, his family said.

Mr. Smith, a Republican, withstood the Johnson Democratic landslide and was
elected in 1964 to the first of five terms. His turbulent decade in the House
spanned the student protests against the Vietnam War and the Watergate scandal.

In one of his first votes, in 1965, he departed from the conservative position
that would shape his record: he was the only House member to vote against a bill
to establish criminal penalties for people who destroyed their military draft
cards. Mr. Smith said that even though he supported the objectives of the bill,
he believed its penalties were too harsh.

In 1973, he provided an essential vote on the House Judiciary Committee, giving
reporters the right to refuse to reveal sources of information.

As the third-ranking Republican member of the committee, Mr. Smith also voted
against impeaching President Nixon, arguing that the evidence against him was
not strong enough. Shortly after the vote, he announced that he would not run
for re-election.

At the time, he called the Watergate scandal "stupid" and said he "hated to
belong to a stupid party."

A tall, lanky politician with silver hair and a deep, resonant voice, Mr. Smith
graduated from Dartmouth College and the Cornell University Law School. After
serving as Mayor of North Tonawanda, the suburb of Buffalo where he grew up, he
was appointed a surrogate and family court judge by Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller.

He then became the Niagara County Republican chairman before running for the
House. On his retirement, he was appointed the United States chairman of the
International Joint Commission, United States and Canada, by President Gerald R.
Ford, and he held the position until 1978.

In 1981, he became chairman of the Association to Unite the Democracies.

He is survived by his wife, Helen; three daughters, Susan McConnell and
Christiana Hays of Washington, and Lucinda Shave, of Apopka, Fla.; a brother,
John Belding, of West Yarmouth, Mass., and six grandchildren.

NAME: Henry P. Smith 3d

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Henry P. Smith 3d (Associated Press, 1974)


TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Four Old Boys and Their Adventures at the C.I.A.

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words



THE VERY BEST MEN
 Four Who Dared: The Early Years of the C.I.A.

By Evan Thomas

Illustrated. 427 pages. Simon & Schuster. $27.50

"You always assume," John Kennedy said, reflecting ruefully on the amateurish
disaster of the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba, "that the military and
intelligence people have some secret skill not available to ordinary mortals."
Kennedy's sentiment, cited in Evan Thomas's history of the first 15 or so years
of the Central Intelligence Agency, is probably shared by many who think of the
American espionage outfit as a tentacular institution endowed with arcane skills
that enable it to manipulate events in faraway places and leave no fingerprints.

By contrast, Mr. Thomas's description of the C.I.A., in which he dwells on its
failures in places as far apart as Cuba, China and the former Belgian Congo,
often makes the agency look like the coyote in a Road Runner cartoon, frequently
outwitted or foiled by its own feckless enthusiasm for its task. His focus is on
four ordinary, indeed rather tragic mortals, all senior officials in the
agency's clandestine services department -- or, as this sub-agency was briefly
called at its creation in 1948, the Office of Special Projects -- including
those who devised the Bay of Pigs.

The four, Frank Wisner, Richard Bissell, Tracy Barnes and Desmond FitzGerald,
were all members of the postwar WASP elite, a well-connected best-and-brightest,
prep-school-and-Ivy League group of social companions whose overconfidence and
naivete produced, as Mr. Thomas puts it in something of an understatement,
"results that were often frustrating and sometimes tragic."

In recounting their intertwined lives and careers, Mr. Thomas, who is the
Washington bureau chief of Newsweek magazine, has given us a brisk, readable,
lively account of 15 turbulent years of history. His writing is in the news
weekly tradition, informed, anecdotal, full of colorful details, but sometimes
short on full explanation. "The newspaper teletype lines chattering into the
Associated Press office in Vienna described, in heartbreaking cablese, what was
happening in Budapest," Mr. Thomas writes, evoking the scene when Mr. Wisner, on
a tour of the C.I.A.'s stations in Europe, learned about the 1956 Soviet
crackdown in Hungary. Mr. Thomas cites a few gripping lines coming over the
"chattering" teletype machine (whose text was not in cablese), but he does not
tell us who is sending the message, or for whom it was intended, or why it was
coming into the Associated Press office (it did not seem to be a news dispatch),
or even what the message had to do with Mr. Wisner.

Publicity for "Four Who Dared" stresses that Mr. Thomas, who is the author, with
Walter Isaacson, of "The Wise Men," a highly regarded history of postwar
American diplomacy, had privileged access to the C.I.A.'s own secret histories.
In fact, while Mr. Thomas is a careful and thorough researcher, his new book
provides little in the way of major revelations about recent history, no
dramatic new disclosures about the C.I.A.'s activities, be they operating the
espionage tunnel in Berlin of the mid-1950's or experimenting with LSD on
unsuspecting (and mostly black) subjects in the 1960's.

But Mr. Thomas says his book is "in many ways a social history," and here he
plows new and fascinating ground, describing the collective outlook of a group
of senior spies, barely remembered today, who were tied together by a web of
friendships and social connections as well as admiration for the exploits of
imperial England and the experience of victory in World War II. In "The Wise
Men," Mr. Thomas examined six other men from the same social background whose
invention of the postwar policy of containment of the Soviet Union was a
brilliant success. "The Very Best Men," a phrase that Mr. Thomas intones with
irony, describes the days when the C.I.A. was led by a group of talented
amateurs who went into espionage out of idealism and excitement but without much
understanding of how the world actually works. They came from the same
background as "the wise men" and socialized with some of them, but hardly
enjoyed anything like their historic triumph.

In fact, the four spies were classic liberal interventionists. They were also
afflicted with what the daughter of one of them insightfully called "the poetic
illusions" of their class, a phrase suggesting the elite postwar generation's
self-confident assumption that daring and good intentions could overcome all
obstacles. "The catalyst was World War II," Mr. Thomas writes. "They found in
their wartime experiences a sense of drama and meaning that could not be matched
back at their law firms or lecture halls in peacetime. They saw the opportunity
of American predominance and reached out to seize it."

Mr. Wisner was the first head of the clandestine services department. Mr.
Bissell created the U-2 spy plane but was also in charge during the series of
bungles that culminated in the Bay of Pigs. Mr. Barnes masterminded the
overthrow of the leftist Government of Guatemala in 1954 and Mr. FitzGerald,
formerly in charge of operations against Communist China in the 1950's,
eventually took charge of the attempts to assassinate Fidel Castro that
continued even after the Bay of Pigs calamity. Some of what these men fomented
looks so foolish as to defy belief. Mr. FitzGerald seriously proposed
assassinating Mr. Castro by placing an exploding seashell where the Cuban
leader, who enjoyed skin diving, might happen to pick it up.

But in 1962, Mr. FitzGerald presciently told Defense Secretary Robert S.
McNamara on an early visit to Vietnam that the war there could not be won by
conventional military means. How to account for the way in which brilliance
alternated with misconceived skulduggery? Mr. Thomas is more descriptive than
explanatory, which is a weakness in his book. Still, in portraying his four who
dared, Mr. Thomas has given his readers plenty to contemplate about an uniquely
American combination: hubris and idealism, genius and innocence, recklessness
and the burning desire to do something good.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Charles Veach, 51, Shuttle Astronaut

SECTION: Section D;  Page 23;  Column 6;  National Desk

LENGTH: 239 words


Charles Lacy Veach, an astronaut who flew into orbit on two space shuttle
missions in 1991 and 1992, died on Tuesday at his home in Houston. He was 51.

The cause was skin cancer, NASA said.

Mr. Veach joined NASA in 1982 as an engineer and research pilot at the Johnson
Space Center in Houston, and he became an astronaut in 1985. On April 28, 1991,
he was launched into space with six other astronauts aboard the shuttle
Discovery on an eight-day Defense Department mission. As a mission specialist,
he operated numerous instruments, including an X-ray telescope and an infrared
telescope that observed Earth's atmosphere and the "Southern lights," or aurora
australis.

On his second shuttle flight, aboard the Columbia, he spent 10 days in space
with five other astronauts, beginning on Oct. 22, 1992. The crew deployed the
Laser Geodynamics Satellite, which has a mirrored surface that reflects laser
beams to measure movements of Earth's crust.

Mr. Veach was born in Chicago and graduated from the United States Air Force
Academy with a bachelor's degree in 1966. He became an Air Force pilot the next
year, and he served as a fighter pilot for 14 years. He flew in the United
States, Europe and the Far East, including 275 combat missions in Vietnam.

Mr. Veach is survived by his wife, Alice; a son, Marshall, and a daughter,
Katherine, all of Houston, and by his parents, Mr. and Mrs. Marshall Veach of
Honolulu.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
Orgy of Memoirs

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 29;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 698 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


If Bill Clinton ever gets the urge to let Jimmy Carter meddle in foreign affairs
again, he should read this passage in "In Confidence," the just-published
memoirs of former Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin:

"Jimmy Carter paid me an unexpected visit on January 30 [1984] to voice concern
at the extent of Reagan's arms buildup." To undermine U.S. peace overtures,
Carter sent this secret message to Moscow: "The former President was 'utterly
convinced' that there would not be a single agreement on arms control,
especially on nuclear arms, as long as Reagan remained in power."

Nice to know that our embittered ex-President tried to get the Evil Empire to
disbelieve his successor's demarche. But that's only one of the insights in this
season's memoirs.

Bush Secretary of State James Baker writes: "In mid-October [1990], Colin Powell
telephoned me and said 'I'd like to have a little private chat with you.' . . .
Since Powell had asked that the meeting be private, I respected his wishes and
dispensed with my usual custom of informing [Secretary of Defense] Dick Cheney
of any such contacts."

According to Baker, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs circumvented the Pentagon's
civilian chief to "get a better sense" of what Baker thought of putting
military-diplomatic pressure on Saddam Hussein.

If true, this would portray General Powell on a devious end run, because, as
Baker puts it, "he knew that I had a close personal relationship with the
President." Baker protests too much: "Some have suggested that Powell and I knew
that we were both opposed to the use of force and that he was soliciting my help
. . .," which he denies.

Poor Baker; duped again into thinking he was someone's confidant. When I read
this passage to two men who were Assistant Secretaries of Defense at the time --
Richard Perle and Richard Armitage -- both told me they believed that Powell had
fully informed Secretary Cheney of the "private" meeting with Baker. Reached in
Dallas, Dick Cheney says he doubts that Powell kept talks with Baker from him.

Which brings us to "My American Journey," Powell's memoir, in which the
potential candidate for President refers to Armitage throughout as "my brother
and bodyguard," "confidant," "ever-resourceful," "friend of the heart."

This personal warmth in the general's life story certifies Rich Armitage as
Powell's most intimate associate. They were comrades in Washington's
bureaucratic wars; they consult today. If Powell ever becomes President, you can
expect the gruff, heavy-set, outspoken Armitage to be Secretary of Defense or
White House chief of staff.

Now let us add a political dimension to that closeness in Powell's memoir.
Armitage, years ago, dared to cross Ross Perot on the matter of Vietnam M.I.A.'s
and P.O.W.'s.

The vindictive Perot put his head together with the radical leftist Christic
Institute, which had sued Armitage for being a drug-and-gun-running C.I.A.
operative in some vast conspiracy. The suit was thrown out of court and the
complainant fined. Perot later took some of those phony allegations to the
F.B.I.; its inquiry cleared Armitage.

But when his perceived archenemy was nominated to be Secretary of the Army,
Perot dragged out all the discredited charges. Armitage went to see his
tormentor and tells me he heard another smear about a Vietnamese woman he knew a
generation ago. Perot's abuse did not let up; Armitage withdrew his name, though
he later took ambassadorial assignments.

That searing experience may be why Armitage is now advising his friend not to
expose himself and family to the reputational rigors of a campaign.

Here then is Perot, who Powell told friends is a nut case, talking to the
general about his Independent Party. And Powell pretends to listen.

Forget it. Memoirs demonstrate that Powell and Armitage are best friends; I know
that Armitage and Perot despise each other; and any political deal between
Powell and Perot would reflect disloyalty and dishonor on Powell, a man who
reveres loyalty and honor.

"How profoundly human nature and indeed human relations affect the outcome of
events," writes the Communist memoirist Dobrynin. How true, Anatoly.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Eiji Okada, 75, Japanese Co-Star of 'Hiroshima, Mon Amour'

BYLINE: By RONALD SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section D;  Page 23;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 291 words


Eiji Okada, the Japanese actor who starred in "Hiroshima, Mon Amour" and "Woman
in the Dunes" and who in his only Hollywood film appeared opposite Marlon Brando
in "The Ugly American," died on Sept. 14. He was 75 and lived in Japan.

Mr. Okada was cast in a number of Japanese films in the 1950's. But it was not
until he appeared in Alain Resnais's 1959 film about the aftermath of the atomic
bombing of Hiroshima that he gained an international reputation.

In fact, it was his performance as the handsome, enigmatic Japanese architect
who has an affair with a French actress that prompted Mr. Brando to recruit Mr.
Okada for a leading role in "The Ugly American" (1963), as the leader of a
fictional Southeast Asian country strongly suggesting South Vietnam.

His most memorable scenes in "Hiroshima" were his haunting rebukes to the
actress, played by Emmanuele Riva, "You have seen nothing in Hiroshima,
nothing."

But his most famous role in Japanese film was as the entomologist in the 1964
film "Woman in the Dunes," in which he discovers an attractive widow living at
the bottom of an enormous sandpit on a deserted beach. He spends most of the
film endlessly shoveling sand in a desperate attempt to avoid being buried
alive.

His other films, many of which appeared throughout the world, include "She and
He" (1964) and "This Transient Life" (1971).

Although Mr. Okada continued to appear in films, he devoted most of his time to
his primary interest, the theater, founding a company with his wife, Aiko Wasa.

Before his career as an actor, Mr. Okada served in the Japanese Army in World
War II and worked as a traveling salesman and a miner until he made his first
film, "Until the Day We Meet Again," in 1950.

NAME: Eiji Okada

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Finally Famous In Films, Back to Theater

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section C;  Page 17;  Column 3;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1270 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO


In the last two years, Gary Sinise's movie career has taken off like a moonshot.
After playing pivotal supporting roles in two Tom Hanks hits, "Forrest Gump" and
"Apollo 13," and winning an Academy Award nomination for his performance in
"Forrest Gump," he moved on to "Truman," incarnating the President in the HBO
movie based on his life.

Now, with Hollywood stardom very much in his trajectory, Mr. Sinise has taken a
characteristic 90-degree turn. He has returned, for the present, to his
alternate career as a director in the theater, working with Sam Shepard on a
partly revised version of the playwright's Pulitzer Prize-winning "Buried
Child." The production, which stars James Gammon, Lois Smith and Ethan Hawke,
recently opened the season at the Steppenwolf Theater Company, the celebrated
troupe that Mr. Sinise and two friends founded 20 years ago.

Mr. Sinise remains unpredictable, and that in itself is a key to his durability.
With a devilish smile, he said, "I like to keep them guessing." The guessing
continues. What will he do next? Direct Mr. Hanks in a movie, carry a major film
by himself or act and direct onstage? The answer is all of the above, each in
its own time.

For Mr. Sinise, who is 40, it has been a gradual but continuous progression.
Finally claiming the spotlight by himself, he couldn't be happier. He has a zeal
for whatever project he is immersed in, and in common with many of his
characters, he has never been one to accept discouragement.

In "Buried Child," Dodge, the crusty old grandfather played by Mr. Gammon,
overflows with unsolicited advice. At one point, he says: "Persistence,
fortitude and determination, those are the virtues, the principles on which the
country was founded. You stick with those three, and you can't go wrong." And to
his hapless son who says he is unable to figure anything out, Dodge adds:
"What's to figure out? You just forge ahead."

Assuming a whiskyed Walter Brennan voice, Mr. Sinise quoted Dodge's philosophy
with affection. "Forge ahead!" he repeated, and quickly acknowledged the
dialogue as a commentary on the course of his own career.

An indifferent student in high school (in Highland Park, Ill., a suburb north of
Chicago), he spent much of his time playing guitar with rock bands. Skipping
college, he entered the theater at 18, without professional training. Together
with his friends Terry Kinney and Jeff Perry, and with financial help from their
families, he started a theater in a church basement near his home. "Our first
patron was Jeff's mom," he said.

Against the odds, Steppenwolf persisted, gathering talented young performers
(John Malkovich, Laurie Metcalf, Joan Allen and Glenne Headly, among others) and
competing with institutions like the Goodman Theater. Along the way, the company
created its own identity and performance style: visceral, kinetic and restlessly
inventive.

After winning awards in Chicago, Steppenwolf triumphed in New York with Mr.
Sinise's rousing revival of Mr. Shepard's "True West," starring the director and
John Malkovich. The actors played brothers in collision: Mr. Malkovich as a
renegade desert rat, Mr. Sinise as a restrained, hopeful Hollywood screenwriter.
The production reclaimed the play after it had failed at the Public Theater, and
it catapulted Mr. Malkovich into a film career.

Subsequent Steppenwolf plays brought other actors to public prominence, although
Mr. Sinise stayed in the background. The Tony Award-winning production of "The
Grapes of Wrath" was his first breakthrough, followed by his film of "Of Mice
and Men." But it was not until "Forrest Gump" that he fully emerged from the
ensemble.

As an actor, Mr. Sinise has scrupulously avoided typecasting. It is a leap from
Lieutenant Dan, the crippled Vietnam veteran in "Forrest Gump," to the astronaut
in "Apollo 13," to Truman. But these roles and others, like Tom Joad in "The
Grapes of Wrath," share a commonality of integrity: each is a reluctant American
hero, a man who is confronted by a challenge and accepts it.

What appealed to Mr. Sinise about Lieutenant Dan was the character's
transformation: from patriotic warrior to disillusioned victim to a man at peace
with himself. When the director Ron Howard offered him his choice of astronauts
in "Apollo 13" (except for Jim Lovell, who was played by Mr. Hanks), Mr. Sinise
picked the smallest role, that of Ken Mattingly, who was scratched from the
flight at the last minute. The actor thought that Mattingly was the most
compelling character.

"He lived his whole life for this shot at the moon," Mr. Sinise said. "He's told
he's not going, and there's nothing for him to do." After the accident in space,
he is called to help bring the crew back to Earth. "I like the way he loses his
hope and gets it back in the end."

Mr. Sinise had doubts about playing Harry Truman until he watched film of the
President's speech at the 1948 Democratic convention. "It was a fiery speech,"
he said. "He was very mad and very animated. I was fascinated by his life's
journey. He has to become Presidential and fly by the seat of his pants."

It is a sense of transformation that also draws Mr. Sinise to the work of Mr.
Shepard, "the idea of characters changing into six different people, of having
circumstance change your psychology, turning a passive character into an active
character." In "True West," for example, Mr. Sinise's character reverses himself
by the end of the play and "becomes a wild, psychotic individual."

Despite the fact that Mr. Sinise feels "simpatico with Sam's plays," the revival
of "Buried Child" is the first time they have collaborated. Several times the
playwright drove to Chicago from his new home in Minnesota to consult with Mr.
Sinise and to sit in on rehearsals. In his rewriting, the playwright reduced the
length of some of the dialogue, including Dodge's last will, and added to the
tension of the mystery of the buried child. As before, the play is an explosive
comic nightmare about an ingrown American family hiding a dark secret and arming
itself against the encroachment of reality.

"I think it's Sam's best play," said Mr. Sinise. "It has all the elements --
mystery, horror and pain -- and it's hysterically funny. He doesn't write things
that are all logical and linear. Just like life, he leaves many questions
unanswered." As director, Mr. Sinise said, he has tried "to emphasize the sharp
turns of the play."

"Sam is constantly shifting gears. Power shifts around the room. There are
little cyclones." Then he quoted a line, "Madness under the skin," adding,
"That's what the play is: madness under the skin. It finally cuts through."


For Steppenwolf, "Buried Child" is a sign of renewed affirmation. In this
anniversary year, Mr. Sinise and his original founding partners have stepped
back in to take a more active role in the company (with Martha Lavey as the new
artistic director). In a time of retrenchment, Steppenwolf is expanding, opening
a second stage and beginning construction soon on studio and office space.

Later in the season, both Mr. Malkovich and Frank Galati have projects
scheduled. Periodically, Mr. Sinise will return from Pasadena, Calif., where he
lives with his wife, Moira Harris, a Steppenwolf actress, and their three
children. Along with other members of the company, he has always regarded
Steppenwolf as his home base. He plans to forge ahead -- as an actor and
director in both theater and films. Reflecting on the diversity of his career,
he said, "People will only underestimate you if you deserve to be
underestimated." Give 'em hell, Gary.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos:Gary Sinise (top, at right) directing Ethan Hawke, left, Ted
Levine and James Gammon in Sam Shepard's "Buried Child" at the Steppenwold
Theater in Chicago. Mr. Sinise, above, in "Truman", top left, in "Forest Gump,"
and bottom left, in "Apollo 13."


TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

International Briefs;
Ford Motor in Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;  Page 7;  Column 5;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 75 words


The Ford Motor Company has broken ground for its first assembly plant in
Vietnam, the company said yesterday. Ford is building the factory with a joint
venture partner, Song Cong Diesel, in Hai Hung Province, 35 miles east of Hanoi.

Ford plans to assemble cars and trucks at the plant, which is expected to cost
$102 million. Construction is to begin within three months, and the first Fords
are to roll off the assembly line in late 1997.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Doesn't Stint on Defense Readiness

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 12;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 323 words


To the Editor:

Andrew Cockburn's "Swords Into Stock Shares" (Op-Ed, Oct. 3) incorrectly asserts
that the Defense Department has slighted readiness to keep its procurement
budget high.

From its peak in 1985, defense spending has fallen by 40 percent after
inflation, and procurement is down 70 percent. The number of men and women
serving in the active-duty military is 33 percent lower today than at the end of
the cold war.

But this peace dividend has not come at the cost of readiness. In the drawdowns
following World War II, Korea and Vietnam, readiness slipped badly. By contrast,
the Clinton Administration has kept readiness high, favoring training,
operations and maintenance over procurement. Our forces have performed well,
wherever called -- in Rwanda, in Haiti and in the skies over Bosnia.

"The demands upon our forces these last two years have reinforced the wisdom of
putting readiness first . . . near-term readiness today remains at historically
high levels," the Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman, Gen. John Shalikashvili,
recently told the Senate Armed Services Committee.

Other points in the article are wrong. In particular, Mr. Cockburn incorrectly
states Defense Secretary William Perry, the Director of Central Intelligence,
John M. Deutch, and Paul Kaminski, Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition
and Technology, "controlled" a defense contractor that received a small contract
from the Defense Department. They do not control any Defense contractors.

An investment partnership in which they have interests, which they have not been
able to sell, helped finance about a dozen small companies, including several
that have won defense contracts. They have recused themselves completely from
any dealings with these companies, and the Senate Armed Services Committee has
approved these arrangements.

KENNETH H. BACON
Assistant to Secy. of Defense
for Public Affairs
Washington, Oct. 5, 1995

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Trading Villains' Horns for Halos

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1227 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AS history unfolds, statesman and warriors rise and fall, their fates and
reputations often turning on unexpected events or the requirements imposed on
them by others. Just as political figures who are lionized one day can be cast
out of the family of nations the next, pariahs can be reinvented as peacemakers.

That is what seems to be happening in the Balkans. To secure peace in Bosnia the
Clinton Administration is setting aside its contempt for Slobodan Milosevic's
brand of Serbian nationalism and inviting him to America. The man who did the
most to abet the slaughter of Bosnia's Muslims three years ago has already been
rewarded for his belated readiness to settle with them.

President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia will be at the peace talks as well -- his
rantings against the Muslims and the recent atrocities by his troops overlooked.


Rehabilitating Like Robespierre

Personal histories, after all, often change with time. Robespierre, the French
revolutionary who was responsible for the worst excesses of the Terror,
underwent a decades-long rehabilitation after his death. Napoleon began the
process, telling intimates that Robespierre fell not because he wanted to
continue the Terror, but because he wanted to end it.

Political transformations are particularly common when a time of war is ending.
By definition, one makes peace with one's enemies, not with one's friends, and
once a warmaker leaves his gun outside the meeting room, it would be difficult,
and probably foolish, to deny him a seat at the peace table.

"Some leaders can change," says Robert Jay Lifton, a psychiatrist who has
written extensively about the psychology of genocide. "We have to have room in
our understanding of leaders who have engaged in violence and terror, room for
the possibility of their undergoing a change." But Mr. Lifton adds an important
caveat: "Is the alleged change being imagined by others, by those who render him
a statesman?"

The Palestine Liberation Organization leader, Yasir Arafat, was transformed
overnight from guerrilla leader to budding statesman at the moment in 1993 that
he agreed to negotiate a peace with Israel. In the two years that have followed,
his relationship with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel (with whom he
shared the Nobel Peace Prize) has become so routine -- if not cozy -- that Mr.
Rabin and his wife sent the Arafats a baby present after the birth of their
daughter.

Finding the Good Side

Often, to arrive at peace a mediator must split the persona of the would-be
peacemaker in two, ignoring his acts of brutality and concentrating on his
capacity for doing good. President Hafez al-Assad of Syria ordered the massacre
of 20,000 Syrian civilians in the city of Hama 13 years ago. But that has not
kept American officials from sitting down with him in hopes of making peace.
"Mr. Assad probably would stand behind an agreement once it had been reached,"
former Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d wrote in his memoirs. "I had no
illusions about his ruthlessness and his dismal history of harboring
terrorists."

Now both the Americans and the Europeans have chosen to overlook the dark side
of Mr. Milosevic, the Serbian President , whose unleashing of Serbian
nationalism paved the way for the breakup of Yugoslavia and the terror that
followed.

In its first two years, the Clinton Administration avoided contact with Mr.
Milosevic, in part because the Bush Administration had named him and the Bosnian
Serb leaders Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic as possible war criminals who
should be held accountable someday for crimes against humanity. (That gesture
was an artificial one, made by an Administration that did little to avert or
stop the war in Bosnia and by a Secretary of State, Lawrence S. Eagleburger, who
believed all three sides were to blame.) Mr. Karadzic and Mr. Mladic have since
been indicted by an international war crimes tribunal; Mr. Milosevic has not.

Then the Clinton Administration concluded that the only way to make peace in
Bosnia was for the United States to do the deal itself, and to do it with Mr.
Milosevic, who has shown he can deliver the Serb leaders of Bosnia.

So now the transformation of Slobodan Milosevic is well under way. The West no
longer treats him as a liar whose word cannot be trusted, but has begun to
portray him as a reliable partner with reasonable goals. If the talks produce
true peace, this former banker and Communist may even be hailed as a visionary.

Last month, France's Foreign Minister, Henri de Charette, said it would be "very
probable and desirable" that Mr. Milosevic would come to France once the peace
process got under way. As part of the American-brokered cease-fire deal last
week, the United States invited him, along with Mr. Tudjman and President Alija
Izetbegovic of Bosnia, to talks on ending the war.

That decision has its critics. "There is an impulse towards self-deception
because it seems to serve peace," says Dr. Lifton. "Reinventing Milosevic will
have terrible costs and will impair the peace process because nobody trusts him,
probably least of all his people. Somebody so recently involved in genocide is a
very dubious symbol of peacemaking."

Making Tudjman Welcome

President Tudjman of Croatia, unlike Mr. Milosevic, was never shunned by the
international community, despite his racist views and his territorial ambitions,
so he never had to be reinvented. In 1993, he was given a visa to attend the
opening of the Holocaust Museum in Washington even though he had written that
estimates of the number of Jewish victims in the Holocaust were vastly inflated
and that the main characteristics of Jews were "selfishness, craftiness,
unreliability, miserliness, underhandedness and secrecy." (He has since
apologized for his anti-Semitic views). Last year, Mr. Tudjman was welcomed to
the White House and lauded as a man of peace by President Clinton after he
agreed to join a federation with the Bosnian Government against the Serbs. No
matter that Mr. Tudjman has boasted of his own expansionist intentions regarding
large swaths of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Even now, Mr. Tudjman makes no secret of his contempt for the Muslim-dominated
Government with which he is allied. And last Friday, he admitted his troops
committed atrocities in overrunning the Serb-held Krajina area, but explained
away the "looting and robbery, scorching and bombing, even killing" as
"inevitable occurrences in wartime."

The Clinton Administration makes no excuses for inviting its new negotiating
partners to talk. "We didn't invent these people," says Richard C. Holbrooke,
the chief American negotiator. "They invented themselves, and created a hellhole
out of what was once a fragile and peaceful country. Our role has been to
encourage them towards peace."

Whether Mr. Milosevic and Mr. Tudjman eventually are honored as peacemakers
depends on how serious they are. Even Mr. Holbrooke says his "worst nightmare"
for Bosnia is that it may still play out the way Vietnam did. Although Secretary
of State Henry A. Kissinger hammered out a peace accord with Le Duc Tho, by the
time the two negotiators were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in late 1973 North
Vietnam was already violating every provision of the cease-fire. In the end the
peace collapsed and North Vietnam used force to annex the South.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Serbia's President, Slobodan Milosevic, at Serbia's tomb of the
unknown soldier last March. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Everywhere, Weapons That Keep On Killing

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 993 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


KEN RUTHERFORD, an American relief worker for the International Rescue
Committee, was traveling a dusty road in rural Somalia on Dec. 16, 1993, when,
he recalled, "the whole front of the car blew up." He looked down and saw his
right foot, torn off by a land mine. "I was trying to put it back on," he said,
"and it kept falling off."

He was rushed to Switzerland and the United States for treatment, which so far
has cost $250,000. But Mr. Rutherford, 33, who will soon undergo more surgery to
reconstruct his mangled left foot, considers himself lucky. "The only reason I'm
here is because I was born in this country," he said in an interview last week.
"In developing countries, they don't have a chance."

Wars come and wars go, but land mines seem to last forever, perpetuating the
slaughter long after the armies have gone home. Up to 110 million mines
contaminate the soil of 64 countries, and mines kill or injure more than 20,000
civilians a year, the United Nations estimates. Several million of them lie
buried in Croatia and Bosnia, where the cease-fire has now increased the
prospects for the eventual deployment of American peacekeeping troops.

Always Planting

In fact, while about 100,000 mines are cleared annually, two million to five
million more are planted, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said last
month. "If that trend continues," he said in a statement delivered to a United
Nations conference on land mines in Vienna, "the international community will
have to clear mines well into the third millenium and will have to suffer,
between now and then, the loss of several million people who will be wounded or
killed."

The 79 nations gathered in Vienna are discussing an indiscriminate weapon
likelier to kill or maim farmers, shepherds, refugees and other civilians than
soldiers. Proposals range from a total ban to requiring that some mines
incorporate a timing device that will deactivate or destroy them after a set
period.

The conference, which ends Oct. 13, is reviewing part of a 1980 Convention on
conventional weapons covering land mines and booby traps. Forty-nine nations,
including the United States, have signed the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, as it is formally
titled.

Twenty-nine nations have stopped exporting anti-personnel mines. Belgium passed
the first law banning their production, use and export. Austria destroyed its
stockpile and France has begun doing so.

"The United States should be showing a lot more leadership than it is," said
Senator Patrick Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, who wants a year's moratorium on the
use of some anti-personnel mines by the American armed forces.

Almost everyone agrees that land mines have wreaked tragedy on innocent
civilians like Mr. Rutherford, but consensus on what to do remains elusive.
"There are a lot of practical problems," said Joerg Wimmers, a lawyer with the
United Nations Mines Clearance Unit. For one, land mines are cheap and
accessible to poorer nations. An anti-personnel mine can cost as little as $2,
prompting Senator Leahy to call them the "Saturday night specials of warfare."

Some nations contend that land mines have legitimate uses. "Mines are effective
defensive weapons for many countries, especially developing ones, to resist
foreign aggression," Li Chenghe of China, a leading producer of mines, said at
the Vienna conference. And Gilbert Chauny of Peru asked other delegates to
consider the "special situation" of countries afflicted by criminal and
terrorist groups.

No Civil Wars

Even if nations restrict some types of mines, compliance is almost impossible to
verify. And the 1980 Convention applies to wars between nations, not to internal
conflicts like those in Angola, Cambodia or Bosnia.

Mine warfare dates to the American Civil War, when General William Tecumseh
Sherman, who was never squeamish, denounced land mines as a "violation of
civilized warfare." A century later, as many as a third of American casualties
in Vietnam were caused by mines, many of them American-made.

By now, they have become so routine in military arsenals that it is difficult to
create the kind of international consensus that produced sweeping bans on
chemical weapons, for example. Johan Molander, chairman of the Vienna
conference, has admitted that "no rule of international law pertaining to the
use of a weapon will stand a chance to be observed if it is incompatible with
perceived legitimate defense interests."

To rid the world of all buried land mines would cost as much as $58 billion.
Kuwait spent $800 million purging its territory of mines after the gulf war. But
even where other mine-clearing operations are underway, as in Afghanistan or
Mozambique, mines still get exploded, as a de-mining specialist phrased it, "one
arm and one leg at a time".

Senator Leahy's proposal for a moratorium passed the Senate last month by a vote
of 67 to 27. Though the amendment would not take effect for three years and
would exempt mines fenced along frontiers and demilitarized zones, the Pentagon
has lobbied to block it. Gen. John Shalikashvili, the chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, said land mines were needed to minimize American war casualties
-- an argument that Senator Leahy said was made for poison gas after World War
I.

Self-Destructing

The Clinton Administration proposed that some types of anti-personnel mines
carry self-destruct mechanisms, but such devices have a failure rate of about 10
percent. In any case, poorer nations have little incentive to pay extra for a
mine that renders itself inoperable after 60 or 90 days.

Senator Leahy said he fears the continuing toll could include Americans sent to
keep peace in Bosnia, which is strewn with about 1.5 million mines. "Some poor
sergeant out on patrol will get killed," he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: At a rehabilitation center near Ho Chi Minh City, new patients
line up to receive artificial legs and wheelchairs. Some lost legs during the
war, and some more recently, when land mines planted long ago exploded. Two such
centers, financed by a Vietnamese-American, have aided 13,000 amputees since
1991. (Photographs by Lois Raimondo for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Wartime Correspondents Gather And Remember Slain Colleagues

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 26;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 403 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 7


Some of the journalists who covered the wars of this century remembered their
lost comrades at a bittersweet reunion today and told each other their best
stories.

World War II correspondents met those who had covered later conflicts -- in
Korea, Indochina, the Middle East, the Persian Gulf and Bosnia -- at a daylong
gathering that the 300 participants ranked as the largest ever held in the
United States.

It began with tributes to the 250 reporters, broadcasters and news photographers
who have been killed since the Spanish Civil War. Participants gathered at a
willow oak tree and marble memorial in Arlington National Cemetery that was
dedicated at the first such gathering, in 1986, to the journalists "who died
while covering wars and conflicts for the American people."

They reassembled for an exhibition of war photographs and an evening of war
songs and anecdotes.

"I was only the storyteller, never supposed to fall on foreign field. My bullet,
that which cut my story, end untold, was random," wrote 90-year-old Boyd Lewis,
European news manager for United Press at the end of World War II, in a poem he
read at the memorial service.

David Halberstam, the master of ceremonies at the cemetery, said that in
Vietnam, "everyone was scared, every day." He added, "They knew full well of the
danger, but they also knew that journalism mattered here, mattered on this
assignment more than in most places." Mr. Halberstam became a top-selling author
after reporting wars for The New York Times in Angola and Vietnam and sharing a
Pulitzer Prize.

Dan de Luce, Max Desfor and Horst Faas, all winners of Pulitzer Prizes in
journalism, placed wreaths at the "He Who Finds a Truth Lights a Torch" monument
honoring fallen war correspondents. Another wreath was placed by relatives of
Ted Yates, who was killed in Jordan in 1967.

Mr. DeLuce, who retired as deputy general manager of The Associated Press,
reported some of the bloodiest fighting on the Italian and Western fronts in
World War II. Mr. Desfor, who began as an A.P. photographer during World War II,
won his Pulitzer in Korea. Mr. Faas covered wars in Vietnam and Bangladesh and
is the A.P. photo chief for Europe.

Sally Kaplan, the widow of David Kaplan, an ABC news producer killed in 1992 by
a sniper in Sarajevo, said she thought her husband's death had made people more
aware of the killing going on in the former Yugoslavia.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Portrait of The American Child, 1995

BYLINE: By CAMILLE SWEENEY

SECTION: Section 6; Page 52; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 988 words



THERE ARE ABOUT -- 57 milion children under 15, about 22 percent of the
population. About 79 percent are white, 16 percent blck and 5 percent Asian or
Pacific Islander, America Indian, Eskimo or Aleutian. About 12 percent of the
population is of Hispanic origin.

IN 1994, THERE -- were an estimated 3,949,000 births. This was the first time
since 1989 that the total has fallen under four million. The decline indicates
an echo effect, as the outsize number of baby-boom mothers start to pass out of
their childbearing years.

THE NUMBER OF-- children per woman has decreased from 3.6 in 1960 to 2.0; today.
Nearly 1 potential mother in 10 now says she never expects to bear a child.

THE AVERAGE AGE-- of a first time mother is 23.7, only slightly higher than the
average age of first-time mothers in 1940 but nearly two years higher than in
1960. First-time fathers then and now are typically three or four years older.

THE INFANT MORTALITY-- rate decreased from 10.6 per 1,000 births in 1985 to 8.5
in 1992. This has been attributed to expanded Medicaid coverage, better
nutrition and better medical technology. Even so, a recent report found that the
rate is still lower in 22 other developed countries.

AMERICA RANKS 31ST-- in the percentage of low-birth-weight babies, behind
Turkey, Iran and even Romnia. Washington, D.C., has the highest U.S.
concentration of low-birth-weight births, 14.3 percent as of 1991, compared with
10 percent for New York City and 7.1 percent for the country.

THE PROPORTION OF--multiple births to all births in America is still very small,
2.4 percet in 1992. Nonetheless, since the early 70's the multiple-birth rate
has increased by a third. The increase is attributable to an increase in births
to older women, an incease in infertility service seekers and new drugs and
treatments.

RECENT DATA SHOW-- that 42 percent of families with children under 18 have only
one child in the household. In 1960, the figure was only 32 percent. Now, 6
percent have four or more children. Then, the figure was 17 percent.

SINCE 1950, THE -- number of American children living in mother-only families
has quadrupled , from about 5 million to nearly 20 million, and since 1970 the
number of single parents has tripled, from about a million to about 12 million.
About 26 percent of households with children under 18 now have only a mother at
home and another 4 percent have only a father. The highest concentrations of
such single-parent households are in Louisiana, Mississippi,Tennessee and
Washington, D.C.

ONE OF EVERY--six children is a stepchild. One of every eleven adults is
divorced, three times the proportion in 1970.

IN 1991, OF-- the total amount of child support supposed to be paid, only 67
percent was ctually paid.

AS OF 1992 -- the median income of families with children was $35,100. The
official poverty level for a family of four was $14,763. There are more than 14
million children living in poverty in the U.S. In recent study, the U.S. ranked
worst among 18 western industrialized nations for the percentage of children
living in poverty.

AN ESTIMATED 464,000-- childen were in foster homes, group homes or residential
treatment centers on any single day in 1993. That's only 0.5 percent of all
children, but it represents an increase of 77 percent since 1982

ABOUT 200,000 WOMEN-- a year are trying to adopt a child.

IN RECENT YEARS, about 200,000 children 14 and under immigrate to the United
States annually. Nearly a quarter of the children come from Mexico, with high
concentrations from the former Soviet Union, Vietnam, India and China. New York
City's public school student body represents children from 188 countries.

IN CONSTANT DOLLARS-- in 1959-60 public schools spent $1,765 per student in
average daily attendance. By 1980, that amount had more than doubled. By 1990,
it hadmore than tripled.

STUDENT--TEACHER RATIOS-- in public schools have been decreasing steadily
nationwide. In 1940, there was 29 students per teacher; in 1950, 17.2. New York
City's ratio of 18 is only slightly higher than the national average, but with
current budget cuts, the number of students per classroom in the city is on the
rise.

OVER 25 YEARS-- national averages for reading and math at the grade-school level
have not changed significantly. The most recent report indicates that 42 percent
of fourth graders scored below the basic reading level, and 41 percent scored
below the basic math level.

AVERAGE COMBINED SCORES-- on the Scholastic Aptitude Test have dropped 78 points
since 1963. The latest national average S.A.T. scores are 424 in verbal and 478
in math.

THE NO. 1-- foreign language studied in public schools is spanish, with 443,000
students in 1948 and more than 2.5 million by the early 90's. Only French has
come close.

SINCE 1978, THE-- number of children receiving home schooling has jumped from
12,500 to 1 million.

FROM 1995 TO-- 1994, the number of reported cases of child abuse nationwide
increased 64 percent. More than three million cases were reported in 1993. It's
estimated that third of all cases are reported are substantiated. It is also
estimated that three children died each day in the U.S. in 1994 as a result of
maltreatment.

IN A RECENT-- study, the U.S. ranked in the lower half of Western industrialized
countries in providing services for family support.

PUBLIC CONCERN ABOUT-- teen-age pregnancy appears to be having an effect. The
Government reported last month that the birthrate among teen-agers dropped 2
percent in 1993. That followed a drop of 2 percent in 1992. Even so, teen
pregnancy rates are significantly higher in the U.S. than in many developed
countries--twice as high as in England, France and Canada, and nine times as
high as in the Netherlands and Japan. Every day in America, 1,340 teen-agers
give birth.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

My Parents' Bust-Up, And Mine

BYLINE: By WALTER KIRN;   Walter Kirn is the author of "My Hard Bargain," a
collection of stories, and "She Needed Me," a novel.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 74;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2090 words


My parents stayed together for the sake of the children. When the children were
grown and settled, my parents divorced -- for their own sake. My brother was 25
and single, studying for a graduate degree; I was 27 and newly married, about to
publish my first book of stories. Because Mom and Dad had decided to tough it
out (29 years in all), we faced their breakup not as vulnerable kids but as
self-sufficient adults. You'd think it would have been easier that way: no
custody battle, no child-support brouhaha, no change of schools, no teen-age
identity crises.

You'd think I'd thank my parents for their decision.

Here is what I learned, though: when the rug is pulled out from under you
emotionally, it isn't necessarily an advantage to be standing on your own two
feet. Nothing is quite so shocking, somehow, as news you've been half-expecting
all your life.

I got the word on a pay phone, in a Salt Lake City Dairy Queen. My wife and I
had been camping in the Rockies and were ready to fly home to New York. My
parents, who'd been camping with us, had already driven back to Minnesota, the
state where I grew up. The trip had been tense, my parents grumpy and distant,
but I felt I had to phone them. I'd read something wild in the local paper: a
dead school friend of mine whose funeral had been a month ago (his overturned
raft was found floating in Puget Sound) had turned up alive in a tiny Western
jail.

"Karl faked his own death!" I told my mother. "Can you believe it?"

"Walt, I'm leaving your father. I'm moving out tonight. Our marriage is over.
I'm sorry. We're really finished."

I stood there. All around me families licked ice-cream cones. Big happy Mormon
families, by the looks of them.

"I'm sorry," my mother said. Her voice was gravelly. "Maybe you could call your
brother and give him the telephone number where I'll be staying."

When I hung up, my wife asked what was wrong. We'd been married less than two
years, and I knew in an instant that we would not have wed if what had just
happened had happened years earlier. I wouldn't have had the faith, the
optimism. Indeed, I was already losing it.

"They're getting divorced," I said.

My wife just sighed. Her own parents had split up when she was tiny. "It's
probably for the best," she said. "After seeing them together, I'm not
surprised."

"Well, I am!" I shouted. "I'm surprised!"

I was and I wasn't; I just needed to shout. I shouted a lot that year. Shouted
so much, in fact, and so crazily (often while drunk and often in my sleep) that
by year's end I'd be divorced myself.

Let's take the bust-ups in order, though.

Let's follow the long, branching crack from the beginning.

Some people grew up during the Depression, some during World War II or Vietnam.
That's how they place themselves historically: as children of some great,
defining calamity.

I grew up during Divorce.

Though it took two more decades to infect me personally, the plague broke out
around 1973 -- at least in the sheltered Middle West. We were living, our
buttoned-down family of four, in a Minnesota village whose men commuted to
dentist-accountant-type jobs in Minneapolis-St. Paul. The town had a white
clapboard general store, a hilltop elementary school. Our horizon was ringed by
soft, round human hills, the streets shaded by towering vase-shaped elms.

Two evils struck at once; the elms started dying, felled by a Dutch beetle, and
my friends' parents started splitting up, victims of a more mysterious bug. (I
sensed at the time that it came from our television sets, bred during episodes
of "Love, American Style" and in the swanky "cocktail party" sketches of
"Laugh-In.") The sounds of that summer still come to me; chain saws outside,
bickering inside.

To an 11-year-old, it felt like doomsday. Kids started disappearing from school,
whisked away by feuding parents. For Sale signs sprouted in weed-infested yards.
One Sunday morning, while selling Cub Scout candy, I rang the doorbell of a
neighbor's house where I'd recently attended a friend's birthday party. The
husband answered, gray and unshaven, holding a gin-filled novelty glass whose
pinup girl stripped naked when ice was added. Behind him, the house was scarily
empty. Stark.

"Sorry, out of cash," the man said, slurring. "I'd find some loose change in the
couch, except she took the couch."

The plague spread so quickly and widely that, two years later, kids like me who
still lived with both parents were feeling a little out of it socially. The
gangs of divorced kids had an edgy glamour, while I felt like a blob of
normalcy. Divorced kids smoked, both cigarettes and pot -- often right at the
kitchen table with their exhausted-looking single moms. Many divorced boys could
strike matches one-handed, handle a knife or a kung fu throwing star.

But I was happy my parents were staying together. When Mom and Dad fought --
which was happening more often -- I prayed on my knees for the roars and shrieks
to cease. When mealtime silences grew strained, I burst into upbeat accounts of
my day. When I found a parent weeping in the garage or raving about suicide in
the bathroom (not uncommon events by the time I was 13), I tried to change the
subject to sports or television.

Finally, to save ourselves, we moved. We left our blighted village for sunny
Phoenix. There, Dad found God, and we joined the Mormon Church. Family unity was
the Mormons' true gospel, and many of the converts were like us: middle-class
households about to snap, desperate for old-time religion's sturdy clamp.

For us, the clamp held. My parents' marriage stabilized. We moved back to
Minnesota, to a farm. And from this patched foundation, I took off, achieving
everything they could have wanted for me: degrees from Princeton and Oxford, a
lovely wife, a successful career as a writer in New York. I felt lucky, grateful
-- and I still do. I know full well that if my parents had split, these
wonderful things might never have happened to me. The problem is that when my
parents did split, it felt as if none of them ever had.

At first, I reacted well to the divorce, I thought. The issue was infidelity,
but I was a grown-up: affairs were part of life. I agreed with my wife: my
parents' marriage had been on life support for years. Pulling the plug would be
painful, but necessary, and in time they'd both be better off. "It's not as if
anyone's died," my wife reminded me, "or fallen gravely ill." My wife's mother
was a paraplegic suffering from multiple sclerosis, so these words had force. I
decided my minor family trauma didn't warrant a big emotional breakdown, so I
resolved not to have one.

It didn't work. Having an independent life, I was disappointed to learn, didn't
prevent me from being absorbed into my parents' crisis. The all-consuming
childhood desire to keep the family whole came roaring back. I may have moved
out of my parents' house, but I'd never truly left home.

I became exceedingly odd. I stopped being able to enter stores and banks. I'd
freeze at the threshold and send my wife in, convinced that the clerk or teller
was angry at me. I got funny about money too. My wife and I had an income and
plenty of savings, yet I nearly bit off her hand one day for misplacing a $5
bill. "I earned that money!" I raged about it for hours, convinced that
bankruptcy was truly near. Then I fled our apartment and rode the subways all
night. I fantasized I was homeless, and I enjoyed this thought.

Back home, the bust-up was growing uglier. (Home was still the Middle West, I'd
discovered, despite my years in New York.) My work, strangely enough, was going
well. I wrote a weekly magazine column that readers seemed to like, but I needed
to chain-smoke and drink to get the words out. The hacking cough I developed
appealed to me much as the homeless fantasy had, but my wife was worried. She
suggested I talk to a therapist.

Instead, I talked to my dissolving family. That Dairy Queen call was just the
first of hundreds. With me in New York, my parents in Minnesota and my brother
in Illinois, the long-distance carriers had us where they wanted us: thousands
of miles apart and in crisis.

The Kirn family built its own Internet of grief that year. We surfed the Web of
dysfunction. The calls flew in all directions. Two by two, in every combination,
family members shared secrets, swore pacts, rehearsed deceptions and blurted
confessions. The breakup was painful enough by itself, but the electronic
filters made it maddening. If the divorce had happened in my youth, while I
still lived at home, I probably would have witnessed tearful pleas, thunderous
accusations, rattling door slams. Emotions would have been attached to scenes.
The images might have been wounding, but at least they would have been something
to hold on to.

Instead, I underwent a cyber-split. An electronic, disembodied trauma. With no
one to look in the eye, I grew distrustful. With no one to look in my eyes, I
grew untrustworthy. I stopped listening to everyone. The divorce had made my
world seem unreliable, but the phone calls had rendered it unreal. Only the
calling patterns themselves held meaning for me. By interpreting busy signals,
call-waiting beeps and the behavior of answering machines, I could figure out
who was speaking to whom and who was whose enemy.

Back in the physical realm, things were bad. My wife was staying with friends.
My money tantrums, boozy workathons and grocery-store terrors had finally got to
her. Plus, I was feeling jealous all the time. And not bathing. And bawling at
breakfast.

The solution, I decided, was to move. Now that my childhood home was gone, the
dream of buying my own house consumed me. When my wife returned, we discussed
the idea. She seemed agreeable, but wanted to wait. That week, I flew to Montana
to cover a doomsday cult and stayed in a sweet little town full of bars and
low-priced, tree-shaded houses. I drank steadily for two weeks, then bought one.
My wife was shocked.

I moved out West alone, carrying my computer and a gym bag. My wife considered
following me, but I had an affair and we divorced instead. Our split was quick
and fairly amicable, which allowed me to feel superior to my parents, who were
still in court. I phoned each of them from my echoey, empty new house to
announce my own divorce, and when they didn't show sufficient pity, I went
drinking downtown and passed out on some railroad tracks.

I woke up hung over, but thrilled. I was a divorced kid, too, now, a sexy, wild
outcast. I'd been abandoned and wronged, but also freed. I embraced chaos that
summer. Just hours after seeing my father face to face for the first time in a
year, I fell into a trance of recrimination and drove a Jeep off a cliff. It
rolled four times, falling hundreds of feet, and landed on its roof in a stream.
Upside down and bleeding from the head, I looked at my bashed-up girlfriend in
the passenger seat. "This is it," she said. "We're breaking up." It was the
funniest remark I'd ever heard. Dead men can't be threatened, and I was dead
inside. Soon, I might even be dead on the outside.

Therapy, sobriety, exercise, meditation, friends and antidepressants. Everything
helps. But such comeback stories are boring. In fact, six years afterward, my
parents' breakup still gnaws at me. No more holiday feasts. A host of lingering
legal squabbles, a brain that seems irreparably torn between Mom's side and
Dad's side. And the question of whether I'm thankful they held on long enough to
undermine me as a man rather than wound me as a boy seems insoluble. Still, I
sometimes wonder, What if? A lot of those teen-age divorced kids I once knew
sank and never resurfaced, but the ones who survived seem enviably vibrant to
me. They're dynamic, open, unafraid. They play in the best new rock bands, write
visionary computer software. The road less taken is where they're most at home.
Me, I'm halting, ironic, a stricken traditionalist. Institutions others dismiss,
I'm still hopeful about.

Like marriage. As I write this, my second wedding is days away. Her name is
Maggie, and I'll be her first husband. The ceremony will take place in a church.
Maggie seems confident we'll grow old together, despite the fact her mother and
father have each been been married three times. She might be right. To me, our
prospects seem cloudier. But what the hell.

Love may be fated to sour and spread suffering, but what am I supposed to do
about it? Crying for doomed humanity is God's job.

Me, I'm off to marry my sweetheart.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (pg. 75)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

My Parents' Bust-Up, And Mine

BYLINE: By WALTER KIRN;   Walter Kirn is the author of "My Hard Bargain," a
collection of stories, and "She Needed Me," a novel.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 74;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2090 words


My parents stayed together for the sake of the children. When the children were
grown and settled, my parents divorced -- for their own sake. My brother was 25
and single, studying for a graduate degree; I was 27 and newly married, about to
publish my first book of stories. Because Mom and Dad had decided to tough it
out (29 years in all), we faced their breakup not as vulnerable kids but as
self-sufficient adults. You'd think it would have been easier that way: no
custody battle, no child-support brouhaha, no change of schools, no teen-age
identity crises.

You'd think I'd thank my parents for their decision.

Here is what I learned, though: when the rug is pulled out from under you
emotionally, it isn't necessarily an advantage to be standing on your own two
feet. Nothing is quite so shocking, somehow, as news you've been half-expecting
all your life.

I got the word on a pay phone, in a Salt Lake City Dairy Queen. My wife and I
had been camping in the Rockies and were ready to fly home to New York. My
parents, who'd been camping with us, had already driven back to Minnesota, the
state where I grew up. The trip had been tense, my parents grumpy and distant,
but I felt I had to phone them. I'd read something wild in the local paper: a
dead school friend of mine whose funeral had been a month ago (his overturned
raft was found floating in Puget Sound) had turned up alive in a tiny Western
jail.

"Karl faked his own death!" I told my mother. "Can you believe it?"

"Walt, I'm leaving your father. I'm moving out tonight. Our marriage is over.
I'm sorry. We're really finished."

I stood there. All around me families licked ice-cream cones. Big happy Mormon
families, by the looks of them.

"I'm sorry," my mother said. Her voice was gravelly. "Maybe you could call your
brother and give him the telephone number where I'll be staying."

When I hung up, my wife asked what was wrong. We'd been married less than two
years, and I knew in an instant that we would not have wed if what had just
happened had happened years earlier. I wouldn't have had the faith, the
optimism. Indeed, I was already losing it.

"They're getting divorced," I said.

My wife just sighed. Her own parents had split up when she was tiny. "It's
probably for the best," she said. "After seeing them together, I'm not
surprised."

"Well, I am!" I shouted. "I'm surprised!"

I was and I wasn't; I just needed to shout. I shouted a lot that year. Shouted
so much, in fact, and so crazily (often while drunk and often in my sleep) that
by year's end I'd be divorced myself.

Let's take the bust-ups in order, though.

Let's follow the long, branching crack from the beginning.

Some people grew up during the Depression, some during World War II or Vietnam.
That's how they place themselves historically: as children of some great,
defining calamity.

I grew up during Divorce.

Though it took two more decades to infect me personally, the plague broke out
around 1973 -- at least in the sheltered Middle West. We were living, our
buttoned-down family of four, in a Minnesota village whose men commuted to
dentist-accountant-type jobs in Minneapolis-St. Paul. The town had a white
clapboard general store, a hilltop elementary school. Our horizon was ringed by
soft, round human hills, the streets shaded by towering vase-shaped elms.

Two evils struck at once; the elms started dying, felled by a Dutch beetle, and
my friends' parents started splitting up, victims of a more mysterious bug. (I
sensed at the time that it came from our television sets, bred during episodes
of "Love, American Style" and in the swanky "cocktail party" sketches of
"Laugh-In.") The sounds of that summer still come to me; chain saws outside,
bickering inside.

To an 11-year-old, it felt like doomsday. Kids started disappearing from school,
whisked away by feuding parents. For Sale signs sprouted in weed-infested yards.
One Sunday morning, while selling Cub Scout candy, I rang the doorbell of a
neighbor's house where I'd recently attended a friend's birthday party. The
husband answered, gray and unshaven, holding a gin-filled novelty glass whose
pinup girl stripped naked when ice was added. Behind him, the house was scarily
empty. Stark.

"Sorry, out of cash," the man said, slurring. "I'd find some loose change in the
couch, except she took the couch."

The plague spread so quickly and widely that, two years later, kids like me who
still lived with both parents were feeling a little out of it socially. The
gangs of divorced kids had an edgy glamour, while I felt like a blob of
normalcy. Divorced kids smoked, both cigarettes and pot -- often right at the
kitchen table with their exhausted-looking single moms. Many divorced boys could
strike matches one-handed, handle a knife or a kung fu throwing star.

But I was happy my parents were staying together. When Mom and Dad fought --
which was happening more often -- I prayed on my knees for the roars and shrieks
to cease. When mealtime silences grew strained, I burst into upbeat accounts of
my day. When I found a parent weeping in the garage or raving about suicide in
the bathroom (not uncommon events by the time I was 13), I tried to change the
subject to sports or television.

Finally, to save ourselves, we moved. We left our blighted village for sunny
Phoenix. There, Dad found God, and we joined the Mormon Church. Family unity was
the Mormons' true gospel, and many of the converts were like us: middle-class
households about to snap, desperate for old-time religion's sturdy clamp.

For us, the clamp held. My parents' marriage stabilized. We moved back to
Minnesota, to a farm. And from this patched foundation, I took off, achieving
everything they could have wanted for me: degrees from Princeton and Oxford, a
lovely wife, a successful career as a writer in New York. I felt lucky, grateful
-- and I still do. I know full well that if my parents had split, these
wonderful things might never have happened to me. The problem is that when my
parents did split, it felt as if none of them ever had.

At first, I reacted well to the divorce, I thought. The issue was infidelity,
but I was a grown-up: affairs were part of life. I agreed with my wife: my
parents' marriage had been on life support for years. Pulling the plug would be
painful, but necessary, and in time they'd both be better off. "It's not as if
anyone's died," my wife reminded me, "or fallen gravely ill." My wife's mother
was a paraplegic suffering from multiple sclerosis, so these words had force. I
decided my minor family trauma didn't warrant a big emotional breakdown, so I
resolved not to have one.

It didn't work. Having an independent life, I was disappointed to learn, didn't
prevent me from being absorbed into my parents' crisis. The all-consuming
childhood desire to keep the family whole came roaring back. I may have moved
out of my parents' house, but I'd never truly left home.

I became exceedingly odd. I stopped being able to enter stores and banks. I'd
freeze at the threshold and send my wife in, convinced that the clerk or teller
was angry at me. I got funny about money too. My wife and I had an income and
plenty of savings, yet I nearly bit off her hand one day for misplacing a $5
bill. "I earned that money!" I raged about it for hours, convinced that
bankruptcy was truly near. Then I fled our apartment and rode the subways all
night. I fantasized I was homeless, and I enjoyed this thought.

Back home, the bust-up was growing uglier. (Home was still the Middle West, I'd
discovered, despite my years in New York.) My work, strangely enough, was going
well. I wrote a weekly magazine column that readers seemed to like, but I needed
to chain-smoke and drink to get the words out. The hacking cough I developed
appealed to me much as the homeless fantasy had, but my wife was worried. She
suggested I talk to a therapist.

Instead, I talked to my dissolving family. That Dairy Queen call was just the
first of hundreds. With me in New York, my parents in Minnesota and my brother
in Illinois, the long-distance carriers had us where they wanted us: thousands
of miles apart and in crisis.

The Kirn family built its own Internet of grief that year. We surfed the Web of
dysfunction. The calls flew in all directions. Two by two, in every combination,
family members shared secrets, swore pacts, rehearsed deceptions and blurted
confessions. The breakup was painful enough by itself, but the electronic
filters made it maddening. If the divorce had happened in my youth, while I
still lived at home, I probably would have witnessed tearful pleas, thunderous
accusations, rattling door slams. Emotions would have been attached to scenes.
The images might have been wounding, but at least they would have been something
to hold on to.

Instead, I underwent a cyber-split. An electronic, disembodied trauma. With no
one to look in the eye, I grew distrustful. With no one to look in my eyes, I
grew untrustworthy. I stopped listening to everyone. The divorce had made my
world seem unreliable, but the phone calls had rendered it unreal. Only the
calling patterns themselves held meaning for me. By interpreting busy signals,
call-waiting beeps and the behavior of answering machines, I could figure out
who was speaking to whom and who was whose enemy.

Back in the physical realm, things were bad. My wife was staying with friends.
My money tantrums, boozy workathons and grocery-store terrors had finally got to
her. Plus, I was feeling jealous all the time. And not bathing. And bawling at
breakfast.

The solution, I decided, was to move. Now that my childhood home was gone, the
dream of buying my own house consumed me. When my wife returned, we discussed
the idea. She seemed agreeable, but wanted to wait. That week, I flew to Montana
to cover a doomsday cult and stayed in a sweet little town full of bars and
low-priced, tree-shaded houses. I drank steadily for two weeks, then bought one.
My wife was shocked.

I moved out West alone, carrying my computer and a gym bag. My wife considered
following me, but I had an affair and we divorced instead. Our split was quick
and fairly amicable, which allowed me to feel superior to my parents, who were
still in court. I phoned each of them from my echoey, empty new house to
announce my own divorce, and when they didn't show sufficient pity, I went
drinking downtown and passed out on some railroad tracks.

I woke up hung over, but thrilled. I was a divorced kid, too, now, a sexy, wild
outcast. I'd been abandoned and wronged, but also freed. I embraced chaos that
summer. Just hours after seeing my father face to face for the first time in a
year, I fell into a trance of recrimination and drove a Jeep off a cliff. It
rolled four times, falling hundreds of feet, and landed on its roof in a stream.
Upside down and bleeding from the head, I looked at my bashed-up girlfriend in
the passenger seat. "This is it," she said. "We're breaking up." It was the
funniest remark I'd ever heard. Dead men can't be threatened, and I was dead
inside. Soon, I might even be dead on the outside.

Therapy, sobriety, exercise, meditation, friends and antidepressants. Everything
helps. But such comeback stories are boring. In fact, six years afterward, my
parents' breakup still gnaws at me. No more holiday feasts. A host of lingering
legal squabbles, a brain that seems irreparably torn between Mom's side and
Dad's side. And the question of whether I'm thankful they held on long enough to
undermine me as a man rather than wound me as a boy seems insoluble. Still, I
sometimes wonder, What if? A lot of those teen-age divorced kids I once knew
sank and never resurfaced, but the ones who survived seem enviably vibrant to
me. They're dynamic, open, unafraid. They play in the best new rock bands, write
visionary computer software. The road less taken is where they're most at home.
Me, I'm halting, ironic, a stricken traditionalist. Institutions others dismiss,
I'm still hopeful about.

Like marriage. As I write this, my second wedding is days away. Her name is
Maggie, and I'll be her first husband. The ceremony will take place in a church.
Maggie seems confident we'll grow old together, despite the fact her mother and
father have each been been married three times. She might be right. To me, our
prospects seem cloudier. But what the hell.

Love may be fated to sour and spread suffering, but what am I supposed to do
about it? Crying for doomed humanity is God's job.

Me, I'm off to marry my sweetheart.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (pg. 75)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Puerto Ricans Fight U.S. Radar Plan to Cut Drug Traffic

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 847 words

DATELINE: LAJAS, P.R.


Carlos E. Torres was stumped when the Navy wanted to reserve his farm in a
bucolic valley in the southwestern part of the island for a radar antenna to
snag drug traffickers from South America.

"I always loved it here," Mr. Torres, 60, said, worrying now that the radar will
make it hard for him to sell the farm when he retires. "This should not be
happening."

Opposition to the radar proposal has been widespread and vocal among the 25,000
people who live in Lajas, even though Navy officials say it is vital to
Department of Defense efforts to staunch drug traffic into the United States.

More than 100 residents have formed the United Front in Defense of Lajas Valley
to oppose the Navy plan to put an array of radar antennas in Lajas and a radio
wave transmitter more than 50 miles offshore on the island of Vieques.

The group has hired a lawyer and held rallies that have attracted thousands of
supporters, who believe that the installation could take away as many as 200
acres of productive farmland.

"All of Puerto Rico is looking at Lajas," said the Mayor, Jose Rivera Nazario.
"We don't want the radar here."

The proposal is currently stalled until public hearings are held by the
Environmental Quality Board. The local agency postponed the hearings for the
third time last week because of a technicality, and has not set another date.

In an effort to quell a dispute that officials said had become "highly
politicized," the Navy has been seeking alternatives to the private land in the
valley. The transmitter site in Vieques is on land owned by the Navy.

Lieut. Comdr. Michael K. McCloskey, 35, who is in charge of the project,
insisted that the Lajas site was still preferred for an array of 372 pairs of
aluminum antennas that would stretch over a mile and a half.

Navy officials hope to have the $9 million radar construction completed and
operating by 1997, with 20 employees and an annual budget of $2.4 million, he
said.

The Navy will pay the "fair market value" of about $200 to $300 an acre to lease
950 acres of farmland for up to 20 years, including 100 acres for the antennas,
part of which may be fenced off. Another 100 of the acres could be restricted
for security reasons.

And although construction of new buildings would be forbidden on the remaining
acres in order to prevent interference with the radar, owners would be able to
continue farming, with some restrictions, Commander McCloskey said.

"Here we have a project that has national significance, but they have a very
vocal opposition movement," he said. "It needs to go in Puerto Rico."

The antennas, which stand 19 feet high and 23 feet apart, are one of three
components of the Relocatable Over-the-Horizon Radar, a leftover from the cold
war that was made by the Raytheon Company of Massachusetts to track low-flying
Soviet bombers.

The transmitter, which must be 50 to 100 miles away, bounces a continuous radio
wave off the ionosphere, the upper level of the Earth's atmosphere, to the
antennas. Workers at an operations center scan the information and alert the
authorities to suspicious flights.

The radar installation in Puerto Rico would complement similar systems in
Virginia, which started operations in 1993, and in Texas, which went into
service six weeks ago. Together, the radar systems can scan the Caribbean,
Central and South America for airplanes and ships that could be carrying drug
shipments, Commander McCloskey said.

The Navy reports that the Virginia radar, which is based in Chesapeake and New
Kent, helped net more than $5 billion worth of drugs since it went into
operation.

Nonetheless, opposition to the plan remains strong in Lajas.

"Why don't they invest the money to help the people of Lajas?" asked Ismael
Detres, 70. "This isn't going to produce a benefit for the people."

As an overture to the opposition, the Navy spent $11,000 in June to bring 11
residents of Lajas and Vieques and journalists to the Virginia radar site for a
three-day tour.

Mayor Rivera went, examined the antennas and listened to the explanations. But
he returned to Lajas unmoved.

"The drug traffickers will invent a new strategy," he said dismissively. "They
have money to throw away."

Gov. Pedro J. Rossello has said he would support the project unless opponents
could refute Navy assertions that the radar posed no health risk.

People in Lajas who support the project are a quiet minority, surrounded by "No
Antenna" signs stenciled on walls and houses.

"I hear them fighting, the teachers in school don't want it," said Miriam Ramos,
a high school English teacher. "My neighbors, the Vietnam vets, don't want it. I
tend to like anything that brings progress and anything that is needed. I think
they say no to anything that's American."

A group of veterans of the Vietnam War have become the opponents' most visible
supporters by setting up camp near the proposed antenna site in a show of
protest.

"If I fought in Vietnam for so many years for land that wasn't mine," said
Roberto Diffoot, 62, "why not fight now for land that is?"

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Greening of U.S. Diplomacy: Focus on Ecology

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1221 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 8


Environmental threats like the beautiful water hyacinths choking Lake Victoria
and the desert sands eating away the sparse pastures bordering the Sahara are
some of the issues deemed urgent today by American foreign policy makers in much
the same manner as military threats like new surface-to-air missile sites
alarmed policy makers several decades ago.

These days, intelligence officials are being asked to look at softer targets --
those flowers and sand dunes -- to shed light on this decade's hot wars. Through
this optic, Somalia and Rwanda can be interpreted not as spontaneous outbreaks
of clan warfare or ethnic violence, but as conflicts nourished by the underlying
strains of hunger, drought and a lack of arable land in Somalia, and huge
population growth and population density in Rwanda.

So in addition to their traditional intelligence gathering -- arms, nuclear
weapons programs, expansion of foreign armies -- American policy makers are
looking more than ever before at natural phenomena in their search for the
deeper roots of war and threats to global security. They are expecting more wars
like Somalia, where the United States sent troops to calm a desperate situation
spawned by environmental calamities and the brutal political response to it. To
prepare for such future wars, they are analyzing subjects like the water table
levels in Central Asia and the water hyacinths in Central Africa.


In August, the Defense Intelligence Agency finished a study on the rapid spread
of the water hyacinth plant in Lake Victoria, which provides 120,000 tons of
fish each year to Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania. The agency noted with due
seriousness how a single water hyacinth can multiply into a million plants in
one year and, the report warned, these plants could ultimately strangle the lake
and kill most of its fish. The consequences would be serious: famine and such
political instability in neighboring countries that the United States could be
called in to help.

In looking at the underlying causes of war and crisis, the intelligence
community now examines an expanded menu of subjects, including agriculture,
demographics, economics and epidemiology. It looks, for instance, at China's
economic boom and how it is causing considerable overcrowding in China's cities;
at the AIDS epidemic in East Africa and how it is affecting the region's
military and political elites; and at Mexico's industrial leap forward and how
it has left millions of peasants behind.

Some old-line intelligence officials disparage this new focus on what they call
"soft stuff." But the Clinton Administration, led by Vice President Al Gore, has
deliberately added this new focus on environmental and natural factors --
famine, soil erosion, rapid population growth, the expansion of deserts -- that
they believe will produce many of the world crises of tomorrow.


"During the cold war, most security threats stemmed from state-to-state
aggression, so most of the analysis was of factors that could produce
state-to-state aggression," said James Steinberg, the State Department's
director of policy planning. "Now we're focusing more on internal factors that
can destabilize governments and lead to civil wars and ethnic strife. Now we're
paying much more attention to early warning factors, like famine and the
environment."

The United States looks less than before at who is sitting where in the Kremlin
and more at how good this fall's harvest will be in the Central Asian republics.


The Central Intelligence Agency recently commissioned a study to determine
whether there was a correlation between a country's infant mortality rate, the
openness of a country's trading system to imports and the stability of its
government, hoping that finding a way to view these factors collectively would
help the C.I.A. predict where the next crisis might erupt.

Gathering of the so-called soft intelligence has become routine. The C.I.A. now
does an annual study, called "Global Humanitarian Emergencies" that forecasts
which countries are most likely to suffer from natural disasters. It set up a
global affairs department two years ago that analyzes environmental matters, the
global food situation and other issues the agency once gave little attention.

"We've been looking at some of these softer issues for a long time," said one
intelligence official. "What's different now is these issues have moved from the
periphery to take a more central role."

Angelo Codevilla, an intelligence expert who teaches at Boston University, said
this new approach is misguided. "All this soft stuff is a silly idea," he said.
"The purpose of intelligence is to ferret out secrets from people who want to
keep those secrets. To turn intelligence into environmental reports is not to
understand environmental problems or intelligence."

Professor Codevilla said it was wrong to switch from harder to softer
intelligence. "The hard stuff is as important as ever because guns will
determine the future of the world as much as they ever did," he said.

Toby Gati, Assistant Secretary of State for Intelligence, disagrees, saying,
"This soft stuff immediately becomes hard when you have to send in the Marines."

George Moose, the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, is a
promoter of this new approach and says that if the intelligence community had
studied Somalia's water table levels in the three years before the outbreak of
famine and clan warfare there, the information might have warned diplomats of an
imminent crisis. Since Africa is his responsibility, Mr. Moose is particularly
sensitive to the role of natural disasters in human conflicts. He argues that
the rapid spread of the Sahara desert set off the 1989 conflict between Senegal
and Mauritania, when herdsmen from the two countries went to war over a
dwindling amount of grazing land.

In recent years the Pentagon has sent troops to Somalia, where American soldiers
made it safe for relief groups to deliver food to starving people, and to Zaire,
where the United States set up emergency camps for Rwandan refugees. Even in the
more traditional Haiti operation, American troops were called upon to restore an
ousted, democratically elected president who vowed to combat poverty rather than
to take up arms in a classic government-to-government confrontation like the
wars in Korean and Vietnam.

The Administration says the American people care about the problems addressed
recently. "The issues of overpopulation, of refugees, of famine, of human rights
problems are issues the American people have become more interested in," said
one National Security Council official.

This shift toward softer intelligence has brought with it another shift: more
than ever before, the intelligence community is using public material,
particularly relief reports produced by organizations like the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

In Africa, where the the C.I.A. is cutting back its presence, intelligence
officials acknowledge that the thousands of relief workers there are a trove of
information about the continent. To take advantage of this, the Clinton
Administration is setting up a computer information network, called "Relief
Net," to speed the flow of information from the Red Cross and other relief
groups to Government agencies.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: 'A Closer Look: National Fears, Old and New'
Factors looked to assess national security threats.

Traditional Factors
1) Massing of troops.
2) Development of weapons of mass destruction.
3) The pecking order in the Kremlin.
4) Arms shipments to cold-war surrogates in the third world.

New Factors

1) Rainfall and water table levels as predictors of famine and the collapse of
governments.
2) Infant mortality rates as a predictor that a government will collapse.
3) High population growth and density as a predictor of rebellion or ethnic
strife.
4) The spread of the Sahara Desert as a predictor that ethnic strike will result
when tribes are forced to compete for the remaining grazing and arable land.
5) Inflation rates and trade deficits as a way to predict financial and
political instability.
6) The ability of a third world country to absorb young people into the labor
market.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 10, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Kukrit Pramoj, Thai Ex-Prime Minister, Dies at 84

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A;   Page 21;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 688 words


Kukrit Pramoj, a former Prime Minister of Thailand who steered the country
through a difficult and politically dangerous period after the end of the
Vietnam War, died yesterday in Bangkok. He was 84 and had been hospitalized for
heart disease and diabetes.

Mr. Kukrit -- who was usually addressed with the noble title of Mom Rajawong
because he was the son of a royal prince -- was one of Thailand's most colorful,
outspoken and versatile characters. He co-founded a newspaper and wrote
political commentary, mastered classical Thai dancing and opened a school to
teach it to younger generations, acted in a film -- "The Ugly American" with
Marlon Brando -- and remained an unashamedly opinionated elder statesman until
the end of his life.

It was as a defender of nascent Thai democracy in the 1970's that Mr. Kukrit is
best remembered by historians of contemporary Southeast Asia. Prime Minister for
only 14 months in 1975-1976, he faced the collapse of South Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia to Communist movements, which many believed would soon threaten
Thailand.

But Mr. Kukrit, rejecting the domino theory, established diplomatic relations
with China and asked American troops to leave the huge bases from which they had
mounted much of the war in Vietnam.

These bold steps were popular with Thai intellectuals, particularly leftists who
had a influence on his thinking, John Bresnan, executive director of the Pacific
Basin studies program at Columbia University, said yesterday. But his policies
quickly provoked a conservative backlash. Mr. Kukrit and his Social Action Party
were defeated in an election in 1976 that he had called in the hope of
strengthening his political hand.

While Prime Minister, Mr. Kukrit tried to build a democratic polity strong
enough to resist persistent pressures from the Thai Army, which has staged
repeated coups over more than half a century. As late as 1987, when he was in
his 70's, he was still defying the generals. After a speech in which he accused
the military of trying to establish the equivalent of a Communist-style
"politburo" to run the country, 250 ill-disciplined Thai Army rangers, troops
known for violent behavior, arrived in buses from the remote northeast and tried
to break into his home to threaten him.

When the Army commander, Gen. Chavalit Yongchaiyudh, who is now Defense
Minister, did not discipline the troops, a storm of criticism arose in the
ever-bolder Thai press. Students from 21 institutions of higher education --
precursors of the student leaders and young professionals who would take to the
streets to defend democracy in 1992 -- came to his home with bouquets of
flowers, a touching, traditional Thai way of showing respect or making amends.

Mr. Kukrit was born on April 20, 1911, and was educated in Thailand and at
Oxford University. At 25, he married Pakpring Tongyai and they had two children:
a son, Rongrit, and a daughter, Visumitra. His political career began in 1946
with his election to the Thai Parliament. Several years later he co-founded the
Thai-language newspaper Siam Rath. He did not withdraw formally from politics
until about four years ago.

A quiet nationalist -- his dog barked only at Westerners, he would tell visitors
with a chuckle -- Mr. Kukrit became a strong advocate of holding on to Thai
traditions in architecture, language and the arts while others were rushing into
the Westernization that accompanied a phenomenal economic takeoff. In the center
of booming Bangkok, surrounded by rising concrete apartment blocks and offices,
he lived in a classical Thai house built of tropical wood, and filled it with
Thai treasures. He set a powerful, if increasingly lonely, example.

"We Thai can lead a life that is genuinely Thai and be quite happy about it," he
said in an interview in 1987. "We don't have to live in Western houses or employ
Western methods in our daily lives. If we were to limit ourselves to just being
Thai people, I think we would be happier all around."

In addition to his immediate family, Mr. Kukrit is survived by a brother, Seni
Pramoj, 90, also a former Prime Minister.

NAME: Kukrit Pramoj

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kukrit Pramoj (Reuters, 1995)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Stepping Out From the Lens Of History;
Frozen Moments Alter Lives Of Subjects of 2 Famous Photos

BYLINE: By GEORGE JUDSON

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1044 words

DATELINE: JEFFERSONVILLE, N.Y., Oct. 9


The 100 young photographers had come to a hillside in Sullivan County to learn
from masters, to show off their talent, to make connections and perhaps to win
their first big assignment. All that is possible at the Eddie Adams Workshop,
where each October, veteran news photographers and editors gather for a weekend
to tutor and to test the eye of the next generation.

Kim Phuc and Mary Ann Vecchio came to make connections, too.

When they stepped forward on Sunday in the workshop barn here to embrace the
photographers who captured their images more than 20 years ago, they stepped out
of two of the most famous photographs from the Vietnam War era -- a Vietnamese
child burned by napalm running down a street; an American teen-ager kneeling
over the body of a student at Kent State -- into the lives of those whose
ambition is to find moments as powerful in their own time.

In a room full of news photographers, shutters whirred, but tears also welled at
the shock of recognition, and at the slap of responsibility. Photographers go on
to their next assignments, but their subjects often are bound by place and
circumstance. For two decades, these women had been prisoners of their unsought
fame.

Ms. Phuc, who was 9 in 1972 when her family's village was bombed, became a
propaganda display for the Communist regime in Cuba, where she was taken for
medical care, until she defected to Canada in 1992. Ms. Vecchio, a 14-year-old
runaway who happened to be on the Kent State University campus when the Ohio
National Guard opened fire on May 4, 1970, said she was stunned when she came
under attack by public officials as a hated symbol of the anti-war movement.

"I clammed up about the whole thing for 24 years," Ms. Vecchio told the workshop
after embracing John Filo, who was a photography student in 1970 when he caught
her kneeling over the body of a slain student.

"I'd always dreamed about meeting John Filo," she said, recalling the moment
only a few months before when they met for the first time. "I hoped he was O.K.
I knew my life had been pretty much messed up by the photo."

Ms. Phuc, who was taken to a hospital by Nick Ut, an Associated Press
photographer, after he took her picture as she emerged from a napalm fire, told
the students: "I know that picture changed the world, and it changed my life. I
don't want to remember that day."

Today, as the students prepared for a show of their work over the last four days
that would win some of them assignments for National Geographic, Time and other
magazines, they were still struck by meeting the people from images they had
grown up with, and sharing the impact of the photographs.

"They were two of the most famous nonfamous people in the world," said Patrick
Colquhoun, a freelance photographer from Old Saybrook, Conn.

Brennan Linsley, a young Associated Press photographer in Nicaragua, said, "I
want to ask Eddie, Can we still take those kinds of pictures any more, or is
everyone too numb?"

Eddie is Eddie Adams, who after decades of recording wars, statesmen and
fashion, started the free workshop in his barn eight years ago with the support
of Kodak and Nikon. A number of publications, including The New York Times,
provide staff members to assist in the workshop.

Mr. Adams had almost succeeded in bringing one of his own subjects to speak,
General Nguyen Ngoc Loan, whom he photographed point-blank in 1968 executing a
Vietcong suspect in a Saigon street. The general said he was too ill.

Mr. Adams had made General Loan infamous, but he had stayed in touch. "When you
get involved with your subject, say I take the picture of someone who is hurt or
wounded, I find I become the person who I'm shooting," he said. "I'm hurt, I'm
wounded, and I really feel it.

"I think a lot of really good photographers fall in love with their subjects,
really. I don't know how to do it, but you want to keep in touch."

Mr. Adams recalled the first time he saw General Loan after the execution. "I
was visiting his house in Virginia, after he was wounded, and he was teaching
his little girl French," he said. "He wasn't a bad person. Pictures lie. They
don't tell the whole picture."

Mr. Filo, who like Mr. Adams and Mr. Ut won a Pulitzer Prize for his photograph,
acknowledged that power in introducing Ms. Vecchio. While he went on to a career
as a newspaper photographer and magazine photo editor, she had drifted for years
before marrying and settling in Las Vegas.

"I can't tell you all of the things that were released deep down in my psyche
when I met Mary Ann," Mr. Filo told the students. "That photo was made by a
14-year-old, not a 20-year-old, not an 18-year-old, reacting to what she saw."

Mr. Ut, who has helped Ms. Phuc's family in Vietnam for many years, brought
other photographs from the bombing to show that one picture, indeed, does not
tell everything. To suggestions that the photo of her burned body was faked, he
offers photographs of the bombs dropping from a plane, their explosion on the
ground, her family carrying her two baby brothers, who died from their burns.

"I traveled everywhere in the DMZ, and every day I see bodies and bodies," Mr.
Ut said. "After that day, I don't want to see any more of that."

Then everyone walked from the barn up the hill for a champagne toast around a
memorial inscribed with the names of six photographers, all friends of Mr.
Adams, who died covering the Vietnam War.

One was Mr. Ut's older brother, Huynh Thanh My, killed on an Associated Press
assignment that Mr. Adams sent him on. "It was supposed to be me," Mr. Adams
said. Another was Henri Huet, who in 1971 took Mr. Ut's place on a helicopter
and died when it crashed.

The barn had long been a hangout for Mr. Adams's friends. When the idea of a
workshop came to him, he said, "We thought of getting all of my heroes in one
place, and really do it for me instead of the students."

After the first workshop, he said: "I thought something was missing. I thought
how nice it would be if these guys who were killed could get involved.

"So even though we have photographers here who do underwater photos, who do
fashion photos, one thing I wanted to point out with the memorial is that this
is a fun job, it's a good job, but people do die."

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Kim Phuc, the subject of Nick Ut's Pulitzer-prize winning
photograph as she fled a 1972 napalm attack on her village in South Vietnam
(John Filo/Associated Press), met the photographer at a workshop last weekend.
She placed flowers Sunday on a memorial to photographers killed on the job.
(Gene Pierce); Mary Ann Vecchio, whose reaction to the body of a Kent State
student killed by the National Guard in 1970 spurred anti-war sentiment
(Photograph by Nick Ut/Associated Press), placed flowers as Eddie Adams, left,
in hat, the photographer who holds the annual workshop in his barn, watched.
(Scott Allen)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

FILM FESTIVAL REVIEW;
Jean Seberg's Life, Most of It True

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section C;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 597 words


Mary Beth Hurt, her hair cropped and a beauty mark added to her left cheek,
creates a stirring impression of what Jean Seberg might have looked like had she
lived past the age of 40. Playing Seberg, Ms. Hurt is a gamine turned wise with
middle age who stands in front of familiar black-and-white film clips from
Seberg's early years. As a teen-ager, fresh from Marshalltown, Iowa (which
happens to be Ms. Hurt's hometown, too), Seberg won a nationwide talent search
and the title role in Otto Preminger's "Saint Joan." That 1957 movie was a
disaster; Seberg was a star. "People magazine didn't exist then, but if it did I
would have been on the cover," says Ms. Hurt as Seberg, looking back on a life
in which the Hollywood dream went hideously wrong. "From the Journals of Jean
Seberg" is Mark Rappaport's smart blend of fiction, biography and sociocultural
meditation, wrapped in a smoothly entertaining package. It will be shown at the
New York Film Festival tonight at 9.

A few years after "Saint Joan," Seberg became a European icon in Jean-Luc
Godard's "Breathless." That image stuck: the boyish hair, brashness and casually
seductive manner. Yet her life quickly unraveled. Her career, marriages and love
affairs floundered. She supported the Black Panthers, which led the F.B.I. to
spy on her and plot a smear campaign, which it acknowledged after Seberg
committed suicide in 1979.

But Mr. Rappaport is not interested in biography for its own sake, however
fascinating. He successfully depicts Seberg as an emblem of her time and a
victim of her celebrity. Ms. Hurt's savvy, sympathetic performance is the key to
the film's enticing tone. In the monologue written by Mr. Rappaport (there are
no real-life journals), Seberg approaches her past with a knowing, sometimes
jaded attitude and a measured voice that resists every impulse to drip irony.
Glancing at film clips of herself as Joan of Arc, she asks serenely, "Who would
follow this drum majorette into battle?"

Seberg also sees herself as part of a trio of actresses linked to social causes.
"Jane was the Vietnam War, Vanessa was the P.L.O. and I was the Black Panthers,"
she says, before tracing the arcs of Jane Fonda's and Vanessa Redgrave's
careers. Roger Vadim turned Ms. Fonda, then his wife, into Barbarella. Romain
Gary made a film in which Seberg, then his wife, played a frigid nymphomaniac.
The fictional Seberg wonders: What's with these husbands? And why did the wives
agree?

Mr. Rappaport raises provocative and sometimes amusing questions about screen
images and social responsibility. But in this work composed of dozens of
gracefully blended movie clips, he is less successful at examining the language
of screen images. Whatever its small flaws, though, "From the Journals of Jean
Seberg" glistens with wit, understanding and rich ideas.

Also on the program is "Joy Street," a vivid, intriguing 24-minute animated film
by Suzan Pitt. A depressed woman is shown in languorous shapes and gray tones.
It seems odd that she has a cheerful ashtray with a mouselike creature attached.
It is even more bizarre when the mouse comes to life and rescues the woman,
literally crying her a river of pale green tears and carrying her off to a rich,
vibrantly colored rain forest.

FROM THE JOURNALS OF JEAN SEBERG

Written, directed and produced by Mark Rappaport; director of photography, Mark
Daniels; edited by Mr. Rappaport. At Alice Tully Hall tonight at 9 as part of
the 33d New York Film Festival. Running time: 97 minutes. This film is not
rated.
WITH: Mary Beth Hurt (Jean Seberg)

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mary Beth Hurt in "From the Journals of Jean Seberg." (Film
Society of Lincoln Center)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 12, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

In Implant Case, Missteps Could Hurt Dow Corning

BYLINE: By BARRY MEIER

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1044 words


The tentative agreement that three major producers of silicone breast implants
finally reached last week to settle thousands of lawsuits by women who used the
devices will cost them billions. But the Dow Corning Corporation, which was not
part of the agreement, could end up even worse, the possible victim of its own
miscalculations.

Dow Corning, which is jointly owned by the Dow Chemical Company and Corning
Inc., sought bankruptcy protection in May, citing billions of dollars in
implant-related claims. It was the largest implant producer and made most of the
silicone gel used by other makers.

"It's the only way to bring an overall resolution to the situation," Richard A.
Hazleton, the company's chairman and chief executive, said at the time.

That may well have been true, but Dow Corning's transit into bankruptcy was also
accompanied by a series of miscues by executives, near fist-fights among lawyers
and a faulty presumption about what the judge in the case would do.

While the other producers have agreed to pay huge sums to put much of the
implant controversy behind them, Dow Corning faces the possibility of living
with what may prove to be a slow, painful illness.

Bankruptcy offers some breathing room for the company, but it also gives a judge
the power to second-guess its business decisions. And Dow Corning still does not
know how far its liability will extend. The situation may not be so stark for
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Baxter International and Minnesota Mining and
Manufacturing, the other big implant makers, which are hoping to limit most of
their liability to $3 billion.

Dow Corning's biggest miscalculation, lawyers in the case said, involved the
$4.25 billion global settlement of implant claims, one intended to buy peace
that ended up producing only more war. The plan promised individual women who
said silicone exposure caused health problems awards of $200,000 to $2 million.
Few medical hurdles existed to qualify. And the plan contained an unusual escape
clause: class action claimants could wait to see a deal's final shape before
deciding whether to take part in it.

As the settlement unleashed a flood of lawsuits, women saw their promised awards
fall to as low as 5 percent of what they had originally expected. Thousands more
then decided to pursue lawsuits on their own against Dow Corning.

Dow Corning's implant problems began to intensify in 1992. Despite a lack of
definitive scientific evidence tying breast implants to serious disease, juries
awarded millions of dollars in compensatory and punitive damages against the
company in a series of stunning losses. In March 1992, the Food and Drug
Administration called for a moratorium on implant use, citing a lack of safety
data.

At about that time, Dow Corning hired a lawyer, Kenneth Feinberg, who
specialized in settling mass litigation. Baxter turned to David I. Shapiro,
another well-known lawyer with similar skills. In the Agent Orange defoliant
case in the mid-1980's, the presiding Federal district judge, Jack B. Weinstein
of Brooklyn, had appointed both of them as special masters to help resolve the
case. With their aid, Judge Weinstein effectively forced warring lawyers to
settle the litigation for $180 million. He took the added step of limiting
payouts to those war veterans who said they were most severely affected by the
Vietnam-era defoliant, said lawyers.

In the implant case, Mr. Feinberg and Mr. Shapiro, who each declined to be
interviewed for this article, quickly got in touch with two key plaintiffs'
lawyers, Stanley Chesley of Cincinnati and Ralph Knowles of Atlanta. According
to Mr. Chesley and others, Mr. Feinberg indicated that Dow Corning, as the
largest producer, would pay for most of the settlement,

"Kenny was essentially saying that Dow Corning was going to play the major
role," Mr. Chesley said.

But executives of Dow Corning, who deny Mr. Feinberg made such comments, clearly
had other ideas. In mid-1993, with the outlines of the $4.25 billion settlement
in view, representatives of implant producers met at O'Hare International
Airport in Chicago to discuss how to split the costs. At that meeting, said
James R. Jenkins, Dow Corning's general counsel, he told those gathered that his
company would finance no more than 24 to 30 percent of the deal. His remarks
apparently outraged John McGoldrick, the general counsel for Bristol-Myers
Squibb, who nearly struck Mr. Jenkins, according to several lawyers present.
Jane Kramer, a Bristol-Myers spokeswoman, described the talks as "very heated".

For his part, Mr. Jenkins played down the incident. "Everyone thought that
global peace was a great idea so long as someone else paid for it," he said.

To mediate the issue, Federal District Judge Sam C. Pointer Jr. of Birmingham,
Ala., who is presiding in the case, appointed a three-judge panel. Its decision:
Dow Corning would pay about 42 percent. In terms of the deal's current value,
that meant some $1.2 billion in payments for Dow Corning.

While one of the smaller companies, it was to pick up the biggest part of the
settlement's tab. Nor would Dow Chemical, which had developed silicone,
voluntarily help bail out its half-child because that would make it a target,
too.

Dow Corning's assessment of Judge Pointer's judicial philosophy proved wrong.
Judge Weinstein was an activist in the Agent Orange case and Mr. Feinberg and
Dow Corning officials apparently thought that Judge Pointer would do the same
and come to the company's aid, lawyers in the case said. But Judge Pointer said
he believed it was the lawyers' role to shape a settlement.

Gary E. Anderson, Dow Corning's president, said the company did not directly
find fault with Judge Pointer but said it was disappointed.

As women saw the value of their claims shrink as more plaintiffs emerged,
thousands pulled out of the settlement, filing new cases against Dow Corning.
Faced by its settlement obligations and individual lawsuits, the company saw no
recourse but bankruptcy, Mr. Anderson said.

Just how the latest agreement, which awaits ratification by directors of the
three companies involved, will affect Dow Corning is still unclear. But the fate
of the company is no longer in its own hands.


LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 12, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

FILM FESTIVAL REVIEW;
A Vietnamese Taxi Driver And His Unworldly Sister

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 20;  Column 5;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 731 words


After the elegant tranquillity of Tran Anh Hung's first film, "The Scent of
Green Papaya," the tone of his "Cyclo" comes as a shock. Mr. Hung jolts his
audience with the cacophonous din of Ho Chi Minh City, where the film's nameless
18-year-old protagonist works backbreakingly hard pedaling a bicycle-driven
taxi. As he weaves anonymously through traffic, pushing a rickshaw seat for
paying customers, this orphaned boy remembers his father's wish that his son
have a good life. But the father was a cyclo killed in traffic, and the son's
prospects are even more hauntingly grim.

"Cyclo" outlines that bleakness in precise, eloquent detail, but this is no
ordinary tale of hardship. Instead, the daring and technically expert "Cyclo"
tosses this young man into a bruising world of petty crime, where his innocence
and that of his beautiful sister (Tran Nu Yen Khe, also the star of "Green
Papaya") provoke complex reactions from the film's more controlling characters.
Within this moral limbo, which recalls the intriguing ambiguities of Mr. Hung's
first film, the subtle balance of sin and complicity is linked to the turbulence
of Ho Chi Minh City and its nonstop roar.

The film weaves an intricate web of vindictiveness and sorrow around this young
man and woman, complete with convenient symmetries linking several characters
and a pimp who is also a poet. (Mr. Hung's style is a revealing hybrid,
reflecting that he was born in Vietnam and educated in France.) But too much of
its delicacy is also lost, buried beneath a landslide of assaulttive urban
turmoil. An oblique narrative and shadowy thoughts, in a film that divides
itself abruptly between wordlessness and outright poetry, become too fragile to
rise above harsher images that overwhelm the viewer. "Cyclo" never achieves the
balance to make such contrasts work as lucidly as they might.

Mr. Hung, who won top honors at this year's Venice Film Festival for the
formidably ambitious "Cyclo," again makes it clear that he is a film maker of
unusual sophistication. Not even the most violent moments here are without
touches of the exquisite, like the pattern of shells and dry grasses around the
body of a man who is murdered on screen. Devastating contrasts, like those that
tear the pimp-poet between love and cruelty, sustain visual interest even when
the film's overall scheme remains indistinct. But a fundamental
uncommunicativeness keeps the hypnotic "Cyclo" more memorable for isolated,
crystalline moments than as a successful whole.

While it rivals "Strange Days" as the most viscerally manipulative entry in this
year's New York Film Festival (it will be shown tonight at 6 and tomorrow at 5
P.M.), "Cyclo" becomes a more starkly realistic type of pressure cooker.
Unforeseen jolts, from outright electric shocks to the helicopter that tumbles
off a truck in the midst of Ho Chi Minh City, suit this battered setting and
convey a sense of steady peril.

The film's more abstract horrors include the sexual ordeals of the cyclo's
lovely sister, whose unworldliness makes her so valuable to perverts of all
persuasions, as well as the fate of a mentally defective boy whose life and the
cyclo's become intertwined. At the same time, its sense of the rarefied is as
exacting as the pedicure given by a foot fetishist to the cyclo's sister.
Through this jungle of beauty and misery, Mr. Hung cuts a bold if overly
circuitous path.

On the same bill is "Supermarket," a one-minute epiphany courtesy of David
Byrne, who imagines the faces of grocery shoppers on the brink of nuclear
annihilation. As part of a series of public service announcements called the
Hiroshima '95 project, "Supermarket" makes its point neatly while also
registering a gratifying last-minute thought.


CYCLO

Directed by Tran Anh Hung; written (in Vietnamese, with English subtitles) by
Mr. Hung with dialogue by Nguyan Trung Bing; director of photography, Benoit
Delhomme; edited by Nicole Dedieu and Claude Ronzeau; music by Ton That Tiet;
production designer, Benoit Barouh; produced by Christophe Rossignon. At Alice
Tully Hall tonight at 6 and Saturday at 5 P.M. as part of the 33d New York Film
Festival. Running time: 120 minutes. This film is not rated.

WITH: Le Van Loc (the cyclist), Tony Leung Chiu Wai (the poet), Tran Nu Yen Khe
(the sister), Nguyen Nhu Quynh (the boss) and Nguyen Hoang Phuc (Tooth).

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tran Nu Yen Khe as the sister in Tran Anh Hung's film "Cyclo."
(Film Society of Lincoln Center)





TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 13, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Vietnamese in Germany: No Jobs, No Country

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1230 words

DATELINE: BERLIN, Oct. 10


If there is a German version of the American dream, it begins and ends for some
in Block F of a housing project at 6 Gehrenseestrasse, in what was once East
Berlin.

Here, framed by the concrete symmetry of Communist-era architecture, hundreds of
Vietnamese trade gossip, buy newspapers in their own language, pay high rents
for mediocre housing and scout for jobs. But they also keep one eye out for the
police and wait for the answer to a question that hangs over them all: Will they
be among the 40,000 Vietnamese that Germany plans to deport to Vietnam over the
next five years?

This plan for systematic expulsion of contract workers hired by the Communist
Government in the former East Germany, who were never given permanent residency
status, and of other Vietnamese who have immigrated illegally, was devised this
year. It has been smoothed by a $140 million German aid package for Vietnam --
what some Germans are calling "head money."

It is a tangled tale of many strands and few heroes -- of cold war divisions
that have worked to the advantage of organized crime.

But, most of all, the deportation, which could become the biggest of its kind in
postwar Germany, exposes the central paradox of the country's attitude toward
foreigners. To prevent a revival of xenophobic neo-Nazi violence, officials
insist, unwanted and undocumented foreigners should be kept out of Germany. But
that, in turn, means that the agenda of the far right -- summed up in its
slogan, "Foreigners go home" -- is being fulfilled by a Government that says it
seeks social peace and justice.

Interior Minister Manfred Kanther, a man of both tough words and strong action,
says that such a policy is "the only guarantee against the abuses of
uncontrollable movements of immigrants in the future and against popular
discontent turning to radical political forces."

That is not how it seems in the hostels and apartment houses here that are so
densely and exclusively filled with Vietnamese that some Germans call them
ghettos.

"The people are afraid," said Son Vu Van, who runs a counseling service for
Vietnamese at another drab housing project nearby. "They are afraid to talk.
They are afraid they will be expelled."

A 33-year-old man who lives in Block F declined to be identified because he
feared that publicity would draw the immigration authorities' attention to him.
"Who knows who will be expelled, or why?" he said. "All we can do is wait and
see. There's nothing for us in Vietnam, so no one wants to go. But it's not good
here, either."

His home, he said, is a 150-square-foot room that he shares with one other
person in the five-story, government-run workers' hostel where many Vietnamese
have found homes. The toilets, kitchens and showers are all communal. The rent
is around $370 a month -- about half his earnings from construction work, the
man said.

The residents of Block F are among an estimated 100,000 Vietnamese currently in
Germany, the product of decades of uneven immigration.

In the 1970's, tens of thousands of South Vietnamese -- the so-called boat
people -- found willing asylum in the former West Germany, which introduced a
special law to give them permanent residence rights.

After the Communist victory in Vietnam, East Germany imported some 70,000
Vietnamese as contract laborers in the 1980's, just as the West Germans imported
hundreds of thousands of Turks as laborers in the 1960's.

Then came the collapse of Communism and German unification.

With too many workers and too few jobs as the newly unified state sought to
implant a free-market economy in the east, the Government offered each
Vietnamese contract worker a $2,000 payment and a ticket home. As many as 50,000
Vietnamese took the money and left.

But, as Europe's border restrictions began to crumble with the end of Communism,
up to 20,000 more Vietnamese workers who had been brought in by other countries
of Eastern Europe came here unlawfully, adding to the flow of Poles, Russians,
Gypsies and others already being drawn to what Mr. Kanther, the Interior
Minister, called "the magnet-like attraction of an economically strong Germany."

The response to the influx of foreigners was a violent neo-Nazi upsurge from
1990 until 1993 that persuaded the German authorities not only to crack down on
the far-rightists, but also to strengthen immigration controls.

Germany's longstanding constitutional guarantees of asylum were scrapped. New
legislation narrowed guarantees of asylum only to those fleeing persecution who
had valid identity documents and who had not traveled through any other country
to reach Germany.

A separate set of rules was adopted to cover the anomalous situation of the
Vietnamese from the former East Germany. These rules offered limited residence
rights for a maximum of two years, but only to those who had jobs, homes and no
criminal record.

In one way, the new rules worked. In 1992, 430,000 people sought asylum in
Germany. In 1994, the figure was 120,000 and of these, only 12,000 were given
residence permits.

Germany's crackdown carries heavy emotional and political cargo: if Germans seem
too tough on non-Germans, it inevitably evokes the country's Nazi past. German
officials respond by boasting that Germany has a large number of foreigners --
some seven million in a land of 81 million people.

Mr. Kanther said in a recent published interview that Germany spends between $8
billion and $11 billion a year to enforce its immigration laws and to provide
social services for people seeking residence.

"That is exemplary," he said. "For me there is not the slightest cause to
suggest that German asylum laws are inhumane."

That did not stop him from ordering the expulsion last month of seven Sudanese
asylum-seekers after a court dismissed their contention that they faced
political persecution at home. They were sent back to Khartoum aboard a
chartered Romanian plane despite the protests from the opposition Social
Democrats and the German Foreign Ministry. For Mr. Kanther, the point was to
prove that Germany is no easy touch for unlawful immigrants.

In the former East Germany, contract workers lived in small rooms and forfeited
part of their salary to the Communist authorities in Vietnam. Then, after
Communism's fall, Vietnam refused to take back the Vietnamese workers who had
not availed themselves of the initial $2,000 offer.

The German authorities, however, were under pressure from German industry to
normalize economic ties with Vietnam and thus to secure access to an emerging
Southeast Asian market. So last January, Germany and Vietnam agreed to a deal
promising aid and export guarantees if Vietnam would take back 40,000 of its own
people -- the first 2,500 by the end of this year.

The agreement, which does not affect those who were granted legal asylum, went
into effect last month. No one has been expelled yet because the Vietnamese
authorities have not approved an initial list of 200 to be deported.

"People are very worried about their stay here," said Hang Trinh Thu, a
25-year-old woman from Hanoi who has been in Germany for six years and who works
at a counseling center in Block F.

"Some of them gave up everything in Vietnam to come here. Here, they have jobs,
houses, children at school. They will do everything they can to stay in Germany.
In their own land, they are strangers."

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Vietnamese woman hanging her laundry in the hallway of a
hostel at Gehrenseestrasse No. 6 in Berlin. Germany has said that 40,000 of the
estimated 100,000 Vietnamese there will be deported in the next five years.
(Christian Schulz for The New York Times)


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 13, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                                  (New Jersey)

New Jersey Daily Briefing;
Memorial for Revolution's Poet

BYLINE: By TERRY PRISTIN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 103 words

DATELINE: FREEHOLD TOWNSHIP


Philip Freneau (1752-1832) is known as the Poet of the American Revolution, or,
sometimes, as the Father of American Prose. Yet Freneau, a roommate of James
Madison's at Princeton, doesn't have a rest stop named for him on the New Jersey
Turnpike, and the site of his home is currently occupied by an 18th
Century-style shopping center.

Yesterday, however, Freneau was honored by his hometown, which unveiled a statue
of him at Poet's Square, as the shopping center is known. It was created by
Thomas Jay Warren, sculptor of the Vietnam War Memorial at the Garden State Arts
Center.   TERRY PRISTIN

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 14, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER REVIEW;
Kissinger And Nixon On Trial

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 503 words


Judgment day has come for Richard M. Nixon and Henry A. Kissinger.

And court is in session at the MCC Theater, formerly the Manhattan Class
Company, at 120 West 28th Street in Chelsea, where Jim Simpson's
intermissionless "Nixon's Nixon," by Russell Lees, provides a brilliant
beginning for the company's 10th anniversary season.

Here are great themes and great men, given life in memorable performances by
Garry Bamman as the disgraced President and Steve Mellor as his Secretary of
State. Set in the Lincoln Sitting Room of the White House at 10 P.M. on Aug. 7,
1974, the eve of Nixon's resignation speech, "Nixon's Nixon" imagines the
content of a secret meeting between the two that is said to have actually
occurred.

Writhing in the coils of implacable fate, each man ponders his place in history.
Self-preservation, self-interest, ego, ambition and liquor fire their struggles
to maintain power. Alternately hopeful and despairing, Nixon clings to the
possibility that he can avoid resigning. Mr. Kissinger, certain of the
President's doom, maneuvers to stay on as Secretary of State in Gerald Ford's
Administration.

Bound by a past that is shaping their future, they look back, touching on
encounters with world figures like Leonid I. Brezhnev, Mao Zedung and John F.
Kennedy; there are memories, too, of the 1968 Czechoslovak uprising, the war in
Vietnam, the secret bombing of Cambodia, the overthrow of President Salvador
Allende Gossens of Chile, the killing of students on the campus of Kent State
University. And, of course, the White House tapes.

From time to time, each man takes on the role of one of the figures conjured up
by restless memory. As Nixon and Mr. Kissinger, Mr. Bamman and Mr. Mellor offer
no caricatures, no easy impersonations. But each skillfully evokes the man. Nor
is the playwright taking easy shots. The Nixon of "Nixon's Nixon" is a rounded
portrait: a powerful President, a formidable statesman, a wily politician, a
foul-mouthed adversary, a wounded animal loathing himself as the instrument of
his destruction and a father heart-wrenching in his acknowledgment of his
betrayal of his daughter Julie, who had come to his defense.

Smoothly directed by Mr. Simpson, Mr. Lees's play flashes with humor; watching
Nixon and Mr. Kissinger concoct a world crisis calculated to allow the President
to bow out as a hero is a hilarious as it is hair-raising.

"Nixon's Nixon" is playing through Oct. 22. It is excellent.

NIXON'S NIXON

By Russell Lees; directed by Jim Simpson; sets and lighting by Kyle Chepulis;
costumes by Daniele Hollywood; sound by Mike Nolan; projections, Abigail Simon
and Tal Yarden; props, Nora Pozos; production stage manager, Erica Blum;
production supervisors, Laura Kravets Gautier and Ira Mont. Presented by MCC
Theater, Robert LuPone and Bernard Telsey, executive directors; W. D. Cantler,
associate director. At 120 West 28th Street, Chelsea.

WITH: Gerry Bamman (Richard M. Nixon) and Steve Mellor (Henry Kissinger).

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Steve Mellor, left, and Gerry Bamman in "Nixon's Nixon. ("Joan
Marcus/"Nixon's Nixon").

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By LAUREL GRAEBER

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 36;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 949 words



WHAT I LIVED FOR
By Joyce Carol Oates.
William Abrahams/Plume, $14.95.
Jerome (Corky) Corcoran, an Irish-American businessman of modest means, has
never felt at home in the world since the murder of his father when he was 11.
In this novel he seeks the meaning behind another death, the suicide of a young
black woman. The result is "an engrossing, moving study of desperate, lonely and
lost souls," James Carroll said here last year.

LOUISA MAY ALCOTT: A Modern Biography
By Martha Saxton.
Noonday/Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $15.
There was much more to Louisa May Alcott than can be gleaned by reading "Little
Women." Although this book, originally published in 1977, portrays her as eager
to sacrifice for her peculiar parents, it also reveals her as a person whose
emotional needs had little to do with self-denial. It is "an absorbing, powerful
interpretation of a tormented woman," Patricia Meyer Spacks wrote in the Book
Review. More of Alcott's complexity emerges in THE SELECTED LETTERS OF LOUISA
MAY ALCOTT, edited by Joel Myerson and Daniel Shealy (University of Georgia,
$19.95). In her correspondence she is strong, spirited and cheerful, able to
write prolifically despite the demands placed upon her. This is "a brave and
vivid life in letters," Barbara L. Packer said in these pages in 1987. Just how
brave and vivid can be seen in A MARBLE WOMAN: Unknown Thrillers of Louisa May
Alcott, edited by Madeleine Stern (Avon, $11). The two novellas and three
stories in this volume, originally titled "Plots and Counterplots," represent
the Gothic adult fiction Alcott wrote for added income and, one suspects,
pleasure. As our reviewer, Diane Johnson, put it in 1976, "The heroines are
forceful, independent, sexually demanding, smoke dope and don't do housework."



STRANGE JUSTICE: The Selling of Clarence Thomas
By Jane Mayer and Jill Abramson. Plume, $12.95.
This examination of the personal and political history of a man whose nomination
to the Supreme Court was threatened by charges of sexual harassment concludes
that his accuser, Anita Hill, was telling the truth. Marshaling many named
sources, the authors have written "a fine and rational work, a cogent and
persuasive account," Martin Walker said here last year.

LILIANE: Resurrection of the Daughter
By Ntozake Shange. Picador USA, $12.
The title character is a young black artist who is revealed through her own
voice and that of her friends, lovers and analyst. She becomes both a highly
developed individual and a representative of her race and time. This novel "is a
dense, ambitious, worthy song," Valerie Sayers wrote in these pages earlier this
year.

LAST TRAIN TO MEMPHIS: The Rise of Elvis Presley
By Peter Guralnick. Back Bay/Little, Brown, $14.95.
According to the author, the man behind the myth really was a humble country
boy, devoted to his mother and both fair-minded and prescient enough to try to
bring black gospel music to a wider audience. This account of his early life is
"profound and moving . . . a triumph of biographical art," our reviewer, Stephen
Wright, said in 1994. Little, Brown has also reissued HANK WILLIAMS: The
Biography, by Colin Escott, with George Merritt and William MacEwen ($11.95).
Another son of the South, Williams is shown to have been much less innocent than
Presley when he entered the music business. Writing in The New York Times last
year, Margo Jefferson said the book redeems Williams "from years of sentimental
memoir writing and movie making."

WHILE ENGLAND SLEEPS
By David Leavitt. Houghton Mifflin, $11.95.
After being sued by Sir Stephen Spender, who claimed that the author had
appropriated details from his autobiography, "World Within World," David Leavitt
revised this novel. But the story is the same: In the late 1930's an upper-crust
British writer becomes involved in a love triangle with a young working-class
man and a woman of his own station. It is "a narrative that for the most part
rings true," Penelope Lively said here in 1993.

IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War
By Tobias Wolff. Vintage, $12.
The author of "This Boy's Life" writes of his tour in Vietnam, where he was
adviser to a South Vietnamese Army division. There is moral ambivalence here, as
well as "a great deal of precise, evocative writing," Bruce Bawer wrote in the
Book Review last year. It may be hard to picture the warriors of the "Iliad" in
the rice paddies of Southeast Asia, but Jonathan Shay has done just that in
ACHILLES IN VIETNAM: Combat Trauma and the Undoing of Character
(Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $12). The author, a psychiatrist who treats
Vietnam veterans suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder, shows how well
the cadences of Homer apply to the troubled emotions of 20th-century soldiers.
This is a "remarkable book . . . a vital contribution," Herbert Mitgang said in
The New York Times in 1994.

BORDERLINERS
By Peter Hoeg. Translated by Barbara Haveland.
Delta, $12.95.
In this novel by the author of "Smilla's Sense of Snow," the narrator,
14-year-old Peter, is the brutalized product of a Danish orphanage. Sent to an
elite academy, he and two other young outcasts set out to subvert the school's
Darwinian mission. This novel is "written from the heart," David Sacks said here
last year.

THE STAIN
By Rikki Ducornet. Dalkey Archive, $11.95.
Satan, nuns and an exorcist inhabit this author's first novel, a surrealistic
tale of a 19th-century French girl who is thought to be evil because of the
birthmark on her cheek. The "bawdy and fantastic plot at times recalls Gabriel
Garcia Marquez," Jill Grossman wrote in the Book Review in 1984.   LAUREL
GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Louisa May Alcott

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Science Fiction

BYLINE: By GERALD JONAS

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 33;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1191 words


Part of the fun of reading Ursula K. Le Guin is trying to sort out the myriad
historical and anthropological sources that lend weight to her densely imagined
fictions. In FOUR WAYS TO FORGIVENESS (Harper Prism, $20), the immediate focus
is on the neighboring worlds of Werel and Yeowe. Social organization on Werel
seems to combine the least appealing traits of feudalism and capitalism; rich
Werelians, known as the Owners, possess slaves known as assets. Women's lives
are controlled by men. When the Werelians export their rigid plantation system
to the colony world of Yeowe, the assets eventually rebel. To the astonishment
of Werel's hereditary warrior class, the rebels overcome their oppressors, with
the indirect assistance of the Ekumen, a federation of civilized worlds that
figures in much of Ms. Le Guin's science fiction.

It is not hard to discern in the entwined histories of Werel and Yeowe echoes of
South Africa, Vietnam, Ireland, 19th-century Hawaii, the antebellum South and so
on. But these echoes never become intrusive because, for all her interest in the
ways that societies evolve, Ms. Le Guin always homes in on individuals and the
roles they play, by choice or not, in the great events of history.
Characteristically, she chronicles the rebellion on Yeowe only in flashbacks.
The first of the four novellas in this book is set in a remote village on Yeowe
where a freedwoman named Yoss has come to "make" her soul, according to the
precepts of her religion, in preparation for death. Instead, she meets Chief
Abberkam, a onetime leader of the War of Liberation who, in the aftermath of
victory, betrayed his party and was exiled in disgrace to this backwater.

How Yoss and Abberkam find a measure of peace with each other is a local tale
with far-reaching implications. The same can be said of the three other
novellas, whose protagonists struggle toward a complex truth articulated by one
of the Ekumen's representatives on Yeowe: "All knowledge is local, all truth is
partial. . . . All knowledge is a part of the whole knowledge. . . . Once you
have seen the larger pattern, you cannot go back to seeing the part as the
whole."

BLOODCHILD: And Other Stories (Four Walls Eight Windows, $18) gathers together
the entire output of short fiction by Octavia E. Butler, who was awarded a
MacArthur Fellowship this year. Ms. Butler, who neither hides nor trumpets the
fact that she is one of a handful of black American women writing science
fiction, excels in the calm, straightforward presentation of characters and
societies in extremis. In her moving novel "Parable of the Sower," she wrote
about a teen-age prophet of a new religion in a disintegrating United States.
Two of the five stories in "Bloodchild" are set in near-future North Americas
afflicted by plagues that strike at the very heart of the social contract: one
disease causes people to lose the power of speech, the other goads them to
destroy their own flesh.

As powerful as these stories are, their impact pales in comparison with that of
the title story, which takes place on a distant world whose dominant species --
highly intelligent, egg-laying "worms" -- live in a symbiotic relationship with
human beings. It seems that the first humans to arrive on this planet were
refugees, in flight from members of their own species "who would have killed or
enslaved them." In exchange for permanent asylum, the humans provide an
indispensable service to their hosts. The specifics of this service become clear
only as the story progresses.

Where another writer might have wrung drama from the original interspecies
confrontation and accommodation, Ms. Butler picks up the thread generations
later, in a scene that veers from edgy domesticity into unmentionable horror and
ends in what can only be described as triumphal love. It is a fine example of
how science fiction, by subverting expectations, can jar us into a new
appreciation of familiar truths.

THE GOLDEN NINETIES (Spectra/Bantam, paper, $12.95), by Lisa Mason, borrows its
narrative strategy from Jack Finney's classic time-travel tale "Time and Again,"
which thrust the reader back into a meticulously re-created 19th-century New
York. Ms. Mason's venue of choice is San Francisco in the 1890's. Like Mr.
Finney, she has done her homework. From Nob Hill to Chinatown to the Barbary
Coast, her settings bristle with telling details, her characters rage with the
outsize ardors of a less repressed time and place.

Despite the author's obvious enthusiasm for the period, this is no mere exercise
in nostalgia. Ms. Mason has things to say about the place of women in society
that do not fit easily under the categories of conventional feminism. Her
protagonist, Zhu Wong, is a birth control activist in a 25th-century China that
has taken unpopular measures to deal with its chronic overpopulation. She is
plucked from prison and sent back to 19th-century San Francisco via a technology
that Ms. Mason wisely glosses over in a few pages of technobabble. (The same
technology appeared in her earlier novel "Summer of Love.")

Zhu's mission -- to make sure that a butterfly-shaped brooch passes into the
right hands -- is veiled in mystery from the beginning; the more the author
attempted to explain its significance, the more confused I became. Through the
legerdemain of time travel, the reader gets two endings to choose from, happy
and unhappy. Fortunately, the book's pleasures lie elsewhere: in Zhu's lively
alliance with a successful madam who relishes the title "Queen of the
Underworld"; in her masochistic love affair with a young man of limited means
and unlimited appetite for addictive substances; and in her unpredictable
encounters with prostitutes and gang enforcers and social reformers and schemers
on all levels of a society that Ms. Mason brings to life with a winning mixture
of intelligence and passion.

GAIA'S TOYS (Tom Doherty/Tor, $22.95), by Rebecca Ore, is an exemplary thriller
about eco terrorism that transcends its genre. Allison Dodge, abandoned at the
age of 8 by her parents, joins the violent wing of the environmental movement --
the folks who blow up polluting refineries -- for more reasons than she can keep
straight. These include a need to belong to something in an uncaring world and
the raw desire for revenge. Betrayed by her colleagues in the movement,
manipulated by Government agents, she discovers her true calling only when she
falls in with a group of dissidents who have even more to be angry about than
she does.

This is a difficult book to describe without giving away its many surprises.
Allison's 21st-century America comes alive through details that are fresh and
convincing -- the welfare recipients whose brains are periodically borrowed for
use as on-line computers, the gene-altered mantises whose vibrating feet make
music that soothes the welfare cases who keep them as pets. These same details
turn out to be instrumental in resolving the plot, which manages to stake out a
position on humanity's place in the environment without oversimplifying the
issues or demonizing those who hold other points of view.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

GORE VIDAL RECEIVES A VISITOR

BYLINE: By ANDREW SOLOMONS;    Andrew Solomon is a contributing writer to the
Magazine. His profile of the artist Bruce Nauman appeared in March.

SECTION: Section 6;   Page 40;   Column 1;   Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3190 words


Gore Vidal's villa in Ravello, though not particularly big or grand, is as
enchanting as he makes it sound: white stucco anchored miraculously into the
sheer face of the cliff, 12 acres of vertical stone and terraced gardens, a pool
that commands the same panorama as the house, an extra balcony for cocktails
just along the rock face. Vidal's forthcoming memoir, "Palimpsest," which I have
finished over breakfast, overflows with this place and its vistas: being here
now is like being received at Elsinore the morning you finish "Hamlet."

"You must be Solomon," says a man, mild and tanned and middle-aged, as he helps
me through the three gates between the private road and the house. He is Vidal's
companion of the last 45 years, Howard Austen (ne Auster), and has a marginal
presence at best in "Palimpsest." "A memoir is about what was -- if he were
dead, I might examine our relationship, but I'm not about to be a recorder of
domestic detail and cooks that we have had," Vidal will explain later. The
secret to the sustained connection, he will add, is that they never have sex
with each other. The study is the first room on the left. "Gore, this is
Solomon." Austen withdraws.

For almost seven years, Gore Vidal has refused to talk to newspapers and
magazines. (He told Hillary Clinton that he would never again do a print
interview in English.) "This is the last time," he announces with grim
satisfaction. I shake the hand that shook the hand that shook the hand of Wilde.
We admire the variations on the view from several rooms, then settle for the day
on the suede sofa in the study, Vidal reclining at one end like Xerxes, heaped
on pillows, his head silhouetted against the window so that the sparkling sea
seems a nimbus around his noble head. The light is kind to his 70th year, and
you cannot miss the handsome shape of his face; his bare ankle on the pietra
dura table top is curiously evocative of the same ankle, 45 years younger and as
many years more slender, on the cover of this year's hardback reissue of "The
City and the Pillar." His epigrammatic discourse -- bred in equal measure of
imagination, affectation and brilliance -- is delivered in a voice as rich and
smooth and alcoholic as zabaglione. Though he does not indulge the ego of the
interlocutor, his manner of well-bred control is most engaging, and you can see
at once why so many thousands of people slept with him (cf. "Palimpsest"), and
why so many others wanted to (op. cit.). For someone whose projection of self
and eros are so intertwined, growing old is unfortunate, but the effect is more
anomalous than homely.

If the rest of the Democratic Party had Vidal's subtle grasp of power, we might
live in the welcome compass of liberal rule, for he, by his own admission,
understands domination more profoundly than most modern politicians do, and
perhaps better than any other American novelist does. We begin, gently, with the
past. "Harry Truman, with bipartisan support, militarized the economy so that we
might be forever at war," he says, his tone grandiloquent with a thin edge of
paranoiac insight. "It was just decided that we were going to stay in the war
racket -- that's how we went broke. Now we have an enemy-of-the-month club. If
it's not Noriega, it's Bishop in Grenada; Qaddafi, whose eyeliner is very
ominous; Saddam, just like Hitler. When they get into their bunkers they always
find a copy of 'Mein Kampf,' a portrait of Hitler, women's underdrawers -- which
they wear -- a couple of dead Boy Scouts and three mistresses, because they do
both terrible things."

Vidal's grandfather T. P. Gore was a Democratic Senator from Oklahoma who
flirted with the Presidency. In 1960, Vidal himself ran for Congress in New
York's 29th District (mid-Hudson), losing the race but winning more votes than
any upstate Democrat in 50 years. He declined to be nominated for the United
States Senate in 1962 and finished second in the California senatorial primary
in 1982.  "I'm shocked by the literary figures of our day who go from university
to university and have no lives in the world," Vidal remarks. "What was Goethe's
line? 'Talent is formed in quiet, character in the stream of the world.' I have
been water-skiing on the stream of the world." Jackie Kennedy was Vidal's
mother's second husband's third wife's daughter, and so Vidal was an early
member of the Camelot circle. "Palimpsest" includes a series of haloed
recollections about J.F.K. that unfold Talmudically from 13 pages of notes that
Vidal took in 1961. "Jack believed in the cold war," he says now. "He really was
a war-lover, a very, very right-wing boy from a very Catholic family; we can
thank Cardinal Spellman for a good bit of the Vietnam War. Jack wanted to be a
great President, and he'd figured out that the great Presidents were war
Presidents."

Vidal makes you feel that the world turns as it does because of some
ultra-powerful people whom he has spurned and who have excluded you. (It's an
Emersonian, anti-Tolstoyan view: his "Lincoln" can be read as a rebuttal of "War
and Peace.") Do not say "conspiracy": Vidal doesn't like it. "They don't have to
conspire because they all think alike -- I mean, who runs The Times and Harvard
and the State Department and Hollywood? The country has always been an oligarchy
of money." He describes a debate with John Kenneth Galbraith and Arthur M.
Schlesinger Jr.: "There is no ruling class, they said, and used as an example
somebody -- Levine, I think he was called -- who was president of Du Pont, and
no du Pont was. And I said: 'Yes, I've been to Nelson Rockefeller's house. He
did not cook the lunch, you'll be surprised to know, but it was still his house,
I'm positive, even though somebody else put the food on the table.' " Meaningful
pause. "Politics was for the ones who weren't very good at business, and the
family was terrified to make them president of the company. Nelson Rockefeller
took it a little too far, and the family got quite upset, because the Governor
of New York and the President of the United States, these are people that you
hire, that you pay for, and then they do what you want them to do."

Vidal's influence disseminates through his novels. "Every Presidential
candidate, even Reagan, claimed to have read 'Lincoln,' " Vidal says. "He
probably colored it -- we had a version for them to color. Even Newt Gingrich
said 'Lincoln' is a wonderful book. I'd like to say that professional
politicians are struck by Lincoln's lack of vindictiveness, which is almost
unique in American politics, but what they like about it -- it's a complete
blueprint for how to become dictator of the United States and cover it with
rhetoric."

It is possible to take exception to the structuring devices of Vidal's
historical novels. The classical ones ("Julian," "Creation") include tedious
writing, but the American series -- "Burr," "Lincoln," "1876," "Empire,"
"Hollywood" and "Washington, D.C." -- are strong works of fiction. They return
America's history to its people, humanizing events that frighten us in their
abstraction, and present logical motivations for dark circumstances we thought
impossible fully to grasp. Vidal's trademark flights of fancy -- "Myra
Breckinridge," "Myron," "Duluth" and "Live From Golgotha" -- are called by Italo
Calvino "the hypernovel, or the novel elevated to the square or to the cube."
They are evil satires that out-poststructuralize the deconstructionists; when
they are not maudlin, confusing and overwritten, they are gloriously uninhibited
and very funny. Vidal is also the author of screenplays and plays, and a
collection of his excellent essays won the National Book Award in 1993. He is
perhaps the best-selling serious writer in our language. "At something like 13
or 14, I wanted to be a politician, but knew that I was a writer, and was
writing. The surprise was, just going back over it, how consistently I was
myself, from a very early age."

It's an alarming consistency, demon of an aphoristic mind. "I seem to have met
everyone, but I know no one," Vidal once remarked proudly. In "Palimpsest":
"Sexually, [Sir Henry Channon] preferred men to women and royalty to either";
"Osbert [Sitwell] was rosy-cheeked, with small sharp eyes alongside an important
nose" and, ludicrously, "Fully clothed, I got into bed with [Cecilia Sternberg]
and we passed bottle back and forth, and spoke blithely of the dead."

He is a brilliant mimic: during the afternoon we spend together, he evokes
Eleanor Roosevelt (" 'No dear, I'm not angry, only a little sad.' That can drive
a whole family around the bend, as hers was driven"), Lyndon Johnson ("That
voice makes men in Washington tremble"), Anais Nin (" 'My nerves are shattered,
but I am indomitable!' I never thought women were very good at erotic writing")
and Truman Capote, whom Vidal famously, and successfully, sued for libel.
"Truman could not tell the truth about anything. He was a psychopath, and the
lies would get crazier and crazier, and I'd watch his face as he told them, and
there was a kind of rictus going on, as though he was out of control, orgasmic
-- 'And then, you know, Greta Garbo got down on the waiter, and I just said,
"Greta, you can't do this here, and. . . ." ' You'd have to take him away
foaming. Truman thought his world was high society, never figured out that the
jet set was not high society. I was not about to let him know." The witticisms
fly around stinging, like an invasion of beautiful wasps. Vidal has an air of
geniality throughout. ("An air of geniality isn't difficult, is it, if you're
nicely brought up and have gone to dancing school?") It's basically Charisma
Central in Ravello, except that Vidal does tend to relate these tales of the
grand and glamorous life with that tone of exaggerated, meticulous clarity with
which I.B.M. support services will explain to you a computer you thought you
knew how to use.

A former President of Colombia, Alfonso Lopez, was a classmate at St. Albans;
Vidal recollects that he was the first to develop pubic hair -- "Latin blood,"
he says. Jack Kerouac was circumcised, "to my surprise." Tennessee Williams
cruised Jack Kennedy, which amused the President-to-be. Jackie douched with one
foot in the bathtub and the other on the floor. Vidal's maternal grandfather
once raped a blind girl; Vidal's father had three testicles. In Vidal's hands,
such information is power. Regarding a battle with an editor of the Exeter
literary magazine some 50 years ago: "It was a lovely victory." Meeting Norman
Mailer: "Mailer tells me that I was curious about his age. . . . He says that I
then calculated that I would 'win,' as I was bound, actuarially, to outlive
him." On the attacks that came from the mainstream when he wrote a novel about
homosexuals: "I decided that I was going to win." Of J.F.K.: "I am lucky. He was
not." Elsewhere: "I had risen far higher in the world than [my mother] Nina or
our other connections, excepting always Jackie . . . and I was not about to let
Nina forget my victory over her." Martin Amis wrote memorably about Vidal: "He
has removed pain from his own life, or narrowed it down to manageable areas; and
it is one thing he cannot convincingly recreate in his own fiction. But his
deeply competitive nature is still reassured to know that there is plenty of
pain about."

VIDAL'S NOVEL "THE CITY AND THE pillar," with its portrayal of eminently male
and athletic and "normal" homosexuality, is a landmark for the American gay
movement, and Vidal is still one of America's gay role models. "It was believed
in right-wing circles that I invented same sexuality in 1948 with 'The City and
the Pillar,' that nothing like that had ever happened in the United States until
my book. I feel like Prometheus having brought fire from heaven." But he
staunchly resists the idea of gay identity. "I don't want people in ghettos. I'm
a universalist. I think people should intermingle. Once you get the idea that
there's such a thing as a gay sensibility, then you've got to say that there's
such a thing as a straight sensibility. It's just hopeless. But if other people
are going to proscribe people belonging to a nonexistent category, one must
fight back with every weapon." And on the modern gay movement: "The resentments!
'I share your resentments' should be a greeting. As you enter a queer bar: 'I
share your resentments, good evening, I share them. May all your resentments be
mine.' My God! 'We had a wonderful day at the beach resenting consenting adults
of the other sex.' " Nor does he much like the idea of gay fiction: "What on
earth is that? Does that mean the book only hangs out with other books?"

Sex is as dissociated from love in Vidal's narrative of his life as in his
narrative of romping, rape-happy, fabulous Myra. "If you're not in the business
of baby making," he says, "the anonymous or paid encounter is far more
satisfactory. It takes so much time the other way. The anonymous encounter is
the pure thing. If it's somebody that you know, there's nothing exciting about
it at all to me; if I know somebody in one capacity, I certainly have no
interest in the other." He writes in "Palimpsest": "In my anonymous encounters,
at least, I was what used to be called 'trade.' I did nothing -- deliberately at
least -- to please the other. When I became too old for these attentions from
the young, I paid, gladly, thus relieving myself of having to please anyone in
any way." The sex with people he knew is rare and striking: he and Kerouac "both
thought, even then (this was before 'On the Road'), that we owed it to literary
history to couple." Vidal makes the point, emphatically, that he was the top.

But there is a figure throughout Vidal's work of "the one and only," most
clearly presented as Bob in "The City and the Pillar" -- an athletic straight
man who in the innocence of youth gives a perfect erotic and emotional
satisfaction to another young man. In "Palimpsest," the model for this figure is
revealed as Jimmie Trimble, a baseball hero from Vidal's class at St. Albans.
"He was the unfinished business of my life," Vidal once told a journalist. Here
he writes: "I had once been (in this very room -- and ever since?) in love."
And, "We were in Arcadia." And, "We were whole." Trimble was killed at 19 in
World War II, and Vidal's memoir drifts back and forth to him, an elegy to an
athlete dying young that is in curious contrast to the rather hard tone of the
other memories here.

In the Ravello sunshine, he declares that Trimble was his "twin" (the notion of
the twin fascinates, nearly obsesses him) and that such things do not happen
twice in the world -- but it seems to me that for most people, they either
happen not at all or over and over again. In "Palimpsest": "I was obliged to
face the fact that I was never going to make the journey from homoerotic to
homosexual and so I was never going to be able to have anything other than
one-sided passing sex. . . . This belated revelation was to prove a great
timesaver over the years."

Vidal has kept himself out of psychotherapy of any kind, which seems to reflect
an astonishing self-discipline; if ever anyone has had the painful credentials
for the psychoanalysis racket that has spoiled many of our most interesting
writers, it is he. He connects his resistance to sexual and emotional ties to
the horrendous example of his mother, who sounds, in his description, like the
worst mother anyone has ever had. "She confessed that rage made her orgasmic. I
forgot to ask her if sex ever did." And: "I got one good thing from Nina. I
would never marry. Ever. If they'd said, 'You'll get the White House if you have
a wife and five children,' all I had to do was think of my mother and, nope,
nope, no way."

A striking passage from "Lincoln":

"Oh kindness . . . !" Stevens turned to Hay. "Are you kind, sir?"

"No, sir," said Hay. "I don't think I am."

"But surely," said Chase, the only believing Christian of the three, "you try to
be."

"Well, no, sir, I don't think I do. At least not very hard."

"You see, Mr. Chase? There is a candid young man. He is like me. What kindness
we possess is of a general nature. You will be a statesman one day, Mr. Hay. No
doubt of that."

Vidal twice in the course of a day tells how Francois Mitterand, asked what
quality is most necessary in a great leader, said, "Well, I'd like to say
sincerity, but I'm afraid I must say indifference." Vidal achieves much personal
and literary power through the rigorous exercise of a steely disengagement. He
once wrote of Mary McCarthy that she was "uncorrupted by compassion." In
explicating Mitterand: "You bring yourself to the point of indifference so that
you can examine a situation with as little emotion and as much logic and
intelligence as you can bring to it, which you cannot bring to it if your heart
is breaking." Later, he says: "Kind? Is that an adjective one uses for writing?
Isn't writing more observation? You write what you see, what you hear, what you
think you see, what you think you hear, what you invent. Satirists are not
kindly people, and I'm a satirist. Kindness might be disabling for the
novelist."

But he also says, "I can't imagine how you could write anything without
empathy." No one would accuse Gore Vidal of being nice, and if he has inherited
his mother's particular relationship to rage, he must live in a state of
perpetual climax.  But he is not (as his reputation would have it) cold; he has
sometimes aspired to but has never fully achieved the statesman's indifference.
He is a circumspect romantic; it is the need to transcend feeling that weighs on
his heroes, from Cyrus Spitama to Lincoln to even the gorgeous Myra.  The pathos
and elegance of his work lie in the conflict between the bearing of a visionary
if unelectable politician and the sensibility of a fine writer -- between an
accomplished distance and palpably emotional self-recognition. Vidal has been
water-skiing on the stream of the world for 70 years, often in choppy water; he
has occasionally got wet. These days, he both resists and acknowledges his
experience of loss, concentrated in the manageable metaphor of Jimmie Trimble,
because he reckons his startling gift for pain mostly as a liability.

All this matters little. Vidal is on stage for the moment not for his
accomplishments, but for who and how he was. His memoir sensibly tails off with
the Kennedy stories, as if to freeze the image of him forever in a period we
have lately gilded. Like his chum Paul Bowles, whose concerts in New York last
month were jampacked, Vidal has let his artistic successes be overshadowed by
his life style. If he is to remain famous, it will largely be for his writing,
but at this moment, his writing is nearly irrelevant to his aura of glamour.
Lacking a live Scott Fitzgerald, one clings to his voice, cynical about an era
previous to the one about which we are cynical, an era whose ickiness is far
enough away to seem stylish to most of us. Vidal of the memoir is, depressingly
enough, as charming as a poodle skirt with a tennis sweater, as chic as old
Balenciaga.

NAME: Gore Vidal

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Vidal, left, who says he has met everyone and knows no one,
with Tennessee Williams and J.F.K., then running for President ("Far too
attractive for the American people," Williams said). (pg. 42); With Jimmie
Trimble, foreground, a St. Albans classmate: the love that haunts Vidal and his
fiction. (pg. 43) (PHOTOGRAPHS FROM THE COLLECTION OF GORE VIDAL)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

JAZZ VIEW;
A Jazz Generation and the Miles Davis Curse

BYLINE: By PETER WATROUS

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1563 words


THE ARRIVAL OF THE SAXOPHONIST Wayne Shorter's "High Life," his first recording
in seven years, makes jazz fans tremble with fear. Mr. Shorter, 62, is arguably
the most influential living jazz composer. Like his peers who inhabit jazz's
loftier realms -- Herbie Hancock, Ornette Coleman, Chick Corea, Sonny Rollins --
he has spent the last quarter century flashing bits of his grand talent, then
finding the nearest drain down which to dump the rest.

And his "High Life," which will be released on Tuesday, turns out to be a pastel
failure and a waste of his enormous talent; it is as if Picasso had given up
painting to design greeting cards. Mr. Shorter was a composer who, 30 years ago,
brought to jazz an entirely new harmonic vocabulary, one that is still the
training ground for young musicians.

"High Life" shows none of that vision; simply, it's an eager-to-please
instrumental pop album, with only a vestigial relationship to mainstream jazz
and virtually no connection to Mr. Shorter's glory years. But it is a
fascinating document, one whose esthetic explains much about a generation of
musicians and the idiom called fusion, and ultimately about the curse of Miles
Davis.

Fusion, which Mr. Shorter helped define, first as part of Miles Davis's group
and then as a founder of Weather Report, was a mule idiom, a bastardization of
jazz and pop. It was a marriage of funk and black music in Mr. Davis's hands,
and rock and world music in those of others. Its first real statement of intent
appeared on Mr. Davis's "Filles de Kilimanjaro" (1968), which was notable in its
use of electric keyboards. Fusion was meant to be the great black and white
hope, and it enabled its practitioners to make money: Mr. Davis and his pianist,
Herbie Hancock, had real pop hits.

It would be easy to dismiss what Miles Davis, who died in 1991, wrought as
commercialism. (There are plenty of examples of everyone from Mr. Hancock to Mr.
Coleman, in print, selling short the jazz tradition that allowed their
brilliance to flourish.) Yet the context that produced such abrupt changes of
esthetic and sensibility was clearly all powerful. In four years Mr. Davis and
his band moved from the acoustic music exemplified by "Live at the Plugged
Nickel," a recently released collection of recordings from 1965 that is one of
the great examples of group and formal improvisation found in 20th-century
music, to the hyper-electric "Bitches Brew" and rock audiences.

But culturally and politically, everything had changed around the musicians
during those four years. The Vietnam War dominated the public consciousness. The
civil-rights movement, the Chicago Democratic convention, the assassinations of
Robert Kennedy and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.; the list went on.

Rock was in its ascendance and offered plenty of examples of performers making
money and being creative at the same time. Jazz musicians, regularly reminded of
their music's pre-eminence only 25 years earlier and feeling progressively left
out of popular culture's turmoil and excitement, wanted a way back to relevance.
In retrospect, the means they chose was shockingly ephemeral.

Jazz audiences had been growing whiter, in an era of intense racial divisions.
The vanguard of jazz had abandoned dance-based rhythms and, in so doing, had
alienated fans. Early fusion, in its commercialism, was a way to regain jazz's
lost audience, particularly black listeners who had drifted away. The appeal of
fusion was irresistible, especially when neglect and privation were seemingly
the options. Even Duke Ellington toyed with pop music during this time.

While the early attempts at fusion were often musically sophisticated, the music
quickly faltered, losing its complexity and experimental vigor, and by the late
1970's it barely existed. Within a handful of years, jazz fusion became a sort
of instrumental pop music, using pop's melodic ideas, rhythms, instruments and
textures. And with that, a dream vanished; like any mule idiom, it was barren.

BUT LET'S BACK UP. Wayne Shorter may be the most important living jazz musician.
His sensibility permeates the work of virtually every musician under the age of
30 playing mainstream jazz, and plenty who are older. In his early work, his
improvising -- restrained and precisely colored -- suggests that he completely
understood the saxophone tradition from which he sprang. (Oddly, his work on
soprano saxophone leads directly to Kenny G.) But his most durable influence has
been compositional: he introduced a completely new harmonic vocabulary, one that
gave jazz a new sense of languor and urgency.

The recordings Mr. Shorter made between 1964 and 1967 for Blue Note -- "Night
Dreamer," "Juju," "Speak No Evil," "The All Seeing Eye," "Adam's Apple" and
"Schizophrenia" -- reduce many of today's young musicians to outright
exploitation. His compositions are staples of jazz studies -- the perfect
practice ground for young musicians exploring ambiguous, postbe-bop harmonies.

While Mr. Shorter was recording masterpieces, Mr. Davis was changing directions.
In 1969 he entered the studio to record the sessions that become "Bitches Brew,"
which sold 500,000 copies. In contrast, Mr. Shorter's albums on Blue Note were
selling roughly 5,000 copies.

That year Mr. Davis began touring with his band, opening rock concerts for
Santana. He performed at the Isle of Wight Pop Festival, in front of a crowd
estimated at 400,000. Only five years earlier, at the peak of his creative
energies, he was still often playing three or four sets a night at
hole-in-the-wall clubs. Accompanied by Mr. Shorter, Mr. Davis went on to open
shows for Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young, the Band, Laura Nyro and others. He
performed at the home of rock, the Fillmore, and even records a live album
there. Mr. Shorter still hadn't led a band in public.

It's impossible to overestimate Mr. Davis's influence, and not just on Mr.
Shorter. While Mr. Davis's sidemen and followers may not have taken his precise
musical formula, they certainly benefited from the battles he won as the advance
guard. The drummer Tony Williams and his group, Lifetime, recorded "Emergency"
in 1969. The pianist Joe Zawinal and Mr. Shorter formed Weather Report and
released their first fusion album in 1971. That year, the guitarist John
McLaughlin formed the Mahavishnu Orchestra. (The name was suggested by his guru,
Sri Chinmoy.) Mr. Corea formed Return to Forever in 1972. Two years later, Mr.
Shorter recorded "Native Dancer," a Brazilian jazz fusion album, and Herbie
Hancock released "Headhunters," which quickly sold half a million copies,
reaching No. 13 on Billboard's album chart.

This flurry of activity was noticed by musicians outside Davis's circle. Ornette
Coleman hired the avant-garde guitarist James (Blood) Ulmer the same year
"Headhunter" is released and issued his first fusion album, "Dancing in Your
Head," a year later. In 1973, Joe Henderson recorded a fusion album, "Multiple."
All the while, the pop-jazz label CTI Records, founded by the producer Creed
Taylor, was taking jazz veterans like Stanley Turrentine, Freddie Hubbard and
Milt Jackson into the studio to make some of the worst recordings of their
careers.

Clearly, the esthetic success achieved by jazz musicians through years of
practice and bandstand battles could be lost; jazz, improvisation and the
forward momentum of innovations are muscles that wither when not used. There are
few examples of jazz musicians who took an extended break from the music and
reappeared playing better. And virtually every important member of the fusion
generation has spent time moving between instrumental pop music and mainstream
jazz. None of them, whether it be Chick Corea, Herbie Hancock or Wayne Shorter,
have ever matched their earlier efforts.

So it has to be imagined: What would jazz look like today if Mr. Shorter, Mr.
Hancock, Mr. Corea and others had maintained their nerve and kept moving in the
mainstream of jazz, taking on its problems and amplifying their breakthroughs?
What would have happened if the innovations of the Miles Davis quintet had been
built on instead of abandoned?

One thing is sure. The legions of young people playing jazz now, picking up the
broken pieces left by their elders of two generations earlier, sometimes to
great effect and sometimes to the point of imitation, would not exist in the
form they do today. As good as it is, would one of the best-selling albums of
1991 have been Joe Henderson's acoustic album "Lush Life: The Music of Billy
Strayhorn"? Would historicism, instead of progressivism, be the vocabulary of
the present?

Mr. Shorter's "High Life," with its reliance on the most obvious pop back beats
and its sentimentalism, is quite likely a commercial mistake. The real money
nowadays is in acoustic music with intellectual weight. Mr. Henderson, Mr.
Shorter's label mate, sold 74,000 copies of "Lush Life." Mr. Shorter's three
albums, electric and ostensibly commercial, recorded for Columbia during the
1980's never sold more than 20,000 copies apiece.

Yet that's one of the enduring legacies of Miles Davis: not only did he wipe out
the serious aspirations of a generation but when the time is ripe for a Mr.
Shorter to return to mainstream jazz, the place of his greatest achievements,
he's blind to see it. And he's losing money too.

NAME: Wayne Shorter

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Miles Davis, left, and Wayne Shorter, both circa 1975--The jazz
fusion movement gathered steam in the early 1970's, with Mr. Davis in the
vanguard and Mr. Shorter often at his side. (Illustration by Stephen Kroninger
from photographs by David Gahr) (pg. 1); Chick Corea; Tony Williams; Lenny
White; Wayne Shorter; Herbie Hancock; Joe Zawinal; John McGlaughlin; Children of
Miles -- His sidemen may not have always followed his musical formula, but they
benefited from the battles he had won as fusion's advance guard.; Sonny Rollins;
Ornette Coleman, Joe Henderson; Gil Evans; George Russell; Cousins of Miles --
Many musicians outside Mr. Davis's circle also pulled away from their mainstream
roots to experiment with fusion jazz in 1970's. (Photographs by DAVID GAHR) (pg.
40)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Q AND A

BYLINE: By TERENCE NEILAN

SECTION: Section 5; Page 22; Column 5; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1141 words



Practice, Practice, Practice

Q.  My husband, a serious amateur pianist, and I are planning a trip to Europe.
Our itinerary will include London, Paris and Edinburgh. Is there anywhere in
those cities he can practice while we are away? -- Patricia Green, New York,
N.Y.

A.  There are a few places that should fit the bill.

In London, the Royal Academy of Music has its hands full with students in the
daytime but says evenings and Sundays are available for practice. Two studios
are available, one with a grand piano at $18.60 an hour and the other with an
upright at $15.50 an hour, calculated at $1.55 to the pound. The academy is at
34 Marylebone Road, London NW1 5HT; telephone (44 171) 873 7373, fax (44 171)
873 7374. Nearest Underground station: Baker Street.

Wigmore Hall has two rehearsal rooms available Monday to Friday from 10 A.M. to
6 P.M. at $12.40 an hour. The hall is at 36 Wigmore Street, London W1H 0BP; (44
171) 935 2141, fax (44 171) 224 3800. Nearest Underground: Bond Street.

Fazioli Studios has rooms available Monday to Friday from 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Saturday from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Sunday by appointment. Rates are $11.60 for a
grand and $13.20 an hour for an upright. The studios are at 29 Marylebone Lane,
London W1M 5FH; (44 171) 486 0025, fax (44 171) 935 8454. Nearest Underground:
Bond Street.

In Edinburgh, Varsity Music has a practice room available Monday to Saturday
from 9 A.M. to 6 P.M. for $4.65 an hour. Alternatively it will deliver a piano
to your hotel room (with the hotel's permission) at a cost of $232.50 a week.
The studio, which is a half mile from the main railway station on the A7 road
opposite the Festival Theater, is at 8A-10A Nicolson Street, Edinburgh EH8 9DH;
phone and fax (44 131) 556 3273. Ask for Seph Turner.

In Paris the Salle Pleyel has rooms available for $10.50 an hour once the daily
students have finished their work. The hall is at 252 Rue du Faubourg
St.-Honore, Paris 8; (33 1) 45.61.53.00, fax (33 1) 45.61.46.87. Nearest Metro:
Ternes.

Pianos Hamlet is a short distance away at 264 Rue du Faubourg St.-Honore, Paris
8; (33 1) 44.15.84.84, fax (33 1) 44.15.84.80. A room with a Steinway is
available for $19 an hour Monday to Saturday from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. Nearest
Metro: Ternes.

Pianos Hamm has practice rooms available Monday to Saturday from 10 A.M. to 10
P.M. at $9 an hour for a grand and $7 for an upright. Hamm is at 135 Rue de
Rennes, Paris 6; (33 1) 44.39.35.35, fax (33 1) 44.39.35.50. Nearest Metro:
St.-Placide.

South African Rentals

Q.  Two years ago we went on a wonderful trip to South Africa and would like to
return to the Llandudno-Cape Town area and rent a one-bedroom apartment during
the Maine winter. Are there any agents there who could handle that? -- Rosina
Fontein, Biddeford Pool, Me.

A.You have picked a lovely spot to return to, but be aware that Lladudno is an
upscale area, mostly on the beach front, and that January to April is the peak
period in South Africa. You should expect, therefore, to pay up to $100 or more
a day.

Any of the following can help:

Accommodation Shop, Shop 10, Marine House, St. John's Road, Sea Point 8001,
South Africa; (27 21) 434-2248, fax (27 21) 434-2238. Vacation and long-term
rentals available throughout the Cape.

A-Z Holiday Accommodation, Post Office Box 383, Milnerton 7435, South Africa;
(27 21) 551-2785, fax (27 21) 551-1450. Short-term and long-term accommodation
available in all areas, ranging from budget to luxury private homes and
cottages.

Accomplace, Suite 9, Primavera, Gilmourhill Road, Tamboerskloof 8001, South
Africa; (27 21) 26-2245, fax (27 21) 124-1796. A range of private homes.

Apartments and Homes, 154 Main Road, Sea Point 8001, South Africa; (27 21)
439-4126, fax (27 21) 439-9621. Apartment and hotel reservation service.

Cape Holiday Homes, Post Office Box 2044, Cape Town 8000, South Africa; (27 21)
419-0430, fax (27 21) 217-370, Houses and apartments throughout the Cape
Peninsula.

Execurent, H106 Dolphin Beach, Marine Drive, Table View 7441, South Africa; (27
21) 557-5450, fax (27 21) 557-4280. Luxury homes and apartments for daily,
weekly and monthly rentals.

Holiday Booking Service, Post Office 5514, Cape Town 8000, South Africa; (27 21)
24-3693, fax (27 21) 24-1907. Private homes, from economy to luxury.

Private Places, Post Office Box 489, Milnerton 7435, South Africa; (27 21)
52-1200, fax (27 21) 551-1487. Vacation and business apartments.

Vietnam's Tet Holiday

Q.  We plan to visit Vietnam as independent travelers next February. When is
Tet, the lunar new year, and is it a good time or a bad time to be there? -- J.
Tuttle, Orinda, Calif.

A.  The Tet celebrations will be held from Feb. 18 to 20, and if joyous but
noisy celebrations, with lots of fireworks and milling crowds, are what you have
in mind then you are headed for the right place.

Many regular public activities will come to a halt as people take off from work
to spend time with families and friends. Many others will be visiting Buddhist
pagodas and churches and other public places. New Year's Eve, Feb. 18, is the
night for joining the crowds on the streets.

If you haven't booked a hotel room by now, particularly in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh
City, formerly Saigon, you might have left it too late. The Tet holiday brings
thousands of people to those two cities, including Vietnamese from overseas.

And be sure your airline reservations have been made. Because of the large
number of visiting Vietnamese, getting in and getting out can be a problem at
Tet time.


The Train in Spain

Q.  I am planning to visit Spain this fall and want to travel by overnight train
from Barcelona to Madrid. I would like to reserve sleeping-car accommodations
for the journey and don't want to wait till arriving to make them. Can I can do
that from the United States? -- Lawrence M. Quigley, Fair Haven, N.J.

A.  Tickets and sleeping car reservations for that train can be obtained from
Rail Europe, a marketing group that represents rail travel in virtually all of
Continental western Europe, and big cities in eastern Europe.

This fall, from Sept. 24 to Dec. 3, the overnight train runs Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday and Thursday. It leaves Barcelona Sants station at 11 P.M., arriving
at Madrid Chamartin at 8 A.M. the next day.

The one-way fare is $62 in first class and $41 in second.

The sleeping accommodation is provided in second-class couchettes (seats that
convert to beds; bedding is provided) for $24 a person; second-class sleepers
for four people at $42 a person; first-class single sleepers at $94 and
first-class double sleepers at $58 a person. Prices do not include a $10
handling fee.

The train is the No. 1373. More information: Rail Europe, (800) 438-7245 or
(800) 848-7245, fax (800) 432-1329.   TERENCE NEILAN

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

San Francisco's Urban Retreat

BYLINE: By TERRY TRUCCO;    TERRY TRUCCO writes frequently about travel.

SECTION: Section 5;   Page 14;   Column 1;   Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1838 words


IT was a typical late-summer day in San Francisco -- breezy, hazy and cold,
though the sun was doing its best to burn off the fog. The city was packed with
visitors, but you'd never know it from where my husband, Steve, and I sat on
Baker Beach, an idyllic milelong stretch of sand near San Francisco's
northwestern tip, with an inspiring view of the Pacific Ocean and the Golden
Gate Bridge.

A guidebook I'd read warned that on weekends picnickers and sunbathers swarmed
onto the beach, but on this Wednesday afternoon we had the place to ourselves,
except for an old man with a fishing pole. Seated on a log at the water's edge,
we gazed out at the ocean and the tawny hills of the Marin Headlands and took in
deep breaths of sea air. From our sand dune in the wilds it was hard to believe
this was part of bustling San Francisco.

The absence of crowds seemed doubly strange since we were also on the outskirts
of the newest section of a national park, the 1,480-acre Presidio, the
218-year-old military base that became part of the Golden Gate National
Recreation Area on Oct. 1, 1994.

A glance at a map shows that the Presidio occupies a hefty piece of prime turf
overlooking both the Pacific Ocean and San Francisco Bay in the city's northwest
corner. But unlike its tourist-saturated cousins such as Yosemite National Park
or the Grand Canyon, the Presidio still seems pleasantly uncrowded. In the two
and a half days I recently spent at the park, both with my husband and on my
own, I never waited in a line, and was never asked to snap a photograph of a
fellow traveler. Those were weekdays, of course, but even on weekends, when the
lookout deck near the Golden Gate Bridge is jam-packed, parts of the park, a
ranger assured me, are almost people free.

It is, in short, the ultimate urban retreat, a place to escape for an afternoon,
drink in a little military history, snuggle up to mother nature and catch your
breath before plunging back into the fray of the city.

This is a park of quiet pleasures -- exquisite walking trails lined with
fragrant wildflowers, water views (both ocean and bay), superb 19th-century
architecture and over 170 species of birds. The California quail and the hairy
woodpecker both inhabit the park. The few people I saw looked like local
residents, from the runners pounding the bayside trail near Crissy Airfield, to
the cyclists pedaling through the Presidio's rugged forests of eucalyptus,
cypress and pine. (The Presidio was a nonrestricted base long before the
military left, so San Franciscans are familiar with its hiking and biking
trails.)

The Presidio's moderate head count stems in part from its status as a
park-in-progress. After its long history as a military base, first under Spain,
which founded it in 1776, then under Mexico, which occupied it from 1821, and,
finally, the United States, which seized it during the Mexican-American war in
1846, Congress passed legislation in 1972 calling for the Presidio's transfer
from the Department of Defense to the National Park Service. The move became a
reality in 1989, when Congress voted to close the base as a cost-cutting measure
and hand it over to the Park Service in 1994.

Despite an amicable transfer, the Presidio has lost much of its spit-and-polish
appearance, as well as its sense of purpose, since the military departed. Parts
of the old base look like a ghost town, with dozens of deserted buildings,
including some magnificent Queen Anne-style Victorian houses. You see broken
windows and dried-up lawns riddled with weeds. Vast sections of the enormous
grounds also look neglected, including sections of forest that soldiers planted
from seedlings a century ago to halt erosion and provide windbreaks.

IN fact, there's so much infrastructure work required, from the removal of toxic
substances in confined areas to reviewing the seismic codes for several hundred
buildings, that the Park Service seems overwhelmed. A ranger admitted that no
one is shooing out the Sixth U.S. Army's remaining personnel, since they keep
their houses painted and maintain their yards.

The Park Service hasn't yet made the Presidio as visitor friendly as it could
be, either. There's an information center about a mile in from the Lombard
Street entrance at the eastern edge of the park. But with no mention of the
center as you enter the park -- the faded map near the Lombard Street entrance
tells you where to pick up a military ID and find the Officers' Club -- Steve
and I drove aimlessly before finding a free, up-to-date map at the post office,
which turned out to be a short drive from the information center.

The Presidio's future is, in fact, somewhat hazy. According to the Park
Service's latest grandiose-sounding proposal, the 21st-century Presidio will be
a center for conservation and environmental management, with many buildings
leased for research, education and training institutions "addressing the world's
most critical environmental, social and cultural issues." The Gorbachev
Foundation, set up by the former Soviet President, already leases the 1890 Coast
Guard lifesaving station for a think tank with a peace theme, and the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is next door, though the plan also calls
for more mundane elements, like bed and breakfast inns and improved hiking
trails.

Ultimately, the Presidio's future depends on Congress, both for the legislation
to carry out the Park Service plan and the money to pay for it. The plan's
proponents must also fight off those who want to sell the Presidio, which would
also require an act of Congress.

In the meantime, the Presidio offers the savvy visitor plenty of entertainment,
provided you scour the free Park Service pamphlets available at the information
center for options and have a map (the center sells an annotated one for $2). If
you plan to see the entire spread, which includes an immense national military
cemetery, 11 miles of hiking trails, 14 miles of cycling trails, more than 800
buildings, a 300-acre redwood forest, ocean views and California's second oldest
golf course (it opened to the public in September after years of use by the
military), you'll need a bicycle, which you can rent at one of the shops just
off campus, or a car. You can also reach the Presidio by public bus for $1 if
you don't mind restricting your visit to specific areas, like the Main Post or
Crissy Airfield, and walking a lot.

Steve and I started our Presidio tour with a drive around the grounds to get our
bearings, cruising gently hilly streets with names like Lincoln, Sheridan and
Infantry Terrace. In general, the military buildings, including 1920's aircraft
hangars and some once-elegant officers' houses, are clustered in the northern,
eastern and central reaches, with the 18-hole golf course hugging the park's
southern border and the base's wildlife regions abutting the Pacific Ocean to
the west.

We drove through the dignified San Francisco National Military Cemetery, where
some 30,000 soldiers from the Civil War to the Vietnam War lie buried, and
perused the military's pet cemetery, where tombstones sport names like Rusty,
Tippy and Little Lovey. The drive took us through forests, meadows and
grasslands with the majestic Golden Gate Bridge visible much of the time. Small
wonder the Presidio was known as the Army's best duty station, bar none.

Ready for some history, we parked near Fort Point, a sturdy, three-tiered brick
structure built in 1853 to guard against enemy fleets, which, fortunately, never
arrived. The wind whistles through the ground-floor courtyard, and the
second-floor museum includes a recreation of the officers' mess, complete with
the kitchen philosophy of one Capt. James M. Sanderson, who in 1862 warned that
"beans, badly boiled, kill more than bullets, and fat is more fatal than
powder." But the highlight, literally, is the roof, with its imposing bronze
cannons and enticing, if windy, views of the ocean and San Francisco Bay.

We left, walking past the spot where Kim Novak plunged into the bay in the
Alfred Hitchcock movie "Vertigo." Then, map in hand, we headed for the Coastal
Trail, an easy but enjoyable one-and-a-half-mile hike that goes under the Golden
Gate Bridge and along a well-delineated path lined with trees, shrubs and
wildflowers. We passed several weathered 19th-century defense batteries, gazed
out at the Pacific and ended up staring down at Baker Beach from atop an
enormous sand dune (you clamber down a staircase of 300 logs to reach the
water).

By the time we were back at the Main Post we were hungry, so we headed for the
base's lone public mess hall, Burger King. The eating area was identical to
those at Burger Kings across the country, with one major exception -- the huge
domed windows offered a jaw-dropping view of the Golden Gate Bridge.

I came back the next day on my own, primed for the milelong walking tour of the
Main Post with the Park Service pamphlet as my guide. The hourlong walk covers
several large, paved blocks, an area akin to an outdoor architectural museum,
with barracks of assorted generations, an 1867 wooden chapel and a pair of
17th-century bronze cannons brought there by the Spaniards.

My favorite part was the stroll along the tree-lined Funston Avenue, with its
collection of simple Queen Anne-style cottages, built between 1862 and 1863, and
more spectacular Queen Anne Victorian houses with bay windows, stained glass and
enclosed porches, built in the late 1880's for high officers. Unlike San
Francisco's famous painted-lady Victorians, which flaunt three to five
harmoniously contrasting colors, the Presidio's Queen Annes have simple red
roofs and cream-colored walls, which lend this flamboyant architecture a calming
touch.

The chipper Presidio Museum, billeted in a former hospital from 1864, was also
amusing, with its collection of vintage military uniforms, San Francisco lore
and historic facts (the Spanish word presidio means enforcement). Best of all
were the two compact dark-green cottages behind the museum that looked like
real-life versions of the plastic houses from a Monopoly game. The army built
over 5,000 of them to shelter San Franciscans made homeless by the 1906
earthquake, and set them, cheek by jowl, in refugee camps throughout the city.

FROM there, I set off on the two-mile ecology trail, which took me through
brush, woods and past El Polin Spring, a narrow brook that gurgles through dense
trees. Though I felt isolated much of the time, a ranger assured me that the
park is considered safe during the day. Visitors are encouraged to avoid heavily
wooded areas at night and I had no desire to linger past sunset, even though I
hadn't seen everything. Besides, it's nice to save something, like a round of
golf or a ride on the bike trail, for your next visit, because the Presidio is
worth a return trip, particularly if you long to get away from it all in San
Francisco.

Golden Gate National Recreation Area-Presidio, (415) 556-0865.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Main Post, once the center of the military base at the
Presidio, offers stunning views of San Francisco Bay, less than a quarter-mile
to the north.; Part of the beach area along San Francisco Bay.; Biking on
Washington Street with a view of the Marin Headlands. (pg. 14); Cream-sided,
red-roofed Victorians on Funston Avenue. (pg. 16) (Photographs by Terrence
McCarthy for The New York Times)

Map of The Presidio in San Francisco.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'No More Vietnams'

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 4;  Column 5;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 322 words


To the Editor:

It is interesting to compare the review of Colin L. Powell's new book, "My
American Journey," with the review of "Telltale Hearts," by Adam Garfinkle, both
of which appeared in the Sept. 17 issue. Ronald Steel states that Mr. Powell's
reaction to the Vietnam War led to a "rare angry outburst" in his book and
"almost certainly explains his reluctance" to use American forces abroad. By
contrast, Thomas Powers observes that the subject of Mr. Garfinkle's book, the
Vietnam antiwar movement, "seemed to have been exhausted years ago."

Both Mr. Garfinkle and Mr. Powers might have profited from greater attention to
the bases for the actions of General Powell, one of the leading architects of
American foreign policy over the last decade as national security adviser and
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The "seething" resentment Mr. Steel finds
in military members following the Vietnam War (in which Mr. Powell served two
tours of duty) unquestionably has a deep root in the antiwar attitudes of their
fellow citizens. It has long been noted that "No more Vietnams" has replaced "No
more Munichs" as a talisman for a new generation of policy makers -- a
reflection of just how enduring the impact of the antiwar movement remains.

The truth of the matter is captured by Mr. Powers, when he says that "the war is
not dead and buried but haunting its survivors with its persistent throb." As a
special assistant to Gen. William C. Westmoreland during the Tet offensive in
1968, and the first Vietnam veteran confirmed by the Senate to a civilian post
in the Pentagon in 1979, I find that the power of antiwar sentiments regularly
invades my perspective on foreign and even domestic affairs. Mr. Garfinkle makes
clear that it is healthier to remain steadily aware of, and to govern, that
influence rather than to let it creep into one's outlook unconsciously.

JOSEPH C. ZENGERLE
Bethesda, Md.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Capital Scrambling to Prepare for March

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 24;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 735 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 14


Preparations for a huge rally of black men here on Monday continued today
despite a heavy morning rain that drenched the site of the event, called the
Million Man March. But rain was the least of the distractions besetting
organizers.

With local businesses, schools and other institutions bracing for traffic chaos
on Monday, some local officials planning for the march said they had not been
apprised of important issues, including arrangements for 11,000 buses that
organizers say will be arriving in the area.

"We're prepared as best we can be, with the information we have been provided,"
Sgt. Joseph R. Cox, special events coordinator of the National Park Police, said
today. But the information was scant and suspect, he said, and because
organizers have not told authorities from what direction buses will be coming,
"traffic could be a nightmare."

With organizers holding strong to predictions of a million or more black men
participating in the rally on The Mall, city planners have spent months
developing strategies to accommodate so many people. The plans involve two dozen
law-enforcement agencies in Washington, Maryland and Virginia.

For most people who work in Washington, including 360,000 Federal employees,
Monday is a work day. Many employers have said they will offer their workers
flexible hours and liberal leave policies for those who want to attend the march
or avoid it. To ease the expected crush of rush-hour traffic, organizers have
urged marchers to arrive between midnight and 4:30 A.M.

But just how smoothly that process might proceed is impossible to gauge.

The Rev. Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., national director of the march, said he
expected 9,000 private vehicles to bring people to Washington, in addition to
the buses.

"Any time you get a new group trying to hit a million people, there could be
some problems," said Samuel E. Jordan, acting director of the District's Office
for Emergency Preparedness.

Mr. Jordan's office plans for all major events in the city that attract hundreds
of thousands of people, like inaugurations, celebrations and political
demonstrations. Until now, the largest political rally ever staged in Washington
was the Vietnam War moratorium rally in 1969, which drew 600,000, according to
the National Park Service.

The largest event ever was Lyndon B. Johnson's inauguration in 1965, with 1.2
million.

But even half that many people could put an enormous strain on traffic,
patience, even bladders.

"They don't appear to have enough port-o-potties," said Capt. Tom Wilkins of the
park police. "They told me they would have up to 1,500, but if they are going to
have a million people here, they need 3,300. There could be some long lines."

Sergeant Cox said that he was not sure the crowd would be as large as predicted.

"They tell us 11,000 buses are anticipated to come to this, and we can't find
any evidence to support that," he said. "At this time we have not been able to
identify even 2,000 buses coming to this."

Another city official involved in planning for the event, who spoke on condition
of anonymity, said that she had found the march organizers to be reluctant to
share information.

"Normally," she said, "planning events like this, we know six months ahead of
time about the program and security arrangements. They haven't told us any of
that."

The organizers did not return a telephone call seeking comment.

Organizers say that most bus drivers have been assigned to drop their passengers
off at a terminal point of the city's subway and then proceed to a designated
parking lot. The subway system is scheduled to operate for marchers only between
12:30 A.M. and 4:30 A.M., hours it is normally shut down.

But other drivers have been told to drop passengers on The Mall, which Sergeant
Cox said would create "absolute chaos."

To say nothing of how a million people might find the right bus for the ride
home. The official program ends at 4 P.M. but it is to be followed by four hours
of other activities on The Mall and a reception at the Washington Convention
Center that is scheduled to begin at 9 P.M.

Mr. Jordan said he also worried about the effect of the rain on The Mall.
Washington was pelted for more than 10 hours today, leaving the ground where
most of the marchers will collect unusually soft.

"It'll take a day and a half to dry out," he said. "It could turn a little muddy
out there."

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: City officials in Washington say preparations for the black
men's march there on Monday have lagged because of inadequate information. One
concern is that there will not be enough portable toilets to accommodate the
crowd. Workers moved toilets into position on the Mall yesterday. (Associated
Press)

Map of Washington showing the part of Constitution Avenue along the Mall that
will be closed for the march.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Calcutta Hopes as Communists Push Free Marke

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1456 words

DATELINE: CALCUTTA, India


Until last fall, American diplomats working in a high-walled compound in one of
this city's more prosperous districts were often made to feel unwanted. During
the Vietnam War, the street outside the United States Consulate General was
renamed for Ho Chi Minh. The gesture signaled the onset of 25 years of
demonstrations and harassment that made the consulate one of the most
beleaguered American diplomatic posts anywhere.

Then, suddenly, from one day to the next, the protests stopped. Where angry
crowds once threw up makeshift platforms against the consulate walls for
left-wing politicians to declaim against American imperialism, Calcutta
businessmen now line up for visas that will give them a crack at the burgeoning
trade between India and the United States.

The new mood reflects the wider changes in India, which has sought improved
relations with the United States since New Delhi's alliance with the Soviet
Union collapsed. Nowhere has the change reverberated more strongly than in
Calcutta, the capital of West Bengal, which has been governed since 1978 by a
breakaway faction of the Indian Communist Party, the Communist Party of India
(Marxist).

While land reforms introduced by the Communists broke up feudal fiefs that had
dominated the state of West Bengal for centuries and produced some of the most
bountiful grain harvests anywhere in India, the poverty that has made Calcutta a
byword for urban degradation has shown little sign of receding.

Now, for the first time in a generation, Calcuttans are beginning to hope that
the city's long descent may finally be over. Since September 1994, the
government here has formally thrown its weight behind the free-market economic
reforms that were adopted by the national Government in New Delhi in 1991.

In place of helter-skelter nationalization, work stoppages that had driven
thousands of businesses into bankruptcy, and a general climate of hostility
toward outsiders, the Communists here have become arch-apostles for the new
doctrines of free enterprise, foreign investment and a work culture that
emphasizes productivity over strikes.

These days, visitors calling on Jyoti Basu, the 82-year-old Communist leader who
heads the state government as Chief Minister, are likely to find him tinkering
with his new desktop computer in the Writer's Building, the colonial edifice
that served as the East India Company's headquarters when it ruled much of India
in the 18th and 19th centuries.

Mr. Basu himself, immaculate in a homespun muslin dhoti, reminisces about his
visit this summer to the United States, where he criss-crossed the country
addressing Wall Street bankers and corporate executives from Boston to San
Francisco.

Mr. Basu shakes his head vigorously when visitors suggest that the collapse of
the Soviet Union helped bankrupt the ideology he has followed since the British
authorities imprisoned him for his work as an underground Communist leader more
than 50 years ago.

"A debacle has taken place in the Soviet Union, but we don't think it as the end
of Marxism," he said.

Still, Mr. Basu speaks of his new policies in ways that make them hard to
distinguish from those of the governing Congress Party leaders in New Delhi, who
initiated the free-market economic reforms at the national level that have set
off a rush for private investment, especially foreign investment, by India's 32
states and territories.

"If you are a Marxist or a Socialist, you must look at the realities of the
situation, not what you imagine to be there," he said.

His conversion could have far-reaching implications, and not only for West
Bengal, whose 70 million people remain close to the bottom of Asia's social and
economic ladder. Although the economic reforms appear to have stalled at the
national level, many Indians cite acceptance of the reforms in West Bengal -- a
bastion of Indian Communism since the 1930's -- as proof that whatever the
short-run political obstacles to free-market reforms, India ultimately has
nowhere else to go.

Also, political pundits continue to suggest Mr. Basu as a possible prime
minister after general elections expected in March or April. With the Congress
Party undermined by allegations of high-level corruption and by divisions over
the economic reforms, many commentators predict that the pro-reform wing of the
Congress Party could be forced to seek a coalition with left-wing groups,
including the the Communists, whose two main factions, including the Basu group,
hold 50 of the 545 seats in Parliament.

So far, in Calcutta, the reforms' effects have been limited. Especially during
the monsoons, the city presents a dispiriting spectacle of decaying buildings,
vast slums where millions survive amid seas of mud and filth, sidewalks lined
with the homeless sleeping on mats of sodden cardboard, stick-thin mothers with
small children begging a few rupees for food.

Along traffic-clogged avenues in the city center, signs suggest that Mr. Basu
and his colleagues have started not so much a revolution as a battle for the
city's soul. Ho Chi Minh Street and others renamed by the Communists -- Lenin
Street, Karl Marx Street -- testify to old loyalties, as do posters in the
bazaars that urge Calcuttans to attend a pro-Cuba congress at which Mr. Basu
denounced the United States "imperialism" against Fidel Castro.

But Socialist paraphernalia are dwarfed by billboard advertisements for mobile
telephones and whisky and computer courses. And in a building close to the
mansion from which Britain's governors general ruled India for 150 years, a
close ally of Mr. Basu in the state's Communist hierarchy runs an investment
promotion agency -- the West Bengal Industrial Development Corporation -- that
many Westerners, including the United States Ambassador, Frank G. Wisner, regard
as the best of its kind in India.

Anybody visiting Somnath Chatterjee, the agency's chairman, finds it harder to
imagine India's retreating from the free-market reforms. Like Mr. Basu, Mr.
Chatterjee can box like a champion on matters of ideology, arguing that the
Soviet Union failed not because of repression and economic sclerosis but
because, as he put it, "the entire world ganged up on Soviet Russia."

Mr. Chatterjee, 66, who has a second role heading the Communist bloc in the
Parliament in New Delhi, greets visitors from behind a desk that would not look
out of place in the Oval Office.

When asked how a Marxist adjusts to negotiating with executives from a roll-call
of the world's blue-chip corporations -- Caltex, Matsushita, Motorola, Philips,
Price Waterhouse, Rolls-Royce, Siemens -- that have signed tentative investment
deals, Mr. Chatterjee smiled.

"I am a very practical person, like all Communists," he said. Perhaps with an
eye to Communist Party stalwarts who have yet to reconcile to the changes, he
added: "Inviting foreign capital is regretful. But from the viewpoint of the
people's interests, there is no choice. I have no right to keep them poor."

Mr. Basu and Mr. Chatterjee -- indeed, just about anybody who discusses the
matter in West Bengal -- acknowledges another motive. When Britain moved India's
capital from Calcutta to New Delhi in 1912, and as late as the 1950's, when
Bombay entered the era of rapid growth that has made it India's industrial and
commercial powerhouse, Calcutta considered itself India's leading city. Today,
after 20 years of shrinking production, it is a distant second to Bombay, but
Mr. Basu is confident that "within a few years we will regain our old position."

But before the long climb back, the government will have to convince elements of
its own constituency, particularly West Bengal's powerful labor unions, that
free enterprise is the key to a better future.

Hundreds of other state-owned enterprises are bogged down by restrictive labor
practises and red tape. Many have been technically bankrupt for years, unable to
discipline or lay off workers; some, including factories with thousands of
workers, have produced nothing at all in recent memory.

The Communist leaders also face an internal party struggle over the new
policies. At the party headquarters here, posters of Stalin and Che Guevara
adorn the walls. But despite talk of the "dictatorship of the proletariat" and
"scientific socialism," there are signs that even the hard-liners have found
ways to see old enemies in a new light.

"We are not inviting capitalism to West Bengal; we are inviting capital," said
Anil Biswas, editor of the party's newspaper.

Reaching for a dog-eared copy of the Communist Manifesto, he turned to the
section on capital and added triumphantly, "Read that, and you'll see that
capitalism and capital are two entirely different things."

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The free-market reforms embraced by the Communist Party leaders
who govern the Indian state of West Bengal have created a battle over the
political identity of Calcutta, the capital, where socialist symbols are being
overtaken by commercial advertisements. (Dieter Ludwig/The New York Times)

Map of India showing location of Calcutta.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 16, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Once a Disgraced Senator, Dodd Gets a Presidential Salute

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words

DATELINE: STORRS, Conn., Oct. 15


Surrounded by the heirs and archives of a Democratic dynasty, President Clinton
came to this Connecticut college town today for a sentimental tribute to Thomas
J. Dodd, whose career took him from work as a prosecutor at the Nuremberg war
trials to censure by his colleagues in the United States Senate before his death
a quarter-century ago.

With the help of Mr. Dodd's sons, Senator Christopher J. Dodd, the current
general chairman of the Democratic National Committee, and Thomas J. Dodd Jr.,
the United States Ambassador to Uruguay, Mr. Clinton dedicated the Thomas J.
Dodd Research Center, a new library at the University of Connecticut here.

"Where books are preserved, studied and revered, human beings will also be
treated with respect and dignity, and liberty will be strengthened," said Mr.
Clinton, the first Democratic Presidential nominee to carry Connecticut since
the elder Dodd was still in the Senate, in 1968. "Dedicating this research
center today, we remember that when the Nazis came to power, one of the very
first things they did was burn books they deemed subversive. The road to
tyranny, we must never forget, begins with the destruction of the truth."

The festivities were a gentle coda to the tempestuous life of the elder Dodd, an
old-fashioned Irish politician who mixed passionate anti-Communism with fervent
early support for liberal domestic causes like civil rights and gun control, but
whose career petered out in disgrace and defeat after his censure in 1967 for
diverting about $116,000 in campaign funds to his personal use.

By Mr. Clinton's own college days in the 1960's, Mr. Dodd stood as a symbol of
hawkish stolidity on the Vietnam War, immortalized in Phil Ochs's protest
anthem, "The Draft Dodger Rag," whose ironic verse begins: "I'm just a typical
American boy from a typical American town/I believe in God and Senator Dodd and
keepin' old Castro down."

In fact, as a Yale Law School student in 1970, Mr. Clinton was a campaign worker
for the insurgent candidate, Joseph D. Duffey, who had wrested the Democratic
nomination from Mr. Dodd, who then ran as an independent, splitting the vote and
opening the way for the election of the Republican, Lowell P. Weicker Jr. Mr.
Duffey now works for Mr. Clinton as director of the United States Information
Agency.

But there was no public mention of any of that today. The musical entertainment
was a new wind ensemble piece, "Remembrance Day Soliloquy for a Passing
Century," composed for the occasion by Morton Gould. And the oratorical emphasis
was on Mr. Dodd's pioneering support for causes that would gladden the hearts of
many in the generation of Democrats who followed him.

After working as an F.B.I. agent in the 1930's, Mr. Dodd served in the Justice
Department as a special assistant to five successive attorneys general, helping
to prosecute civil rights and labor rights cases in the segregated South.

In 1945, he was named executive trial counsel to the International Military
Tribunal at Nuremberg, working as assistant to the chief American prosecutor,
Justice Robert H. Jackson of the Supreme Court. He later served two terms in the
House and two in the Senate, dying of a heart attack at the age of 64 in May
1971, six months after losing his race for a third term.

The only drop of vinegar today came on a fluorescent yellow flier distributed by
campus Republicans, charging: "Clinton Supports Thief! Tom Dodd did an excellent
job at Nuremberg, but he was censured by the U.S. Senate for stealing campaign
money. What's next for UConn?"

Later, at a ceremony commemorating the 50th anniversary of the Nazi war trials,
the President recalled the judgments at Nuremberg to reiterate his support for
United Nations war crimes tribunals for Bosnia and Rwanda, warning that while
more recent atrocities were not on the scale of Nazi Germany, such acts "have
been repeated, and repeated on a scale that still staggers the imagination."

The ceremonies at the Dodd Research Center were part of a two-day conference on
human rights and the lessons of Nuremberg, the start of a larger yearlong
retrospective at the Dodd Center. The dignitaries ranged from Elie Wiesel, the
author and concentration camp survivor, to former Senator Russell B. Long of
Louisiana, who was the only colleague to defend the elder Dodd vigorously
against the censure charges. Mr. Long flew up for the day with Mr. Clinton on
Air Force One.

For members of the Dodd family, today's ceremony was a chance to remember their
father's entire life and work, not just its unhappy ending, and they asked Mr.
Clinton to join them for a good-news day in a state he would like to win again.

"To quote the trite lines of Shakespeare, the evil that men do lives after them
but the good is oft interred with their bones," Christopher Dodd, who has been
in the Senate since 1981, said in a telephone interview on Friday. "My father's
professional life spanned 40 years, and obviously there are going to be some
interpreting this as vindication. It's a whole life here, and that's what's
important, not just one tragic event."

The curving red brick center, with a glass front, 60,000 square feet of space, a
185-seat auditorium and 20 miles of shelves in its storage vault, will hold Mr.
Dodd's papers, which had been in the Connecticut State Library. It will also
house the papers of the current Senator Dodd, Gov. John G. Rowland and the late
Senator Prescott Bush, father of former President George Bush, among other
Connecticut politicians, along with the corporate records of the old New York,
New Haven and Hartford Railroad and Connecticut labor groups.

Christopher Dodd, who has cut his own colorful swath as an outspoken and
sometimes roguish Senator about town, and who helped raise $1 million in private
contributions for the research center to supplement a state appropriation of $8
million, was philosophical about his father's legacy.

"I do recall very vividly his being asked, if he'd known how his political life
would go, would he do it again," he said in the interview. "He said he'd do it
again in a minute."

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton talked with Harry Hartley, president of the
University of Connecticut, during dedication ceremonies of the Thomas J. Dodd
Research Center, a new library in the university's Storrs campus. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 16, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MARCH ON WASHINGTON: THE PARTICIPANTS;
A Bus to the Black March: 31 Men, Hope and History

BYLINE: MICHEL MARRIOTT

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 15


Somewhere along the gently rolling expanse of rural North Carolina today, a
430-horsepower workhorse of the open road plowed north on Interstate 85 and into
a predawn darkness.

Inside this bus, while some tried to snooze away the miles, others tossed in
their seats with restless anticipation. For most, the 12-hour journey from
Atlanta to Washington was less to a place than to an appointment with black
hope, history and renewal.

The busload of 31 black men, some graying and one not quite fully grown, were
bound for Monday's Million Man March on the Mall. And that destination, simply
that, infused nearly every gesture, expression and observation made along the
trip, and, at times, the bus itself, with a deeply felt racial significance.

Jimmy Binion, who does engineering and design work for a telephone company in
Atlanta, saw in the bus a symbolic response to the slave ships. Those vessels
carried blacks, cramped and weary, to "negative" futures, he said, while today's
ride was a "totally positive journey," with a cooler of soft drinks and trays of
cold cuts to boot.

But when the bus, amply named "Go'in Places," finally pulled off the highway for
a desperately needed breakfast stop at a roadside Shoney's restaurant, the
decision swiftly led to a stern, yet good-natured, lecture on racial economics
-- after most on the bus had wolfed down eggs, sausage, grits, gravy and fried
potatoes.

"We just spent $150 in a white-owned establishment on our way to a march to
protest about the economic conditions that we find ourselves in," the Rev. Ra
Kabeer, a 52-year-old minister with the First African Presbyterian Church in
Atlanta, said over the bus's public address system. The trip's organizer, Trina
Ross, one of three black women making the trip but promising not to attend the
all-male march, said the bus would stop at a black-owned restaurant on the
return leg. Everyone appeared pleased.

Like Mr. Binion, who is 45, Mr. Kabeer felt himself to be on no ordinary ride.
"We are here under the appointment of destiny," he said.

The march-bound bus was only one of thousands of scheduled busloads of black men
that began arriving on Saturday in response to a call for a million men to join
in a day of fasting, male bonding, soul-searching and atonement. Regional
organizers of the march said many of the buses would be arriving on Monday just
in time to drop passengers in the capital between midnight and 4 A.M. In
addition, thousands more black men are expected to arrive here soon by air, vans
and automobiles.

As preparations for the event neared completion, debate continued over the role
of Louis Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam, who had issued the
appeal.

But on this 40-foot-long, gray and lavender bus, little but praise was heard
whenever Mr. Farrakhan's name was raised, as it often was.

"I've been following him for a long time, since I was 5 years old," said David
LeGall, 35. "I would have to say he is the most inspirational, most educational
teacher in the United States."

Shortly before the bus left the parking lot of the First African Presbyterian
Church -- four hours late -- the men gathered in the two-story, brick and wood
building and discussed Mr. Farrakhan, who is widely regarded as one of the most
controversial black leaders in America.

Aboard this bus, there was little patience with the criticism that has come from
many whites and some blacks about Mr. Farrakhan's role and his history of
anti-Semitic and other inflammatory remarks.

That was not the picture they had of the man. The Rev. Mark Lomax, the
soft-spoken pastor of the church, said he had met with Mr. Farrakhan, and 35
other religious leaders, a month ago in Atlanta and had been thoroughly
impressed. "He is a prophet and he's down with the people," the Rev. Lomax said,
adding, "We don't let our faith differences get in the way of our common
agenda."

A common response for anyone who raised any questions about Mr. Farrakhan's role
was that the march transcended any single man.

During today's trip, march-bound passengers packed into cars sometimes honked
and waved in solidarity as they sped past the bus, which pleased L. Vernon
Allwood, the director of community relations and special projects at the School
of Medicine at Morehouse College. A veteran of the 1963 March on Washington, Mr.
Allwood has been directing through churches 20-week manhood training sessions
for black boys 12 to 14 years old. He echoed a call of the march in emphasizing
that black men must take greater responsibility in raising families.

Between Arabic and Christian prayers, bouts of political debate and hours of
reading pocket-sized copies of the Koran and the Bible, the ride rocked with
old-fashioned fun.

"I didn't have any idea what to expect when I got on this bus," said Charles M.
Canty, a real estate salesman in Atlanta and the father of four. "I only knew
one person." With a chuckle, he added, "You could have all been a bunch of
gangsters." He was greeted with laughter.

"This is a bus of fellowship," Otis Thomas Jr., 49. "There's a whole bunch of
brothers here I've never seen before, yet we act like we've been around each
other for a long time.

"That's what's going to happen at the march," he added. "That makes me very
excited."

Many of the men on the bus were middle-aged and middle-class, but that didn't
stop them from showing a definite flair for the Afrocentric. A glance over the
tops of the bus seats revealed almost as many African-style kufi hats as
baseball caps.

Claude Marshall, a 54-year-old man with a close-cropped scalp, began talking
about his days in the Vietnam War and his one big regret.

"When the March on Washington happened in 1963, I was 22, and I didn't go," Mr.
Marshall lamented. "Now I wish I did. I didn't think it would amount to much.

"But I told myself if there was another, I would go," he went on. "There wasn't
anything significant enough for me to bother with until this march, and I'm
going."

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: On a bus bound for the Million Man March yesterday, Andre
Gadson, 15, got a pat on the back from the Rev. Ra Kabeer after speaking on why
he was making the trip. The group was from a church in Atlanta. (Ozier
Muhammad/The New York Times) (pg. A1); The bus from the First African
Presbyterian Church in Atlanta left so early yesterday that riders had to ignore
the rising sun to get a nap. (Ozier Muhammad/The New York Times) (pg. B6)


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 17, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE MARCH ON WASHINGTON: OVERVIEW;
BLACK MEN FILL CAPITAL'S MALL IN DISPLAY OF UNITY AND PRIDE

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 6;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1444 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 16


Heeding a call for personal atonement and racial solidarity, hundreds of
thousands of black men gathered from across the nation in the heart of the
capital today to vow stronger leadership in protecting their communities from
violence and social despair.

"There's a new black man in America today," declared Louis Farrakhan, the leader
of the Nation of Islam, whose call for the rally brought out an extraordinary
throng -- officially estimated at 400,000 -- to gather in an exuberant mood of
self-dedication on the Mall.

The rally was marked by a spirit of individual resolve as much as dramatic
protest, with speeches by many prominent blacks, including the poet Maya Angelou
and the Rev. Jesse Jackson. But it wound down in something of an ambivalent mood
as Mr. Farrakhan delivered a booming, rambling keynote speech that threatened to
eclipse the occasion.

Before the end of the 12-hour rally, members of the audience could be seen
dispersing across the Mall even as Mr. Farrakhan, surrounded by Nation of Islam
guards, extended his remarks with arcane references to the Bible, numerology and
black renewal, laced with his sulfurous interpretations of history and
denunciations of white supremacy.

"You allow me to speak even though you don't like what I have to say," Mr.
Farrakhan declared, beaming as he addressed "white folks" watching on
television, and as he denied that he has been a race baiter and anti-Semite in
building his support. [Excerpts, page A20.]

One effect of Mr. Farrakhan's speech was to compound the controversy that led up
to the rally over whether the message of uplift could be heard effectively
beyond Mr. Farrakhan's own record as an aggressive black separatist leader. The
march had been opposed by some black organizations, including the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and by some prominent black
women for its exclusion of women.

Official Washington was brought to a near standstill, with President Clinton out
of town and many workers, white and black, avoiding downtown as the rally
dominated a sparkling autumn day. Hours of intense speeches were offered to a
relaxed, dedicated crowd that seemed more intent on its own camaraderie and
personal renewal than on the abstruse, passionate manner of Mr. Farrakhan's
messages in urging black men to take the initiative in their lives and
communities.

"Black man, you don't have to bash white people," he declared near the end of a
two-hour speech in which he seemed to relish criticizing the capital's ranking
white politicians. "All we got to do is go back home and turn our communities
into productive places."

Mr. Farrakhan seemed reluctant to leave the podium as he talked toward sunset
and the crowd shrank. Beyond the theme of atonement and rededication, the Muslim
leader -- a slow-paced firebrand of an orator who could not resist numerous
tangents -- took issue with Mr. Clinton's own speech on racial unity earlier in
the day in Texas.

"Socially, the fabric of America is being torn apart, and we can't gloss it over
with nice speeches, Mr. President, sir," Mr. Farrakhan declared from the west
steps of the Capitol.

Complimenting Mr. Clinton for a "great speech," Mr. Farrakhan added with some
bitterness, "You spoke ill indirectly of me as a purveyor of malice and hatred."

The President had appeared to refer to Mr. Farrakhan in praising the theme of
the Washington rally while adding, "One million men do not make right one man's
message of malice and division."

Speaker Newt Gingrich, sharply criticized in speeches during the day, described
Mr. Farrakhan in a news interview as an "unrepentant bigot" who nevertheless
emerged as the "biggest winner" as the day's keynote speaker.

Gen. Colin L. Powell, in opinion polls currently the most popular of black
Americans, avoided the rally but denounced Mr. Farrakhan in a television
interview for previous remarks the general described as "racist and
anti-Semitic." At one point in the rally, boos could be heard at the mention of
General Powell.

While much of the rally's focus was on Mr. Farrakhan, other speakers sought to
underline the broad mix of racial pride, self-responsibility and political
protest at its heart.

"Clarence Thomas and Newt Gingrich organized this march, just like Bull Connor
organized the march in 1963," insisted Mr. Jackson, referring to the sheriff in
Birmingham, Ala., who beat civil rights demonstrators. Mr. Jackson praised Mr.
Farrakhan for initiating the rally, not making the distinction that some in the
crowd made between message and messenger.

"I'm not here for Farrakhan, I'm here to be a proud black man," said Homer
Billups, a 49-year-old Vietnam war veteran from Washington. He talked more of
his volunteer work with neighborhood youths then of Mr. Farrakhan's separatist
themes.

Across the mall, Dwight Davis, a 34-year-old chemical company worker also from
Washington, made the same point as he led his 14-year-old son, Anthony, to
witness "this day in history." The father described the mood on the Mall as
"overpowering" for its sense of solidarity.

Mr. Davis said that Mr. Farrakhan "offers a strong message of hope, but when
it's mixed with prejudice, the message gets watered."

Mr. Farrakhan, well aware of his critics, offered what he conceived of as an
olive branch in discussing the resentment by Jewish leaders of his several
instances of recorded anti-Semitism, most recently his use of the word
"bloodsuckers" in decrying Jewish merchants and others profiting in black
communities.

"I don't like this squabble with the members of the Jewish community," he said
in proposing a meeting with Jewish leaders. "If you can sit down with Arafat
where there are rivers of blood between, why can't you sit down with us where
there are no rivers of blood?"

Up by the Capitol steps, William 10X, an insurance broker from Orlando, Fla.,
cautioned that Mr. Farrakhan's oratory should be heard for its blunt truth, not
for imagined hints of bigotry. "This is not anti-anything," he said. "This is
pro-black. This is Americanism at its finest. All we can hear ultimately is the
truth."

Mr. Farrakhan's speech, while punctuated with shouted endorsements from his
followers, was a difficult essay for the uninitiated. At one point, deep into
Biblical allusions, he urged Mr. Clinton to "clear the scales from your eyes"
and, like the troubled pharaoh, turn to "the children of slaves" for advice, as
if offering his own services.

But he also had some more concrete ideas. He asked those in attendance to
register voters when they returned to their communities, and to join a "church,
synagogue, temple or mosque that is teaching spiritual and moral uplift."

While few outsiders anticipated the million men that Mr. Farrakhan called forth
and claimed had actually shown up, the turnout offered by the counting process
of the National Park Service, a throng of 400,000, was an impressive measure of
the occasion. This crowd, virtually all black men, exceeded by more than 100,000
the integrated turnout in the 1963 civil rights march on Washington led by Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.

Mr. Farrakhan appeared to offer no oratorical competition to Dr. King, who
delivered his historic "I have a dream" speech in 15 minutes.

Elected black politicians faced something of a dilemma in being wary about Mr.
Farrakhan even as popular support for the rally clearly was growing in recent
weeks in the black community. Representative Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of
Harlem, initially had said he would not attend. He expressed enthusiasm for the
theme of renewal but questioned the idea of "a day of atonement," saying he he
had no personal apology to offer the nation as a black man.

Today, Mr. Rangel did speak, praising the gathering and urging, "Let us go back
home and reap the harvest you have sown."

In the heart of the day, the crowd was deeply stirred by a foreign visitor,
Boubacar Joseph Ndiaye, introduced as the chief curator of Goree Island,
Senegal, who hailed the throng as the gifted progeny of 15 million slaves
kidnapped from Africa. "You have broken the chains," he exulted as the crowd
cheered.

As the day wore down, Mr. Farrakhan's lengthy, convoluted speech resounded in
marked contrast to the simpler spirit quite evident amid the crowd: a sense that
the men assembled had dealt singularly and victoriously with the sad pathos of
the American black man portrayed memorably 40 years ago in Ralph Ellison's
classic novel, "Invisible Man."

"James, tell the man why we're here," 43-year-old Edward Russell instructed his
4-year-old son.

"All black people can work together," the boy instantly piped up.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Louis Farrakhan urged black man to "turn our communities into
productive places." (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times) (pg. A1); Hundreds of
thousands of black men rallied in Washington, vowing stronger leadership of
their communities. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg. A1); Members of the
Nation of Islam guarded the stage on the west side of the Capitol yesterday
while their leader, Louis Farrakhan, spoke to the crowd, officially estimated at
400,000, on the Mall for the Million Man March. (Ozier Muhammad/The New York
Times) (pg. A19)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 17, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Dismay Over Big-Budget Flops

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section C;  Page 13;  Column 4;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Oct. 16


Flops and hits come and go here, and for the most part, they are taken for
granted. But three big-budget, high-profile movies -- "Jade," "Strange Days" and
"The Scarlet Letter" -- opened and virtually collapsed over the weekend,
resulting in losses that probably reached $150 million and leaving many people
in the film industry feeling shaken.

"It's scary," one top studio executive said. "All three will disappear from
sight fast."

Another said, "I don't know what the lessons are here, except we're making a lot
of movies that people don't want to see."

Linked with those failures are two other recent expensive flops, "Assassins" and
"Showgirls," which have raised questions about the judgments of some studio
executives, and more important, about the appeal of several stars and aspiring
stars, among them Sylvester Stallone, Denzel Washington, Ralph Fiennes, Demi
Moore and David Caruso.

Mr. Stallone, an action star in the 1980's with considerable but diminishing
appeal overseas, is in the most difficult straits, many here agree. Except for
his successful 1993 movie, "Cliffhanger," Mr. Stallone's films over the last few
years have failed in the United States or proved disappointing. His last, "Judge
Dredd," is one of the biggest box-office bombs of 1995, grossing only about $35
million so far while costing almost twice that much.

Unlike Bruce Willis, another action star who also shrewdly casts himself in such
low-budget movies as "Pulp Fiction" and "Nobody's Fool," Mr. Stallone has never
made the leap into more serious films and seems thoroughly type-cast as a
grunt-and-groan action hero. Trailers for "Assassins," which opened two weeks
ago, increasingly focused on his co-star, Antonio Banderas, a subtle
acknowledgment that the studio, Warner Brothers, was uneasy about placing the
movie entirely on Mr. Stallone's shoulders.

The failure of "Assassins," which cost at least $60 million, including
marketing, and has grossed less than $20 million, is especially dismaying to the
new regime at MCA Universal. Ron Meyer, who was Mr. Stallone's agent at the
Creative Artists Agency and is now president of MCA Universal, recently signed
the actor to a $60 million, three-picture deal. Executives said there were
probably enough hedges in the deal to allow the studio not to make all three.

The rapid failure of "Jade," a muddled thriller that cost at least $50 million
but grossed only $4.3 million over the weekend, has clearly been a setback for
David Caruso, who left the television show "N.Y.P.D. Blue" to become a movie
star. So far he hasn't. His last film, "Kiss of Death," also collapsed at the
box office. Studio executives said Mr. Caruso should now narrow his sights to
playing character roles, rather than leads, as one of his co-stars in "Jade,"
Chazz Palminteri, has done.

The movie's poor opening is also one more blow to Joe Eszterhas, the highly paid
screenwriter whose most recent film, the famously NC-17 "Showgirls," was crushed
by the critics and emerged as one of the biggest disasters of the year.

As for "Strange Days," this apocalyptic thriller directed by Kathryn Bigelow and
starring Ralph Fiennes, Angela Bassett and Juliette Lewis was designed by Mr.
Fiennes and his agents as a vehicle to turn him into a movie star. Instead, the
film took in just $3.6 million and looms as a major failure for 20th Century
Fox.

On the other hand, Demi Moore, an actress who is widely viewed as a movie star,
seems to have emerged unscathed from the "The Scarlet Letter." In the $50
million film, the director, Roland Joffe, and screenwriter, Douglas Day Stewart,
rewrote the Hawthorne classic to give the movie some sexy scenes, more violence
and a happy ending. The result was guffaws from critics and a disappointing
turnout at the box office: $4.1 million.

Yet one studio chairman, speaking on condition of anonymity, said: "Demi isn't
hurt by this. No one's blaming her. She's very contemporary. She sticks out like
a sore thumb in this thing. I don't think you're going to see her in a period
piece for a long time."

If there's a single recent film whose poor box-office showing troubles many film
people here, it's "Devil in a Blue Dress." The acclaimed drama, based on Walter
Mosley's novel of the same name, is about an amateur sleuth, played by Denzel
Washington, immersed in a racial and political scandal in Los Angeles, circa
1948. Executives at Sony Pictures, whose subsidiary, Tri-Star, made the film,
said they are proud of it but wished that it cost far less than its $27 million.
(It cost $15 million more to market the movie). Now in its third week, it has
grossed only about $13 million.

What disappointed Sony executives was that the movie failed to attract young
black audiences, in contrast to even the modest success of "Dead Presidents,"
about the lives of a group of men in the South Bronx before, during and after
the Vietnam War. After "Devil in a Blue Dress" and Mr. Washington's last film,
"Virtuosity," which also failed, studio executives have reached a harsh
conclusion.

"As good as he is," one studio chairman said, "Denzel is not a movie star. He's
a terrific actor, incredibly good-looking but he's not a movie star."

At the same time, the unexpected success of "Seven," a bleak thriller about a
serial killer that has been the No. 1 box-office attraction for four straight
weeks, has affirmed the clout of Brad Pitt, who co-stars with Morgan Freeman.

The movie, which received generally negative reviews for its violent content,
has become one of the most successful movies of the year.

"It's about the star power of Brad Pitt -- you can't minimize that -- but it's
also about the material and how it was cast and how the film was marketed," said
Arnold Kopelson, the movie's producer.

Chris Pula, president of marketing at New Line Cinema, said the advertising
campaign for "Seven" was risky, designed to inform audiences that the movie was
unconventional, dark and violent. "We wanted to prepare people," he said. "We
wanted to make Brad and Morgan co-stars with the crimes in the film. We wanted
to create word of mouth."

Obviously, it worked. "Believe me," Mr. Kopelson said, "I'm no genius. I had no
idea this was going to happen. In this case audiences wanted -- and got --
something they haven't seen before."

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Assassins," with Sylvester Stallone, top (Andrew Cooper/Warner
Brothers), and a new film, "The Scarlet Letter," with Gary Oldman and Demi Moore
(Takashi Seida/Cinergi Pictures Entertainment), were expensive failures, and two
more big-budget films failed over the weekend. The unexpected success of "Seven"
showed the drawing power of Brad Pitt, bottom. (Peter Sorel/New Line Cinema)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SENATORS QUERY U.S. ROLE IN BOSNIA

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 981 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 17


The Clinton Administration and members of both parties clashed today at a Senate
hearing on plans to send 20,000 American troops to help enforce the tenuous
peace in Bosnia.  Republicans and Democrats alike said the Administration had
failed to make its case.

But three of Mr. Clinton's top national security advisers said that the mission
was crucial to the stability of Europe and United States credibility in NATO,
even if it meant American casualties.

"This will not be without risks; it will not be without costs," Defense
Secretary William J. Perry told the Senate Armed Services Committee. "But
allowing the war to continue also has risks and costs, and in my judgment, those
risks and costs would be greater."

Much of today's debate revolved around the War Powers Act, and whether the
Administration had any obligation to obtain Congressional approval before
sending troops.

But with scheduled peace talks bringing America's promise to contribute ground
troops closer to reality, lawmakers appeared to be wary of supporting a plan
that still lacks both a clear end point and an agreement on Russia's role in a
60,000-member NATO-led force.

An Administration official said tonight that the peace talks between the warring
sides in the Balkans would be held in the secure setting of Wright-Patterson Air
Force Base in Dayton, Ohio. Secretary of State Warren Christopher was to
announce the decision on Wednesday.

Today, even as Administration officials told senators that the warring factions
no longer had an incentive to fight, the fighting continued in northwest Bosnia.
Gen. George A. Joulwan, NATO's top military commander, told reporters that the
Bosnian Serbs had rebuilt some air defenses destroyed by NATO warplanes in
August.

Even Secretary Christopher had to acknowledge to senators that the
Administration had a tough sell ahead. "No, we haven't yet made the case," he
said. "But there's a case to be made and we'll make it."

At the first of four Congressional hearings in two days, Mr. Christopher, Mr.
Perry and Gen. John M. Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
gave the Armed Services Committee the most detailed explanation yet of the plan
while acknowledging many gaps.

The international force would stay no longer than 12 months, cost the United
States about $1.5 billion and require the Pentagon to call up 2,000 to 3,000
reserves. Until recently the Administration had pledged to send as many as
25,000 troops. Today officials refined that figure and put it at about 20,000.

The main job of the force would be to insure that the warring parties stayed
separated. It would not deal with refugees, food and medical relief, election
monitoring or other duties that would be left to the United Nations or civilian
organizations.

But several Republicans expressed skepticism over the United States' potential
military role in the Balkans. "Put this Senator at the moment in the unconvinced
column," said Senator John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia.

Senator William Cohen, Republican of Maine, concurred. "We haven't yet been
persuaded of the need to deploy 20,000 troops," he said.

Some senators asked why, if the United States and NATO would send in troops only
after all sides agreed to a peace plan, the troops would be needed at all "If
there was a real peace, we wouldn't need to send 60,000 troops there," said
Senator Dan Coats, Republican of Indiana.

"Even if the parties agree to this, history shows they need help implementing
it," Mr. Christopher said.

Even Mr. Clinton's advisers seemed at odds with each other at times today.
General Shalikashvili said that NATO could perform the military tasks without
American troops. But Mr. Christopher was less sure. "This is a problem Europe
has not been able to solve on its own," the Secretary said.

The Administration officials warned that a failure to send troops would deal a
severe blow to the Atlantic alliance. But some senators said the NATO issue
would not register with the typical citizen.

"With all due respect, I don't think the average American person really feels
that affinity for NATO now that the cold war is over," said Senator John Glenn,
an Ohio Democrat who was one of the plan's few supporters.

Much of the hearing focused on a question Congress and the White House have
fought over since the Vietnam War: Congress's role in approving military
operations.

The Administration says it would welcome approval from Congress, but insists
that Mr. Clinton has the Constitutional right as commander in chief to send
American troops overseas without a Congressional blessing.

But Senator Robert Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, warned: "It's very important
for the President to seek approval of the Congress. The title of Commander in
Chief is one thing. But the power of the purse is the greatest power in our
Constitutional system."


                             --------------------


No Progress on Russian Role

MOSCOW, Oct. 17 (By The New York Times) -- The effort to define a role for
Russia in the Bosnia peace process continued today as leaders of the
international "contact group" held a meeting here and then praised the host
despite any sign of progress.

"Russian participation in the contact group has been an essential ingredient in
the search for peace," Assistant Secretary of State Richard C. Holbrooke said at
a news conference here this afternoon. "We would not be where we are today
without the Russian Federation as part of the process."

But today's meeting seemed aimed more at massaging Russia's pride than settling
its precise role in enforcing peace in the Balkans.

NATO powers have agreed that Russian troops should play a role in policing any
settlement in Bosnia. But Moscow has stated that Russian troops will not
participate in any peacekeeping force under the sole command of NATO.


LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 21, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
Snouts In the Slops

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 21;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 705 words


From out here in the boondocks, today's Washington seems bizarre. Did you catch
the American Medical Association selling Newt Gingrich its vote on Medicare?

The A.M.A. -- that's the doctors' lobby -- came along quietly after Gingrich
promised to go easy on cutting Medicare fees for doctors and grant other
financial boons.

And so what? Nobody familiar with the A.M.A. expects anything of it but an
obsession with money for doctors. But lo, behold, and how about that, sawbones
fans! -- the A.M.A. is offended by suggestions that Gingrich bought it. The
A.M.A., which over the years has paid gazillions to kill every attempt to
rehabilitate the country's troubled health- care system -- the A.M.A. resents
the suggestion that its honor is forfeit to filthy lucre.

What do lobbyists take us for out here in the sticks?

Gingrich is redistributing the wealth. It is only natural that everybody with a
high-powered lobby -- even doctors, noble offspring of Hippocrates though they
be -- should fight for a share of the loot.

The spectacle of these huge struggling lobbies summons up memories of "The Last
Train From Madrid," of the last helicopter from the embassy roof in Saigon. When
the train is leaving the station, when the helicopter is leaving the roof, it is
only human for many people to behave swinishly.

Lobbies exist to behave swinishly on behalf of people too delicate to behave
swinishly for themselves. Unlike the A.M.A., most lobbies are too worldly to
whine when someone notices their snouts in the trough lapping up the slops.

Little news items tucked away far beyond O. J. Simpson and Bosnia tell of
lobbies saving their places at the trough despite tales painting Gingrich as the
demon hog-starver of Capitol Hill.

The sugar lobby has escaped a cut in its infamous sugar subsidy. The tobacco
lobby still prospers even as the Government spends money to control
tobacco-related diseases. The entire farm lobby is apparently untouched despite,
or maybe because of, the fact that a high percentage of farm subsidies now go to
giant agribusiness corporations.

It is unmanly these days to express dismay for the Republican plan to use life's
losers to balance the budget, and heaven save us all from indulging in such
bleeding-heart sentimentality.

From out in the sticks though, where all we know is what we read in the papers,
it seems nutty that Republicans should be so zealous to put the boot into widows
and orphans, the halt and the lame as it were, while excusing doctors, Tobacco
World and assorted other farm corporations from putting shoulders to the wheel.
Isn't this a patriotic endeavor to save the economy?

Gingrich is not the only man here who seems deep in fantasy. How about Mister
President? Bill Clinton. He's a Democrat, whatever that means, besides
brain-dead.

He is expected to run for re-election and, if the newspapers are right, which
they frequently aren't, he may be the only Democrat who will be elected to
anything next year.

Newspapers report Democrats leaving the party en masse. "Like rats from a
sinking ship" is the cliche. It may be significant that present-day Washington
lends itself to animal metaphor: hogs at the trough, rats fleeing the ship.
Animals are the stuff of fables, and historians may look back on this age in
Washington as a time of fabled absurdity.

Besides those Democrats who are simply refusing to run for re-election, there
are Democrats who hate being Democrats but can't bear the thought of going off
the Federal payroll. These Democrats come from the old solid Democratic South
which has now become the new solid Republican South. Simple wizardry turns them
into instant Republicans with safe, dry berths on an unsinking ship.

Speaking of fantasy, how would you like to see President Clinton run against the
Democratic Party next year? Congressional Democrats think that's what he had in
mind when, talking to a Houston money crowd, he seemed to blame Democrats for
high taxes.

With the party melting away from under him, who knows? He might turn Republican
himself. He runs better in the polls than any of the Republican candidates. This
would clear the way for Colin Powell to run as a Democrat and return the party
to life.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 21, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

After Vietnam War, A Literary Healing

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 635 words


There was a time, Wayne Karlin says, when they might easily have killed each
other: the Marine Corps helicopter gunner and the teen-age girl in a North
Vietnamese Army brigade on the Ho Chi Minh Trail.

Instead, in a page that could have been lifted from their short stories, Mr.
Karlin, 50, and Le Minh Khue, 46, Vietnam veterans from different sides of the
jungle canopy, have become literary collaborators in an unusual joint endeavor,
an anthology of postwar fiction by 37 Vietnamese and American writers. The
roster includes Ward Just, Philip Caputo, Tom O'Brien, Robert Stone and Robert
Olen Butler, whose writings on Vietnam are well known in this country, with Bao
Ninh and other Vietnamese whose works have begun to appear here in translation.

The book, "The Other Side of Heaven" (Curbstone Press), edited by Mr. Karlin,
Ms. Khue (pronounced Kway) and an expatriate former South Vietnamese soldier,
Truong Vu, links the triangle of former adversaries to examine not so much the
war itself but the effects of the war, Mr. Karlin and Ms. Khue said at a reading
on Thursday night at New York University, which was part of their continuing
cross-country tour. In San Francisco recently, they were met by an
anti-Communist demonstration against them.

Royalties from the book are to be donated to a clinic in Hue, Vietnam.  The
collection is to be published in Vietnam as well. Many of the Vietnamese stories
have already appeared there.

"I have met so many Vietnam War veterans in the United States," Ms. Khue said
through a translator, another visiting contributor from Hanoi, Ho Anh Thai. "We
suffered a lot, so we can share."

Ms. Khue's story in the book is the picaresque tale of a thuggish Vietnamese
peasant and his rapacious son out to peddle the remains of an American
serviceman, only to be haunted by the dead man's ghost. Bones are also a
gripping image in Mr. Karlin's story of a veteran who excavates the site of a
Civil War massacre.

The project grew out of panel discussions among Mr. Karlin, Ms. Khue and other
Vietnamese writers at the William Joyner Center for the Study of War and Social
Consequences at the University of Massachusetts in Boston in 1993. The
realization of how much they liked one another, Mr. Karlin wrote in his
introduction to the book, "how much we had in common, how terrible it would have
been if we'd succeeded in killing each other, brought us to moments of what I
can only describe as a grief so intense that it changed us so we could never
again see each other -- or ourselves -- in the same way."

Their bond, he went on, grew from the moment he told Ms. Khue that he had
volunteered as a helicopter gunner in 1966, and she said she had spent her years
from 15 to 19 under American air attack clearing bombs from the Ho Chi Minh
Trail. "At that moment," Mr. Karlin wrote, "I pictured myself flying above the
jungle canopy, transfixed with hate and fear and searching for her in order to
shoot her, while she looked up, in hatred and fear also, searching for me, and
how it would have been if I had found her then."

In December, Mr. Karlin, who lives in St. Mary's City, Md., flew to Hanoi to
meet Ms. Khue and other writers and to plan the anthology. He ruled out as too
painful, however, a trip south to areas of his former Marine camps. "I had not
wanted it to be a trip to the past," he said.

To his surprise, he said, he found that even in the darkest moments of the war,
many Vietnamese found solace in writing and reading. In one case, he said, he
learned of a North Vietnamese officer taken with the works of Walt Whitman. When
the officer's unit captured an American soldier, Mr. Karlin said, the officer
sought the prisoner out for a literary chat. Unfortunately, Mr. Karlin said, the
American had never heard of Whitman.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Wayne Karlin, left, Ho Anh Thai and Le Minh Khue, whose stories
appear in an anthology, on Thursday night at New York University. (David Corio
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 21, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Terror in Paris

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 20;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 464 words


Everyone in Paris, rich or poor, native or tourist, rides the Metro. Hence the
special malevolence of terrorist attacks that target subways or linked suburban
lines, as in the explosion Tuesday that injured 29 commuters, 5 of them gravely.
No grievance can justify a cowardly campaign by Algerian Islamic radicals that
by now has killed 7 people and wounded more than 200. Adding to the outrage is a
threat of more violence unless France bows to such impossible demands as closing
its embassy in Algiers.

With these provocations, there is an understandable clamor for President Jacques
Chirac to strike back hard. Yet despite dragnet arrests and armed patrols in
France's Algerian neighborhoods, terror attacks continue. Nightsticks alone are
an inadequate instrument to quell this disorder, especially in light of French
demographics.

Five million Muslims, most from North Africa and many of them French citizens,
now live in and around French cities. Though a xenophobic French minority would
treat all immigrants as enemies, such a course is neither thinkable nor feasible
in a France true to its democratic legacy.

France and Algeria are bound together by blood and history, beginning with
conquest and colonization and culminating in a war of liberation that nearly
ignited a civil war in France in the 1950's.

There is little dispute about the roots of the current terror campaign. Once
Algeria became independent in 1962, France began to establish a modus vivendi
with its erstwhile foe, the National Liberation Front, which turned all too
quickly into a military tyranny. The Front, faced with losing an election to
Islamic militants in 1992, canceled the vote. Mass jailings followed,
encouraging radicals in the opposition and triggering an armed struggle that has
claimed as many as 40,000 lives.

Washington correctly protested the suspension of the Algerian election and has
since pressed for a political solution through inclusive elections. Paris
bristled over what it viewed as American meddling, so much so that a high-level
French official flew to Washington last year for negotiations -- which both
sides misleadingly said were about Bosnia. That testiness persists under
President Chirac, whose Government provides $1.2 billion a year in aid to
Algeria.

The United States has reminded France of its own wise, and unheeded, advice
about Vietnam. In the early years of American intervention, the French,
especially President Charles de Gaulle, warned against radicalizing an adversary
that Washington might sooner or later have to live with, and cautioned about
betting too much on an unstable and corrupt partner in Saigon.

France must be firm in responding to Algerian terrorism, but should not violate
its democratic principles in the process.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SUNDAY, OCTOBER 22, 1995: BIG-STICK DIPLOMACY;
Sugar and Spice, Vietnam's Now Nice

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 18;  Column 3;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 166 words


Speaking softly and importing big sticks, the United States has resumed its
cinnamon trade with Vietnam. Connoisseurs of the aromatic spice, once valued as
dearly as gold, are understandably delighted by the end of its embargo, since
they consider it the world's best.

"Vietnamese cinnamon has a high level of volatile oils," says Albert Goetze,
vice president for spice procurement at McCormick, a major importer based in
Hunt Valley, Md. "That gives it an intense, sweet, burning taste."

Goetze concedes that Vietnamese cinnamon is not to everyone's liking, because of
its strength, and is sometimes blended with other cinnamons to create a desired
"flavor profile." Cinnamon from Sri Lanka is described as having citrusy notes
and that from Indonesia as mild, less sweet than the Vietnamese. (After a while,
spiceologists tend to sound like overwrought wine critics.)

Vietnamese cinnamon is slowly filtering onto select grocery shelves; in about
six months, expect it everywhere.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

One Campaign Over, Another to Begin?

BYLINE: By ERNEST TOLLERSON

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 16;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1567 words

DATELINE: NORFOLK, Va., Oct. 20


With two appearances in this Navy town today, Gen. Colin L. Powell completed the
last lap of his book-signing tour -- 29 events in 23 locales in 20 days --
without getting writer's cramp, losing his voice or dropping any easy clues
about two questions on the minds of his admirers and putative Presidential
rivals: Will he run for President in 1996? And if he does, what's his raison
d'etre for wanting to move into the Oval Office in 1997?

For the umpteenth time since his book tour began, General Powell said today that
he intended to spend the coming weeks deciding whether to run for the Presidency
or to opt for some other form of service to the nation. The General's
mulling-things-over posture, however, has not deterred campaign professionals
from acting as though it is a fait accompli that he will run. Some professionals
have reached out to General Powell's friends and advisers, including Ken
Duberstein, a White House chief of staff for Ronald Reagan, for advice on
joining a Powell campaign.

During the weeks General Powell crisscrossed the country, interest in him and
his Presidential ambitions never flagged. All of his final stops -- Atlanta on
Thursday and Norfolk today -- drew long lines of book buyers. If anything, some
of the major news events of recent weeks -- O. J. Simpson's acquittal on
double-murder charges and the Million Man March -- have only heightened interest
in the retired general's grasp of domestic issues and have led local television
news reporters to ask constantly for his analysis of the nation's racial
problems.

Generally throughout the book tour, General Powell espoused centrist ideas that
seemed to resonate with moderate Democrats, moderate Republicans, independents
and some G.O.P. conservatives.

The retired general's admirers, of course, and those shopping around for an
alternative to the current cast of candidates were more than willing to explain
why they felt he might be Presidential timber. The Powell loyalists and the
Powell browsers who lined up early this morning at the Norfolk Navy Base's main
retail exchange and later this afternoon at Prince Books and Coffee House were
pleased to have the retired four-star general sign their copies of his book, "My
American Journey."

"Colin Powell is a very good man," said Janice Van Houweling, an employee of the
base exchange who gained a spot among the first 20 in line by camping out at 4
A.M. "I'd like to see him run for President. He has the same beliefs I do on
abortion, gun control and crime." Her issues checklist does not mean that she is
a classic liberal. She said she was a registered Republican -- "an open-minded"
one -- who voted twice for Ronald Reagan and for George Bush in 1992.

As upbeat as one might expect Powell supporters to be, some were concerned about
the impact of recent events on his potential candidacy.

"I have a little bit of a problem with the O. J. business," said Dan Westbrook
of Jasper, Ga. "I wonder if that's going to take some steam" out of his
political future. Mr. Westbrook's friend in line at a book signing, Dick Roy,
said that because of the Simpson trial and the march, General Powell will now be
"seen as a black man." If there is any negative effect on General Powell's
viability as a candidate, Mr. Westbrook said he hoped that it would "blow over."

In interviews in a Detroit suburb, around Atlanta and here, this self-selected
but racially and economically diverse slice of American book buyers and voters
articulated similar reasons for wanting General Powell to run. His centrist
views on most issues, according to these people, could make him the great
moderate hope in Republican primaries -- a man who could galvanize party
moderates and woo a significant slice of Republican conservatives like the Rev.
Tim Mowry of Traverse City, Mich., and Mr. Westbrook.

A Vietnam veteran and the owner of a small chemical company, Mr. Westbrook said
he wanted General Powell to run as a Republican. "I hope he does," he said as he
stood near the front of the book-signing line inside the cavernous Sam's Club in
Duluth, Ga., on Thursday morning. "Politically, I'm a pretty staunch Republican,
a very hard-shell Republican." He said General Powell's moderate views did not
scare him off. "He's a little more moderate on certain things," he said. "I
think he's a fine outstanding man. It's hard to put into words what he
exemplifies."

General Powell's performance during the Persian Gulf War, Mr. Westbrook said,
restored his pride in military service. "A lot of people are trying to be
everything to everybody," he said. "And Bill Clinton represents the fact that
that's hard to do. Maybe there is room for a middle-of-the-road Republican."

Mr. Mowry, a conservative Lutheran minister who said he had attended every
Republican Presidential inauguration since 1969, organized his day Wednesday so
that he and his wife and two children would be near the head of the line at the
Barnes & Noble in West Bloomfield, an affluent suburb outside Detroit.

"Colin Powell is not as conservative as I am," Mr. Mowry said. "But the fact
that he is an ethical man and a moral man goes a long way with me." Mr. Mowry
said he did not know whether General Powell would be trounced in Republican
primaries dominated by conservative voters. "He doesn't have to come across as
being extremely conservative," said Mr. Mowry. "If he runs an inclusive
campaign, he'll do well. He'd be a shoe-in for vice president on anybody's
ticket."

Even those who are squarely in General Powell's corner wonder about a moderate's
chances of prevailing in Republican primaries. "I would prefer it if he would
run as a Republican," said Roy McGinn, a Navy electronic technician stationed in
Norfolk. "But I'm worried that because of some of his stands he won't win. There
are too many conservative Republicans who might try to squelch him."

Staunch is not exactly the word Paula Leach would use to describe her brand of
Republicanism. In recent Presidential elections, Mrs. Leach voted for Ronald
Reagan twice and George Bush twice but calls herself an independent Republican,
and she said she was eager to see General Powell run. "He's a very independent
thinker and no one is going to push him into something he doesn't want to do,"
said Mrs. Leach, of Rochester Hills, Mich., who has a son in the Army. "I have
more respect for Colin Powell than for other political figures."

During stops in the Midwest and the South this week, General Powell's remarks in
brief "press availabilities" suggested that he had not become intoxicated by all
the attention that he and his book have received. In West Bloomfield, he said
that he would never confuse the popularity he enjoyed with the political ratings
citizens give elected officials. And he has reminded the press at almost each
stop that running for President is not his only option.

Whether it is winning the hearts and minds of a thoughtful conservative like Mr.
Westbrook or attracting the attention of a disgruntled Democrat, General Powell
must now figure out whether his appeal among some voters as the uncandidate can
be easily converted into political support, financial contributions and votes
for a declared candidate. In essence, whether he is a feel-good flash-in-the-pan
celebrity with a hot book or the real thing many Americans say they want, a
leader of unassailable character and judgment?

What his admirers often see first is a quintessential role model. "I think he's
rational," said Kathleen Davidson, a Smyrna, Ga., resident who was first in line
at the Oxford bookstore in a posh section of Atlanta on Thursday. "He embodies
the American work ethic." Mrs. Davidson said she admired his life style and
family as well. "He appears to be a family man," she said. "I'd prefer it if
more of our politicians live it and not just preach it."

In the closing days of his book tour, General Powell has offered no public
answer to the other big questions: Where would he take the nation? What's his
vision? Since he is the uncandidate, his observations remain broad and sweeping.
As close as he comes is the response he offered when asked whether conservatives
in the Republican Party viewed him as a liberal for his pro-choice stance and
his qualified support for affirmative action. "I'm really not trying to craft a
message," he said during a brief news conference in West Bloomfield. "I'm trying
to tell people what I feel, what I believe about the issues."

Occasionally, though, General Powell's remarks inch dangerously close to those
that would be made by a man on the cusp of entering the Presidential race. Here
in Norfolk today, when he was asked if a Robert Novak column about him had stung
this week, he opened his response with a classic Powell sound bite and closed
his answer with thoughts and phrasing that could foreshadow a run for the White
House.

"I haven't gone ga-ga or run into a bunker and hidden," he said. "It's not the
first time in my life people have criticized me. I understand that the political
world will be one of constant pouring over everything I say, everything I do.
And I will have political opponents who will attack me regularly and try to
persuade people to follow their ideas. This is part of the great American
dialogue; it's called democracy. I fully understand it, and I fully know what
I'll be getting into if I join the political debate."

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Colin Powell was greeted by supporters on Friday in
Norfolk, Va., where he wound up his book tour. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Before He Became a Saint

BYLINE: By Geoffrey C. Ward;   Geoffrey C. Ward, the principal author of "The
Civil War: An Illustrated History," is a biographer of Franklin D. Roosevelt.
His most recent book is "Closest Companion: The Unknown Story of the Intimate
Friendship Between Franklin Roosevelt and Margaret Suckley."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1557 words



LINCOLN
By David Herbert Donald.
Illustrated. 714 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $35.

DAVID HERBERT DONALD began his distinguished career in 1948 with "Lincoln's
Herndon," a life of Abraham Lincoln's law partner and early biographer, William
Herndon, so comprehensive -- and so entertaining -- that no one has ever
bothered to write Herndon up again. Now, nearly half a century later, after
writing, editing or collaborating on 15 more volumes and winning two Pulitzer
Prizes for biography, he has produced a life of Lincoln himself. He cannot
expect Lincoln to belong to him the way Herndon does, of course; no biography of
the 16th President can ever be definitive; each new generation will insist on
redefining him, just as all its predecessors have. But Mr. Donald's "Lincoln" is
so lucid and richly researched, so careful and compelling, that it is hard to
imagine a more satisfying life of our most admired and least understood
President, at least for the foreseeable future.

No one knows how many books have been written about Lincoln -- one prominent
collector estimates there have been more than 7,000. But the authors of all but
a handful of them began by assuming that he was a Great Man, then dutifully
worked their way back through his life in search of clues to how he got that
way. Mr. Donald's life of Lincoln is different and therefore more rewarding; it
unrolls, as Lincoln's real life did, as a series of abrupt twists and turns,
triumphs and setbacks, after any one of which, had he made the wrong choice, he
would never have had his chance at greatness.

How might American history have been altered, for example, had Lincoln decided
to become a blacksmith instead of a lawyer, as he almost did at the outset of
his political career? Or if he had accepted the governorship of the far-off
Oregon Territory, offered to him by his fellow Whigs as a consolation prize when
he left Congress in 1849? Or had his enthusiastic friends succeeded in winning
for him the Republican Vice-Presidential nomination in 1856, only to see him go
down to defeat with John C. Fremont?

There are no startling revelations here -- Mr. Donald is too scrupulous ever to
push the evidence farther than it should go -- and all of Lincoln's familiar
avatars are present: the awkward youth and canny lawyer, grieving father and
tormented husband, master of English prose and amateur military strategist, Man
of Sorrows and life-long champion of what he called "cold, calculating,
unimpassioned reason." But Mr. Donald's portrait of Lincoln is nonetheless a
good deal grittier than those produced by most of his predecessors. This will
come as no surprise to those who remember his "Lincoln Reconsidered," a book of
elegant essays, published in 1955, in which he stressed his subject's
tough-mindedness and tactical skills.

"The secret of Lincoln's success is simple," he wrote then: "He was an astute
and dexterous operator of the political machine." This distinctly unsentimental
view caused a considerable stir at the time -- in those days the sites
associated with the Emancipator in Springfield, Ill. were still officially
designated the "Lincoln Shrines" -- and in "Lincoln in American Memory,"
published just last year, Merrill D. Peterson took Mr. Donald to task for having
so heavily emphasized "Lincoln's political flexibility, opportunism and
pragmatism that he was left with no ideological undergirding at all."

In Mr. Donald's new full-length study, Lincoln is amply undergirded with
principles, but he remains wily and elusive in his pursuit of them. The key to
understanding him, Mr. Donald writes, is his blazing political ambition, what
Herndon called his "little engine that knew no rest." Lincoln was just 23 years
old in 1832, and a relative stranger to his New Salem neighbors, when he first
declared his candidacy for the Illinois state legislature; he had attended
school only sporadically, had not yet opened a lawbook, did not even own a suit,
but was already determined to be at the center of things.

Much of the first half of "Lincoln" is given over to a vivid account of the
fierce, sometimes squalid local political infighting that consumed its subject
for the nearly three decades that followed, first as a canny leader of the
minority Whigs in predominantly Democratic Illinois and then, when that grand
old party splintered over slavery, as one of the founders of the Republicans.

As every schoolchild used to know, Lincoln met with more than his share of
disappointments along the way, but he was helped through them by what Mr. Donald
argues was a second distinctive trait, "the essential passivity of his nature."
"I claim not to have controlled events," Lincoln wrote in 1864, "but confess
plainly that events have controlled me." His conviction that human events were
ultimately controlled by an unfathomable Higher Power did not preclude his
exhausting himself trying to attain the goals that meant the most to him --
first the betterment of himself and his family, and then the maintenance of the
American Union, which he believed literally a sacred bond and "the last best
hope of earth," in large measure because it was the only government in all the
world that would have allowed a man like himself to rise so far. (He loathed
slavery too, but until the war was well under way saw little he could do about
it under the Constitution except make certain it did not spread farther.)

But his belief that the "Almighty has His own purposes," Mr. Donald contends,
did sustain him during a life of constant striving that might otherwise have
crushed him. It helped rescue him from self-righteousness, allowed him to be
forbearing when others made mistakes, and encouraged in him the realistic
caution that served him and his country so well during its gravest crisis, but
that also profoundly irritated his more systematic and single-minded
contemporaries -- and still troubles some of the more unforgiving students of
his career in our own time.

"You know," Lincoln once told a group of quarrelsome Pennsylvania Republicans,
"I never was a contriver. I don't know much about how things are done in
politics." In fact, as Mr. Donald's new account makes clearer than ever before,
he knew all there was to know about how things were done; he could not have
survived so long or done so well as President if he had not.

Few men ever moved into the Executive Mansion less apparently well prepared than
he: mostly self-educated and still largely unknown to his fellow citizens, he
had not held public office of any kind for more than two decades, had never
overseen anything larger than a two-man law office, was thought a countrified
embarrassment even by members of his own Cabinet. It was lessons learned in
country courtrooms and the grimy corridors of the Illinois Statehouse that
finally made the difference: hard lessons about the value of keeping one's own
counsel, the pace at which public opinion could safely be shaped, and the uses
of delay and flattery and the miraculous power of patronage to change men's
minds.

This Lincoln is quite capable, when necessary, of acting with the kind of guile
and sinuousness more often ascribed to, say, Franklin D. Roosevelt. When
Congressional investigators seemed on the trail of damning evidence against his
first Secretary of War, Simon Cameron, for example, Lincoln cheerfully whisked
him off to Russia as his Minister to the Czar. And when he decided that the
forthright antislavery opinions of his first Vice President, Hannibal Hamlin,
might harm him among moderate voters in 1864, he managed to drop him from the
ticket so soundlessly that Hamlin himself was never sure what had happened.
Still later, meeting in secret with the Confederate Vice President Alexander H.
Stephens aboard the steamboat River Queen in Hampton Roads on Feb. 3, 1865,
Lincoln apparently went so far as to be deliberately vague about whether or not
the Peculiar Institution might still somehow be permitted to survive in parts of
the South, provided all of it surrendered.

LINCOLN'S convictions about slavery's evil had clearly not altered -- his
behind-the-scenes lobbying had just helped win passage of the 13th Amendment in
the House, in fact -- but he was quite willing to imply that they had, Mr.
Donald believes, if by doing so a "campaign of misinformation" would further
undermine the battered Confederacy.

Mr. Donald refrains from speculating about what sort of Reconstruction policy
Lincoln might have sought had he stayed home from the theater on the evening of
April 14, 1865. Like other nagging questions about Presidents who were snatched
from the scene too soon -- Would F.D.R. have dropped the atomic bomb? Would
J.F.K. have pulled us out of Vietnam? -- it remains unanswerable. But Lincoln
did leave one characteristically oblique clue. "The pilots on our Western rivers
steer from point to point as they call it -- setting the course of the boat no
farther than they can see," he told one senator who asked him what was going to
happen when the fighting stopped; "and that is all I propose to myself in this
great problem." As this remarkable new biography demonstrates, Abraham Lincoln
was a master at point-to-point navigation because, unlike a good many of his
successors, he never forgot toward which harbor he was steering.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Before He Became a Saint

BYLINE: By Geoffrey C. Ward;   Geoffrey C. Ward, the principal author of "The
Civil War: An Illustrated History," is a biographer of Franklin D. Roosevelt.
His most recent book is "Closest Companion: The Unknown Story of the Intimate
Friendship Between Franklin Roosevelt and Margaret Suckley."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1557 words



LINCOLN
By David Herbert Donald.
Illustrated. 714 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $35.

DAVID HERBERT DONALD began his distinguished career in 1948 with "Lincoln's
Herndon," a life of Abraham Lincoln's law partner and early biographer, William
Herndon, so comprehensive -- and so entertaining -- that no one has ever
bothered to write Herndon up again. Now, nearly half a century later, after
writing, editing or collaborating on 15 more volumes and winning two Pulitzer
Prizes for biography, he has produced a life of Lincoln himself. He cannot
expect Lincoln to belong to him the way Herndon does, of course; no biography of
the 16th President can ever be definitive; each new generation will insist on
redefining him, just as all its predecessors have. But Mr. Donald's "Lincoln" is
so lucid and richly researched, so careful and compelling, that it is hard to
imagine a more satisfying life of our most admired and least understood
President, at least for the foreseeable future.

No one knows how many books have been written about Lincoln -- one prominent
collector estimates there have been more than 7,000. But the authors of all but
a handful of them began by assuming that he was a Great Man, then dutifully
worked their way back through his life in search of clues to how he got that
way. Mr. Donald's life of Lincoln is different and therefore more rewarding; it
unrolls, as Lincoln's real life did, as a series of abrupt twists and turns,
triumphs and setbacks, after any one of which, had he made the wrong choice, he
would never have had his chance at greatness.

How might American history have been altered, for example, had Lincoln decided
to become a blacksmith instead of a lawyer, as he almost did at the outset of
his political career? Or if he had accepted the governorship of the far-off
Oregon Territory, offered to him by his fellow Whigs as a consolation prize when
he left Congress in 1849? Or had his enthusiastic friends succeeded in winning
for him the Republican Vice-Presidential nomination in 1856, only to see him go
down to defeat with John C. Fremont?

There are no startling revelations here -- Mr. Donald is too scrupulous ever to
push the evidence farther than it should go -- and all of Lincoln's familiar
avatars are present: the awkward youth and canny lawyer, grieving father and
tormented husband, master of English prose and amateur military strategist, Man
of Sorrows and life-long champion of what he called "cold, calculating,
unimpassioned reason." But Mr. Donald's portrait of Lincoln is nonetheless a
good deal grittier than those produced by most of his predecessors. This will
come as no surprise to those who remember his "Lincoln Reconsidered," a book of
elegant essays, published in 1955, in which he stressed his subject's
tough-mindedness and tactical skills.

"The secret of Lincoln's success is simple," he wrote then: "He was an astute
and dexterous operator of the political machine." This distinctly unsentimental
view caused a considerable stir at the time -- in those days the sites
associated with the Emancipator in Springfield, Ill. were still officially
designated the "Lincoln Shrines" -- and in "Lincoln in American Memory,"
published just last year, Merrill D. Peterson took Mr. Donald to task for having
so heavily emphasized "Lincoln's political flexibility, opportunism and
pragmatism that he was left with no ideological undergirding at all."

In Mr. Donald's new full-length study, Lincoln is amply undergirded with
principles, but he remains wily and elusive in his pursuit of them. The key to
understanding him, Mr. Donald writes, is his blazing political ambition, what
Herndon called his "little engine that knew no rest." Lincoln was just 23 years
old in 1832, and a relative stranger to his New Salem neighbors, when he first
declared his candidacy for the Illinois state legislature; he had attended
school only sporadically, had not yet opened a lawbook, did not even own a suit,
but was already determined to be at the center of things.

Much of the first half of "Lincoln" is given over to a vivid account of the
fierce, sometimes squalid local political infighting that consumed its subject
for the nearly three decades that followed, first as a canny leader of the
minority Whigs in predominantly Democratic Illinois and then, when that grand
old party splintered over slavery, as one of the founders of the Republicans.

As every schoolchild used to know, Lincoln met with more than his share of
disappointments along the way, but he was helped through them by what Mr. Donald
argues was a second distinctive trait, "the essential passivity of his nature."
"I claim not to have controlled events," Lincoln wrote in 1864, "but confess
plainly that events have controlled me." His conviction that human events were
ultimately controlled by an unfathomable Higher Power did not preclude his
exhausting himself trying to attain the goals that meant the most to him --
first the betterment of himself and his family, and then the maintenance of the
American Union, which he believed literally a sacred bond and "the last best
hope of earth," in large measure because it was the only government in all the
world that would have allowed a man like himself to rise so far. (He loathed
slavery too, but until the war was well under way saw little he could do about
it under the Constitution except make certain it did not spread farther.)

But his belief that the "Almighty has His own purposes," Mr. Donald contends,
did sustain him during a life of constant striving that might otherwise have
crushed him. It helped rescue him from self-righteousness, allowed him to be
forbearing when others made mistakes, and encouraged in him the realistic
caution that served him and his country so well during its gravest crisis, but
that also profoundly irritated his more systematic and single-minded
contemporaries -- and still troubles some of the more unforgiving students of
his career in our own time.

"You know," Lincoln once told a group of quarrelsome Pennsylvania Republicans,
"I never was a contriver. I don't know much about how things are done in
politics." In fact, as Mr. Donald's new account makes clearer than ever before,
he knew all there was to know about how things were done; he could not have
survived so long or done so well as President if he had not.

Few men ever moved into the Executive Mansion less apparently well prepared than
he: mostly self-educated and still largely unknown to his fellow citizens, he
had not held public office of any kind for more than two decades, had never
overseen anything larger than a two-man law office, was thought a countrified
embarrassment even by members of his own Cabinet. It was lessons learned in
country courtrooms and the grimy corridors of the Illinois Statehouse that
finally made the difference: hard lessons about the value of keeping one's own
counsel, the pace at which public opinion could safely be shaped, and the uses
of delay and flattery and the miraculous power of patronage to change men's
minds.

This Lincoln is quite capable, when necessary, of acting with the kind of guile
and sinuousness more often ascribed to, say, Franklin D. Roosevelt. When
Congressional investigators seemed on the trail of damning evidence against his
first Secretary of War, Simon Cameron, for example, Lincoln cheerfully whisked
him off to Russia as his Minister to the Czar. And when he decided that the
forthright antislavery opinions of his first Vice President, Hannibal Hamlin,
might harm him among moderate voters in 1864, he managed to drop him from the
ticket so soundlessly that Hamlin himself was never sure what had happened.
Still later, meeting in secret with the Confederate Vice President Alexander H.
Stephens aboard the steamboat River Queen in Hampton Roads on Feb. 3, 1865,
Lincoln apparently went so far as to be deliberately vague about whether or not
the Peculiar Institution might still somehow be permitted to survive in parts of
the South, provided all of it surrendered.

LINCOLN'S convictions about slavery's evil had clearly not altered -- his
behind-the-scenes lobbying had just helped win passage of the 13th Amendment in
the House, in fact -- but he was quite willing to imply that they had, Mr.
Donald believes, if by doing so a "campaign of misinformation" would further
undermine the battered Confederacy.

Mr. Donald refrains from speculating about what sort of Reconstruction policy
Lincoln might have sought had he stayed home from the theater on the evening of
April 14, 1865. Like other nagging questions about Presidents who were snatched
from the scene too soon -- Would F.D.R. have dropped the atomic bomb? Would
J.F.K. have pulled us out of Vietnam? -- it remains unanswerable. But Lincoln
did leave one characteristically oblique clue. "The pilots on our Western rivers
steer from point to point as they call it -- setting the course of the boat no
farther than they can see," he told one senator who asked him what was going to
happen when the fighting stopped; "and that is all I propose to myself in this
great problem." As this remarkable new biography demonstrates, Abraham Lincoln
was a master at point-to-point navigation because, unlike a good many of his
successors, he never forgot toward which harbor he was steering.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Drums Along the Mekong

BYLINE: By David Haward Bain;   David Haward Bain is the author of nonfiction
books about Vietnam and the Philippines. He teaches creative writing at
Middlebury College.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 29;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 768 words



FINDING MOON
By Tony Hillerman.
319 pp. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers.
$24.

TONY HILLERMAN, Western writer of fiction and nonfiction, author of the
best-selling Navajo mysteries featuring the tribal police officers Joe Leaphorn
and Jim Chee, strikes out into dramatically new terrain with "Finding Moon." It
is Southeast Asia, circa 1975, and, as the client governments in Saigon and
Phnom Penh fall before the Communist onslaught, a place of great peril and deep
mystery.

The hero is Malcolm (Moon) Mathias (the nickname comes from his childhood
affection for Moon Pies). He is a barrel-chested former Army sergeant, now
deeply rutted in a job at a Colorado newspaper, editing wire-service dispatches,
smoothing out press releases and passing along boring local news. His girlfriend
is 20 years younger and emotionally undependable; he has no friends, only
colleagues; and his closest family connection is his distant, demanding mother
in Miami Beach. Moon's brother, Ricky, a rakish civilian helicopter pilot and
entrepreneur with business addresses in hangars and warehouses all over
Southeast Asia, died during a flight in the Cambodian mountains, his death as
much of a mystery to Moon as his recent life.

In Mr. Hillerman's hands, solutions for the mysteries, as well as for Moon's
stalled life, beckon unexpectedly from afar. His elderly mother is stricken as
she is about to depart from Los Angeles for Manila -- Moon did not even know she
had left Florida -- and he flies to her side only to be handed responsibility
for her emergency mission: to go to the Philippines and collect an infant girl,
the daughter of Ricky and his vanished Cambodian wife. Thus Moon embarks on an
odyssey that he thinks is a complete departure from his passive, emotionally
numbed and unremarkable nature. His greatest surprise in the ensuing adventure
may be how wrong he is about himself. Suspicious clues and questionable tips
lead him from the squalid warrens of Manila to one of President Ferdinand
Marcos's famous prison compounds, and then across the South China Sea to the
Mekong Delta of Vietnam, and then all the way into the heart of Pol Pot's
Cambodia. Along the way, as complications mount, Moon's insights into the
meaning of comradeship and the depths of true heroism provide him with tests
even greater than mere physical danger.

In less than competent hands, political novels all too often are not yarns but
bullhorns for the writer's views. As a subject and setting, Vietnam has had
perhaps more than its share in this trend, frequently with the familiar template
of war events, characters of singularly flat aspect and the trademark talk,
talk, talk of fictional heroes who have all the answers and most certainly know
whom to blame. Not once in this fast-moving novel does Mr. Hillerman lose
control of his narrative or his grip on its characters -- all of whom have depth
and even a little mystery. If he dedicates this work to his comrades in World
War II -- "to the men of C Company and to all those who earned the right to wear
the Combat Infantry Badge" -- he does not write only to them.

The action in "Finding Moon" is unrelenting -- especially since the author has
effectively placed it within the dramatic context of the 1975 calamity in
Southeast Asia, with North Vietnamese columns steamrolling across uncontested
ground, with United States helicopters dipping over frantic, teeming throngs to
extract embassy personnel in Saigon, with troops of the client regimes rioting
and looting, with the fanatical Khmer Rouge marching civilians out of the cities
and towns and beginning their wholesale murder. Because Mr. Hillerman has made
Moon Mathias a journalist and former Vietnam grunt, these interjected news
bulletins play a realistic and believable part in the narrative, and they are
supported by the author's finely tuned research. Military events in the spring
of 1975 along the lower Mekong and up in the grim Cambodian highlands, unfolding
as Moon and a slapdash team of comrades journey toward their uncertain goal,
have the ring of verisimilitude about them. Mr. Hillerman, known for densely
plotted mysteries, compelling characterization and realistic settings in his
Navajo novels, creates in "Finding Moon" a rollicking, wildly improbable yet
wholly believable dash across war-torn Vietnam in a commandeered armored
personnel carrier. Within those cramped, oily confines, with the sounds of
combat filtering in through the open hatch, Moon and a strange melange of
adventurers close in on their various goals, their odyssey entering into legend.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Troops to Bosnia?

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 263 words


To the Editor:

Re "Senators Query U.S. Role in Bosnia" (front page, Oct. 18): It is not the War
Powers Act but the Constitution that must be used to determine if the President
has the power to place American troops in Bosnia. Madison and Hamilton would be
shocked to know that Congress is losing the war-making and foreign policy battle
not only to the President but also to the United Nations and the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization.

According to the Constitution, only Congress has the power to declare war. Just
as important, the Constitution gave Congress the authority, based on the power
of the purse, "to raise and support Armies and to provide and maintain a Navy."
The President's role was deliberately limited to repelling sudden attacks.

James Madison summarized the issue clearly when he wrote, "In no part of the
Constitution is more wisdom to be found than in the clause which confides the
question of war and peace to the legislature, and not to the executive branch."

After Vietnam, Congress tried to limit the President's ability to make war by
passing the War Powers Resolution. This unwise legislation does the opposite by
allowing the President to commit troops anywhere in the world for up to 90 days
without Congressional approval.

Under the Constitution, the President's role as Commander in Chief is to be on
top of the military chain of command. It is up to Congress to decide if American
troops can be sent to Bosnia or anywhere else. Congress must wake up and take
back its power.

ROBERT PREVIDI
Manhasset, L.I., Oct. 18, 1995

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Increasingly, Political War of Words Is Fought With Nazi Imagery

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1150 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 22


In his campaign to unseat Frank Cassell as Sheriff of Henry County in Virginia,
Ken Barnett for a time criticized Mr. Cassell in a television commercial that
showed Mr. Cassell's picture beside Hitler's and called Mr. Cassell's deputies
"goose-stepping Gestapo."

The two-minute commercial, which ran for nearly a week, also showed a scene from
the film "Schindler's List" in which the commander of a concentration camp
shoots an inmate in the back of the head for no reason.

Mr. Barnett, a technician at a local television station, said he had made the
commercial to protest Mr. Cassell's refusal to allow two colleagues from the
station to cover a private fund-raising event. "Hitler had many facets;
controlling the media was one of them," Mr. Barnett said. "To me, this was a
civil rights issue."

While Mr. Barnett's Nazi images might be among the more graphic used during
recent political campaigns, they were hardly the only ones injected into recent
political discourse. With increasing frequency, candidates from both political
parties around the country have used comparisons to Nazis, Nazi behavior and the
Holocaust to call attention to some perceived political act of horror.

In Virginia alone, three people running this year for seats in the State
Legislature have invoked Hitler or other Nazi themes to attack their opponents.

"They have become an element of the normalization of hyperbole," Kathleen Hall
Jamieson, dean of the Annenberg School for Communication at the University of
Pennsylvania, said of the rising use of references to Nazism for political shock
value. "The danger is that it exhausts the capacity of language to express
outrage. When someone actually does act like Hitler now, we don't have the words
anymore. Crying wolf doesn't work anymore."

Since World War II, the murderous acts of Germany's Third Reich have been
generally held as a benchmark of atrocity and, as such, a wholly inappropriate
comparison for almost anything else. But as hyperbole grows at alarming rates,
obscuring political issues more and more, the civility of public dialogue has
begun breaking down in the race for attention.

In a larger context, the breakdown, say Ms. Jamieson and other political
observers, has led to episodes like Senator Dick Armey, Republican of Texas,
calling the Representative Barney Frank, Democrat of Massachusetts, "Barney Fag"
on the House floor and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York,
mocking Judge Lance A. Ito, a Japanese-American, on a radio program. It has also
generated a stream of unseemly remarks, like Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of
North Carolina, warning President Clinton to bring bodyguards if he visits North
Carolina and Representative Robert K. Dornan, Republican of California,
suggesting that President Clinton gave "aid and comfort to the enemy" during the
Vietnam War.

In particular, it has unloosed Nazis and their deeds as acceptable analogies for
perceived political misdeeds. Here are several examples from this year:

*In Idaho, the State Superintendent of Education, Anne Fox, compared the
difficulties of her first six weeks in office to Anne Frank's persecution by the
Nazis.

*Appearing before state lawmakers in Albany, two Democratic Representatives from
New York City, Charles B. Rangel and Major R. Owens, said the Republicans'
social program outlined in the Contract With America would treat blacks and
other minorities the way Jews were treated under Hitler. Mr. Owens said the
Republicans were "worse than Hitler."

*The National Rifle Association circulated a fund-raising letter to members that
criticized Federal law-enforcement agents as "jack-booted Government thugs," a
clear reference to Nazi storm troopers.

*In his closing arguments in the O. J. Simpson trial, Mr. Simpson's lawyer,
Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., compared the former police detective Mark Fuhrman to
Hitler, calling him a "genocidal racist."

Representative Eliot L. Engel, a Democrat from the Bronx and Westchester County,
has noticed the breakdown of civility even more in private correspondence from
people who disagree with his positions. One letter shows a picture of
concentration camp inmates peering out from their barbed-wire captivity, over
the words, "How to handle the noisome whining Jew!"

Another shows pictures of gas ovens used to kill Jews in the camps and a fetus,
with the suggestion that women's rights advocates are "perpetrators of the
present day American atrocity."

"For the people doing these kinds of things, it's just routine," Mr. Engel said.
"We need to be getting our act together so we can talk about issues without
demonizing the other side. Otherwise, this is a very dangerous trend in American
politics."

Ms. Jamieson said the "erosion of civil discourse" in American politics had been
caused by a combination of two big changes. One is the increasing number of
voices in the national political conversation through radio talk shows and the
Internet. The other is the Republicans' ascendancy to power in Congress last
year, a role-reversal that has thrust both them and Democrats into unfamiliar
roles.

The result, she said, is people using more provocative language and images to be
heard.

Mr. Engel said he would add a third factor, the success of political campaigns
"that go negative," creating an anything-goes climate "that was unthinkable
decades ago."

Few places have produced more Nazi references this year than Virginia, where
Republicans have a chance to win control of the Legislature for the first time
in more than 100 years. Potentially symbolic as affirmation or repudiation of
the national Republican sweep last year, the election has drawn the interest and
financial support of both national political parties.

Three of the campaigns are notable for the use of Nazi comparisons. H. Russell
Potts Jr., a Republican senator from Winchester, contended that campaign tactics
used by state Democrats include "all of the trick plays of slime, shame and
lies." He said, "The guy who crafted their whole campaign was Goebbels."

Patrick D. Cupp, a Republican Senate candidate, circulated a campaign flier
expressing his support for gun ownership that said, "When the Nazi Party came
into power in Germany under Hitler, the first thing they did was to confiscate
all guns."

And Gerald Hudson, a Democratic challenger for a House seat, compared the state
Republicans' "Pledge for Honest Change," the local equivalent of the national
Contract With America, to a Nazi loyalty oath.

"In the past," said Robert Holsworth, a professor of political science at
Virginia Commonwealth University, "Virginia represented an orderly, genteel
political style. Now, we are thoroughly modernized. But I don't think they have
much effect on the public. They have become overused metaphors, and most people
are either repulsed when they hear them or just don't hear them anymore."

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In his campaign for Henry County sheriff in Virginia, Ken
Barnett juxtaposed pictures of his opponent, Frank Cassell, and Hitler.


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE U.N. AT 50;
At the Lectern: Defining the Challenges, Reaffirming the Commitment

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1932 words


Following are excerpts from remarks by heads of state and other leaders
yesterday at a special session of the General Assembly marking the 50th
anniversary of the United Nations, as compiled by the Federal Document Clearing
House, a private transcription service:


Candid Questions About Effectiveness

John Major
Prime Minister of Britain

The United Kingdom today, as we meet here, is the largest contributor of troops
to United Nations peacekeeping operations. British forces are serving in blue
berets from Angola to Georgia, with over 8,000 British troops in Bosnia alone.

So I speak to you this morning as a strong supporter of the United Nations, but
also as a candid friend. . . .

Is there too much waste and duplication between different bodies? I believe
there may be.

Are the priorities right for the 1990's? I'm not convinced yet that they are.

As we form new bodies for new problems, do we close down those no longer needed?
Not enough, I think. There are some bodies we could usefully scrap.

Can we improve the planning, managing, and financing of peacekeeping? I believe
that we can.

And is our machinery for pre-empting conflicts and disasters as good as it
should be? I believe not.

There are other questions as well. Should the Security Council be enlarged? I
believe that it should. The subject has been on the agenda for too long. It
raises difficult questions, but the issues are clear, and the decisions are
needed.

Is the United Nations being efficiently managed? I'm sure more could yet be done
to apply the best modern practices with funding allocated to the most efficient
programs. Is, perhaps, too much time and energy being spent on ritual, verbal
battles, brilliantly interpreted into six languages, and then printed on the
world's highest paper mountain? Of course it is. We know that is the case.

And last, but most urgent of all, financial reform. The U.N. is in a financial
crisis. It is not sustainable for member states to enjoy representation without
taxation. Contributions should be paid promptly and in full, and arrears should
be cleared. But this must be accompanied by a new focus on efficiency and by
modernizing assessments to reflect the changing capacity of members to pay their
dues. . . .

We need frank and honest answers now, because the world needs the United Nations
as much today as at any time in the past.

Seeking Balance On Security Council

Armando Calderon Sol
President of El Salvador

The eradication of poverty continues to be the main challenge before the members
of the organization. We must not rest until we have insured that he who is born
poor is no longer condemned to die poor.

For the organization, duly modernized, to be able to respond effectively to
these challenges, it is indispensable for there to be the political will of all
member states to do so -- and they must meet their financial obligations. As for
the reform of the organization, we support promoting participation and
increasing representation to all states for their very survival. . . .

If our right to fairer participation in all the main bodies of the United
Nations were respected, severally, we should enhance the representative nature
of the Security Council in order to reflect the new structure in the
international community.

The Ever Pressing Need To Bring Equality to All

Nelson Mandela
President of South Africa

When distinguished leaders came together half a century ago to consign to the
past a war that had pitted humanity against itself, the ruins and the smoke from
the dying fires were the monument for what should not have been.

Fifty years after the formation of the United Nations, we meet to affirm our
commitment with the founding idea and the common desire to better the life of
all human beings. . . .

We come from Africa and South Africa on this historic occasion to pay tribute to
that founding idea and to thank the United Nations for challenging, with us, a
system that defined fellow humans as lesser beings.

The youth at whom we have directed most of our awareness campaign on this golden
jubilee should marvel at the nobility of our intentions. They are also bound to
wonder why it should be that poverty still prevails the greater part of the
globe, that wars continue to rage and that many in positions of power and
privilege pursue cold-hearted philosophies which terrifyingly proclaim, "I am
not your brother's keeper." For no one in the north or the south can escape the
cold fact that we are a single humanity.

A Pledge to End Nuclear Testing

Jacques Chirac
President of France

France has always been a leader in the search for peaceful solutions to the
crises of our times. From Cambodia to Bosnia, it has become the leading
contributor of United Nations troops. Commitment also in the search for genuine
disarmament: No one disputes France's major role in the negotiations to ban
chemical weapons, to eliminate anti-personnel mines and to extend indefinitely
the nonproliferation treaty.

Let no one doubt France's determination to insure the success of the negotiation
on the definitive comprehensive and verifiable ban on nuclear testing in 1996.
It was the first to speak out for the zero option. Today I wish to confirm that
once its final series of tests is completed next spring, France will sign the
protocols to the Rarotonga Treaty establishing a denuclearized zone in the South
Pacific. . . .

Let us help the United Nations to adapt to this new world and effectively to
play its role there. Let us make the Security Council more representative by
enlarging the circle of its permanent members to include Germany, Japan and some
large states from the south. Let us learn from our successes, as from our
failures, by developing preventive diplomacy at the regional level and also by
increasing the rapid-reaction capability of our organization in the humanitarian
and military spheres.

From Those Who Have,
To Those Who Need
Lieut. Jerry Rawlings
President of Ghana

For us in Africa, particularly the next 50 years will perhaps be even more
crucial than the past 50 years. We want to see an international community and,
in the U.N. framework, a reversal of our continent's nationalization.

Ladies and gentlemen, we cannot help being struck by the fact that the
international community is willing to spend $5 million a day on U.N.
peacekeeping operations in Bosnia-Herzegovina and would denounce, begrudge those
noble people such international solidarity. Yes indeed, they do deserve it --
but when we have asked for a sum that represents 10 to 15 days of that bill to
help those of us in Africa making every possible effort to assist ourselves with
our meager resources, there is deafening silence.

Ladies and gentlemen, "should double standards continue?" is a question I put
before you. How long, ladies and gentlemen, will world statesmen omit even a
glancing reference to Africa as they survey the world scene, despite the
numerous resources that she has provided to today's modern role.

Ladies and gentlemen, let us not forget that Africa's resources, as I have said,
human and material, have over the centuries made a very major contribution to
the world of nations and of human progress. We must therefore denounce the
selfishness that has the means and sees the others' need but refuses to meet it.

We see the reckless overconsumption of some amidst the wrenching grind of
poverty of so many. Ladies and gentlemen, we feel the hunger in the midst of
plenty, the want in the midst of so much abundance. My brothers and sisters, we
must equally deplore the international focus on only the negative about Africa
and the indifference to the positive that also prevails on this continent. . . .

Ladies and gentlemen, let us remember there can be no bright future for the
world, no new international order that is sustainable, without Africa occupying
a dignified place, a rightful place, in the temple of humanity and in the
consults of global decision-making.

The Persistence Of Discrimination

Amr Moussa
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt

This celebration is a unique opportunity to assess our successes and our
failures. It is an opportunity to learn from our experience and to determine
together our path to the future. Much has been achieved. . . .

However, this bright picture is marred by dark and murky shadows, the most
ironic of which is that the United Nations stands on the verge of bankruptcy on
its 50th anniversary.

However, this, alone, is not the tragedy. The real tragedy, lies in the fact
that in spite of success in achieving equalization, hegemony and policies of
aggression continue to afflict the international scene. Despite our success in
ending apartheid, racial discrimination and religious intolerance continue to
prevail in many parts of the world. Despite our success in conceiving many
theories of development, economic imbalances persist due to the wide gap between
North and South, a gap that portends the division of the world for decades to
come. . . .

When we talk of peace, let us truly mean it. When we talk of development, let us
put it into effect. When we talk about human rights, let us refrain from
resorting to double standards. . . .

As we celebrate the United Nations in its 50th anniversary, let us light a
candle that will illuminate our path in this murky and dangerous times, and
bring about the prosperous and stable future with peace reigning supreme all
over this earth and its humanity.

The Solemn Lessons Learned From War

Le Duc Anh
President of Vietnam

Paradoxically, just as mankind has acquired the technology to reduce the
distance between the Earth and other celestial bodies in the universe, the gap
between the rich and the poor has alarmingly widened. . . .

The Vietnamese people know all too well the sorrow and pain of war, as well as
the harshness of economic embargo and the deprivation of poverty. We therefore
feel in deep empathy with the sufferings and losses of other peoples and other
citizens. From this solemn rostrum, let me join my own voice to the earnest call
for the international community to do their utmost for the enjoyment by all
individuals and nations in the world of their fundamental rights to a life of
peace, equality and development.

Cleaning Environment, Fighting Narcotics

Hubert A. Ingraham
Prime Minister of the Bahamas

As we celebrate our 50th anniversary, we must face squarely the threat of a new
great war in which we are all engaged. The war of which I speak is that which is
being fought in defense of the environment.

This is of particular concern to small island developing states such as the
Bahamas, a fragile, service-based, archipelagic ecosystem of global
environmental significance.

Mr. President, it is useful to articulate the many achievements for which the
United Nations has been responsible. Notable are the tremendous advances made in
world health, including immunization and disease reduction, improved food
production and delivery, improved shelter and general living standards for the
poor, and higher literacy rates in the world. Notable too, are initiatives to
safeguard and promote the rights of women and children.

In our region, where nefarious traffic in illicit drugs and the insidious
erosion of society by powerful drug cartels are well known, we fully appreciate
the importance of the U.N.'s role in galvanizing wide international support for
the fight against the demons of avarice and death.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The crowd thinned at the General Assembly yesterday as many
officials skipped a second day of speechmaking to hold private talks. (Jim
Estrin/The New York Times)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Murder-Suicide Attempt Feared in Baby's Drowning

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 586 words

DATELINE: MOUNT HOLLY, N.J., Oct. 23


A woman with a history of depression may have deliberately driven her car into
the Delaware River, killing her 16-month-old daughter, prosecutors said today.

The woman, Teresa Kinch, 36, was in critical condition today at Cooper Hospital
University Medical Center in Camden, on a life support system and in a coma. She
spent at least 15 minutes underwater on Saturday night before being rescued by a
police officer, and her prognosis was unknown.

The authorities are trying to determine whether Ms. Kinch, of Florence Township,
intentionally plunged her car into the river, said the Burlington County
Prosecutor, Stephen G. Raymond.

Her daughter, also named Teresa, was strapped into a car seat. She died several
hours after a police diver pulled her from the submerged car. An autopsy found
that the cause of death was drowning.

"There's been no definite conclusion," Mr. Raymond said at a news conference.
"It's very possible this is a murder-suicide."

Her husband, Sidney, discounted that theory.

"She didn't take no plunge," Mr. Kinch, 46, told The Burlington County Times.
"She was swerved off the road. She was trying to avoid something."

Mr. Raymond said that Ms. Kinch was on medication for depression, and that the
authorities were investigating other possible suicide attempts. He could not
provide additional information about those attempts.

While investigators have not ruled out the possibility that the incident was
accidental, Mr. Raymond said, Ms. Finch's mental condition "is somewhat
telling."

"It is a severe depression," he said.

A military veteran, Ms. Kinch was discharged in August from the Veterans Affairs
Hospital in Lyons, a hospital spokesman, Luke Metaxas, said. He declined to
comment on her treatment or how long she was at the hospital.

Mr. Raymond said that Ms. Kinch and her husband, a disabled Vietnam veteran, met
at the veterans hospital 13 years ago when both were patients. He did not know
why they were hospitalized.

A witness told the authorities that Ms. Finch drove down a boat ramp at a park
in Florence Township, Mr. Raymond said. The witness, Heather Kramer, did not see
the car go into the river, but when she realized it had disappeared, she ran to
the water and saw the taillights, he said.

"She did it really, really casually and slow," said Ms. Kramer, who called the
police. "I was like, 'Oh my God! Oh my God!' " she said.

Mr. Raymond said investigators were checking Ms. Kinch's 1991 Chevrolet Cavalier
for possible defects, although it did not appear that the brakes had failed. He
said the car was in gear when it was in the water.

The police received a call around 8:45 P.M. Saturday that the car had plunged
into the river. Capt. Sefton Sutphin, an off-duty diver, heard the call and was
the first to arrive at the scene.

Captain Sutphin pulled Ms. Kinch from the submerged car, said Chief Richard
Yurcissin of the Florence Township police. He went back into the water and felt
around in the car until he found the child and pulled her out.

The girl was unconscious when she was rescued, but paramedics were able to get
her breathing, the authorities said. The child, who may have spent 30 minutes or
more underwater, was pronounced dead at Cooper Hospital.

Georgianne Urmson, who lives next door to the Kinches, said Ms. Kinch seemed
different when she returned home from the hospital in August.

"She didn't want anyone to talk to the baby or talk to her," Ms. Urmson said.
"Since she got back, she's been very antisocial."

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Teresa Kinch, 36, with her daughter, also named Teresa, who
drowned at the age of 16 months on Saturday. Prosecutors say Ms. Kinch, who is
in a coma, may have intentionally driven into the Delaware River. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE U.N. AT 50: REPORTERS NOTEBOOK;
Clinton Has Dinner And Cars Go Missing

BYLINE: By MATTHEW PURDY

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 984 words


This wasn't exactly LAX being shut down for the Presidential coif aboard Air
Force One, but some residents of the Upper West Side awoke yesterday morning to
feel the aftereffects of President Clinton's dinner on Monday night.

To make the area around Cafe des Artistes safe for the First Eater, cars were
towed from legal parking spaces on 67th Street near Central Park West and parked
elsewhere in the neighborhood. The street was heavily secured before the
President's arrival, and residents who wanted to go home had to show
identification containing their address or be escorted to their apartments by
police officers. Shortly before the President arrived, a city street sweeper
cleaned 67th Street.

When residents found that their cars were gone yesterday morning, they were
directed to a police barricade near Central Park where they were directed to
their cars.

Mike Tarr, a Secret Service spokesman, said yesterday that his agency had asked
the police to move "several" cars "to facilitate the arrival of the Presidential
motorcade," adding that if it caused any inconvenience, "we certainly
apologize."

Neither the police nor transportation officials could say how many cars were
towed, but a resident of the block said the tow trucks were working for hours.

Oh yes, the dinner. Mr. Clinton dined with nine other people, including Susan
Thomases, a family friend; Bruce Lindsay, the deputy White House counsel, and
Harold Ickes, the deputy White House chief of staff. Mr. Clinton had dined at
the restaurant when he visited New York as Governor of Arkansas, but he had
never eaten there as President, according to the restaurant's owner, George
Lang.

The President order grilled quail served on a bed of caramelized apples
macerated in Calvados. He was seen using pumpernickel bread to sop up the juice.
(Who could blame him?)

But Mr. Clinton was out yesterday morning running it off in Central Park.
Regular joggers there found him and his security detail running around the
Reservoir and joined in. Mary Fortuna, an East Side resident, was about to begin
her morning run when "all of a sudden I saw Bill Clinton running by me, and a
man said, 'Come on, you want to run with the President?' "

Mr. Clinton, it seems, was such a fast runner that Ms. Fortuna could not keep up
with him.


Hunger Striker Hospitalized

On Oct. 14, six Tibetans began a hunger strike across from the United Nations,
vowing to refrain from eating until the international bodies recognized that
Tibet is occupied by China and took steps to return Tibet to control by the
Dalai Lama. They said that if they died, other Tibetans were ready to take their
places.

Late yesterday afternoon, one of the strikers was taken to Bellevue Hospital
after doctors determined that she was seriously ill and unable to decide for
herself whether she needed treatment, said Heidi Melz, a program director with
the Office of Tibet, which represents the Dalai Lama in the Americas. The
striker was identified only as Yiga, 35, a Minneapolis woman.

The protesters have been lying on futons in Dag Hammarskjold Plaza, at 47th
Street and First Avenue, wearing wool caps and covered with blankets. Yesterday,
other Tibetans were chanting slogans like "Free Tibet" and "China Out Of Tibet"
behind the strikers, and monks prayed over them.

Ms. Melz said there had been no response to the hunger strike by United Nations
officials or world leaders attending the General Assembly session.


Castro-Watching

For those stargazers who get their kicks by spotting big-time political leaders,
President Fidel Castro of Cuba has been a hot item this week.

But the Fatigued One had his own bout of celebrity fever Monday night, when he
went to Jimmy's Bronx Cafe to speak to some Puerto Rican business leaders, many
of whom favor lifting the economic embargo against Cuba. When Mr. Castro arrived
at the banquet room, he was seated at a side table out of the view of the
audience. At the next table he spotted Willie Colon, the internationally known
salsa musician who lives in Westchester County.

"Willie!" Mr. Castro said with the fervor of a fan at a rock concert, and broke
into a wide smile. The two embraced in a bear hug.

Mr. Castro continued making his rounds yesterday. He was given a lunch by
Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the Daily News publisher, who said he had made several
trips to Cuba in the last year and had held almost 50 hours of conversations
with the Cuban President. The lunch, at Mr. Zuckerman's Fifth Avenue apartment,
was attended by other media notables like Mike Wallace, Peter Jennings, William
Safire and Barbara Walters.

Answering questions through a translator, Mr. Castro said that he was not afraid
of facing an opponent in an election, but that such elections were not part of
his country's political system. He described Cuba as "an Athenian democracy but
without plebeians and without slaves."

He said he considered President Jimmy Carter "a courageous" man, though he said
he was not having the same experience with Mr. Clinton. But he added: "I look at
Clinton with respect, and I tell you that sincerely. He seems to be a good
person."

He said his greatest accomplishment was "survival" in the face of "the greatest
power in the world." He described Cuba's relationship with the United States in
David-and-Goliath terms -- except, he said, "we do not have a slingshot."

He held out little hope of improved relations. He said that given the demands
being made by the United States, "we have no steps to take except to give up."
He said he wondered why the United States could not have ties with Cuba when it
has relations with Vietnam and China.

At one point in the lunch, Mr. Castro, who is known for his long speeches, was
being questioned by John McLaughlin, the rapid-fire talk show host. "You're a
journalist," Mr. Castro scolded. "But you don't let me speak."

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: At top, Wim Kok, the Dutch Prime Minister, bent for a closer
look at a piece in the Piet Mondrian exhibit at the Museum of Modern Art
yesterday, as the museum's director, Glenn D. Lowry, offered an interpretation.
(Andrea Mohin/The New York Times); At right, President Carlos Reina of Honduras
embraced President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti at a United Nations luncheon.
(Monica Almeida/The New York Times); At bottom, a Tibetan hunger striker
comforted a fellow striker across from the United Nations. (Andrea Mohin/The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Harold Cammer, 86, Champion of Labor And Rights Lawyer

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section D;  Page 21;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 340 words


Harold I. Cammer, a lawyer who championed the rights of workers, labor unions,
accused Communists and victims of racial bigotry, died on Saturday at his home
in Mamaroneck, N.Y. He was 86.

In a career that began in 1932 when Mr. Cammer graduated from Harvard Law School
and ended some 40 years later with his retirement, Mr. Cammer numbered among his
clients major unions like the Congress of Industrial Organizations, the brewery
workers', the New York teachers', the furriers', the leather workers' and the
Amalgamated Meat Cutters. During the widespread Communist hunts of the 1950's,
he defended union officers and teachers, especially in connection with their
appearances before the House Committee on Un-American Activities and its
counterparts in New York State.

Mr. Cammer was also a founder and active member of the National Lawyers Guild, a
nationwide organization noted for its concern with liberal causes and civil
rights, as well as a volunteer lawyer in the civil rights movement in the South
in the 1960's. He was co-lead counsel in the successful defense of more than 700
students arrested during the sit-in at Columbia University in 1968 and, with his
son, Robert, the author of a widely circulated legal analysis of the
unlawfulness of the war in Vietnam.

Mr. Cammer, who was born to poor Russian immigrant parents in Manhattan in 1909,
graduated from City College in 1929 and was admitted on a full scholarship to
Harvard Law School. Except for military service during World War II, he spent
his career practicing law. His firm, Pressman, Witt & Cammer, evolved into
Cammer & Shapiro, a Manhattan firm specializing in labor law, where he worked
until he retired.

In addition to his son, of Larchmont, N.Y., Mr. Cammer is survived by his wife
of 59 years, Florence Glantz Cammer; a daughter, Margaret Cammer, the
supervising judge of the Brooklyn Civil Court; three brothers, Moses, of Waban,
Mass.; Russell, of Brooklyn and William, of Los Angeles, one grandson, and one
great-granddaughter.




NAME: Harold I. Cammer

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 26, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Cuban Anachronisms

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 569 words


Fidel Castro moved through New York City this week like some vestigial presence
from another era, meeting with businessmen, journalists, citizens and foreign
diplomats but shunned by American political leaders from Bill Clinton to Rudolph
Giuliani. He dropped by this newspaper yesterday, a startling cold-war
apparition with a disarming sense of humor and an unbending allegiance to Cuban
Socialism. It was a little like looking up from your desk and finding Mao Zedong
or Nikita Khrushchev standing in the doorway.

Vignettes from Mr. Castro's third visit to the city in his 36 years as Cuban
leader are worth some consideration. President Clinton found him so toxic he
managed to avoid even the possibility of a chance encounter at a United Nations
dinner and photo session of world leaders. Mayor Giuliani made sure the city
offered no official hospitality to Mr. Castro. But there was David Rockefeller
graciously stepping up to shake his hand at a reception, and other American
business leaders were eager to see the Cuban. He received a warm ovation from
foreign leaders when he addressed the General Assembly, and found a welcoming
crowd in Harlem.

If nothing else, the visit suggested how archaic Washington's isolation of Cuba
is now that the cold war is over. Mr. Castro may not have changed all that much,
and he still runs an unforgiving dictatorship in Cuba, but he no longer
represents even a remote threat to the United States. American policy should be
aimed at encouraging democratic change in Cuba. Spurning him and ostracizing his
country are only likely to harden his authoritarian rule. If America can manage
relations with Communist Vietnam and China, surely it can find a more
sophisticated way of dealing with Mr. Castro.

America's efforts to topple the Cuban leader have a lengthy history and a
powerful constituency. They go back to his first months in power late in the
Eisenhower Administration and cover the Bay of Pigs fiasco and a long string of
intelligence operations, including bizarre assassination plots and economic
pressures. Over the years they have been supported by a vocal segment of the
nearly one-million-strong Cuban-American community and its conservative allies.
But newer Cuban-American leaders challenge the wisdom of inflicting further
punishment on their Cuban relatives.

If today's American policy makers had not inherited an embargo against Cuba,
they would have no reason to impose one. Mr. Clinton recently eased restrictions
on social and cultural exchanges with Cuba and has been trying to fend off
Republican attempts to tighten the economic embargo. But he seems to have
concluded that a more radical break with existing policy would cost him
Florida's electoral votes next year.

Washington's tired policy may have served the political interests of successive
American Presidents. It has clearly served Mr. Castro's political interests,
providing him with an excuse for economic privation. He has shown little
willingness to consider the economic or political reforms that would make it
much easier for Washington to justify a change in course.

But ostracism scarcely serves the best interests of the United States. Fidel
Castro will always carry a special emotional charge for Americans. Treating him
as a mortal enemy only exaggerates his importance and delays the day when Cubans
can enjoy the democratic government they deserve.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 26, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
Let the Loser Lose

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 25;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 705 words


In a tie and suit, Fidel Castro, describing himself as a politician, flattered
the media biggies gathered for lunch in Mort Zuckerman's Fifth Avenue apartment
with: "You are the cream of the crop."

A dollop of sour cream came from this corner: If you claim to be a politician,
why have you been unwilling for 36 years to face an opponent in a democratic
election?

The Cuban dictator downmouthed elections as "a popularity competition between
political personalities" engaged in by "speakers good at theatrics, demagogues
and liars. I don't want to get involved in that kind of competition."

Fidel, the non-demagogue, is above all that. He took pains to remind us he won a
law school election 180 to 33, and had perfected the techniques of organization
and direct mail "even before your Christian right."

Then why not let the Cuban people vote? "I am not afraid, but we do not have
presidential elections in our country." Later, he compared his selection to that
of the Pope, elected by a ballot of cardinals.

All this nonsense is being peddled by the only totalitarian ruler in our
hemisphere; his secret police informers, trained by the Stasi spies of East
Germany, permeate every Cuban village and walk of life. Amnesty International
counts 600 prisoners rotting in Cuban jails for daring to oppose the dictator's
rule; the Stasi and the old K.G.B. would be proud of their pupil.

Castro, who rules by fear, avoids free elections because he is afraid he would
lose. That should not be surprising because he is one of the great losers of our
time.

After seizing power, he lost his revolutionary soul by taking Cuba down the
Communist road to repression. He lost all chance for Cuban prosperity by
burdening the people with 3.2 million government workers and a huge standing
army to protect his regime from any need for elections. He lost Cuba's
independence by making it a vassal of the Soviet Union, addicted to Soviet
subsidies, renting out Cuban youth as mercenaries in Moscow's failed African
adventures; and when that blood money dried up, Cubans suffered as never before.

Despite that record of colossal failure, he gets the loudest applause of all
speakers at the United Nations. Why? Not for anything he has done for Cubans,
nor for his necrophiliac love for a dead doctrine. His popularity in the
striped-pants set is rooted solely in his four-decade defiance of the United
States and his contempt for American democracy.

Every U.N. diplomat who envies and resents U.S. power gets a kick out of
cheering Castro, who has clung to unelected power during nine elected U.S.
Presidencies. (As the dictator denounced us, only the Israelis sat on their
hands.) Turning biblical righteousness on its head, he is playing David to our
Goliath, a strategy aimed at snatching one final, personal victory.

That is why he told the luncheon guests that "the U.S. is so astonishingly
powerful that not even the Romans, Napoleon, the Germans in both world wars can
compare. Your economic and political influence has no parallel." In the face of
such power, unlike David, "we don't even have a slingshot."

This is the plaintive we're-no-longer-a-threat plea. End your embargo; send us
your tourists; subsidize my regime with your investment money; help me adopt
capitalism without freedom and rule for life with an iron fist; let me enjoy the
last laugh at the exiles in Miami and the Colossus of the North.

This from the man who stunted Cuba's growth and jailed or exiled many of its
patriots. To obscure his failure, the Communist who victimized his people is
posing as the victim of a U.S. that he claims seeks "hegemony in a unipolar
world."

Some U.S. business executives comfortable with state-monopoly deals help him
sell this line; they're the same ones who assured us that trade would bring an
end to repression in China. President Clinton cannot admit it publicly for fear
of losing Florida in 1996, but if re-elected, I suspect he would end all
pressure to bring down Castro, trotting out the same vague reason he used to
embrace Vietnam: "It's time."

It will only be "time" when Dictator Castro quits or submits to free elections.
Communism is tyranny that is bound to fail. Let the loser lose.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 26, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Tools to Smooth The Grain of Life

BYLINE: By PETE HAMILL

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 4; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1197 words


TOOLS were a part of life when I was a boy in blue-collar Brooklyn after World
War II. Men carried their tools to work in the dark mornings, jammed into
leather belts, or slung over shoulders, or gripped in gloved hands against the
cold. They carried those tools with a certain pride, like prizefighters with gym
bags; they were symbols of work and skill.

In the evenings, the subways were salty with the aromas of perspiration and
labor and the men planted their backs against the doors, with their tools at
their feet. In memory, those working men were all hard and courteous, but grave,
even solemn; more likely, they were simply exhausted. But one memory is
absolutely clear: no kid ever told them to get out of the way.

Tools helped such men form families, raise kids, put food on kitchen tables. But
tools weren't simply a means of earning a living. They were essential to life in
the places where working people lived. In those much leaner times, damaged goods
could not be thrown away and then replaced by the latest models; they had to be
repaired. No agents of landlords or the state would arrive to make minor
repairs; tenants did most of that work themselves. And so every flat in
blue-collar New York contained a toolbox. Ours was one of them.

"Get me the toolbox," my father would growl on a Saturday morning, his voice
already burred by whiskey and cigarettes. "We've got a job to do. . . ."

My brothers and I would rush to the closet and dig out the battered dark-green
metal toolbox and lay it upon the kitchen table (no workshop in those cramped
tenement rooms). Then, with a metallic unsnapping of locks, the lid would lift
-- open sesame! we'd sometimes shout -- and suddenly, magically, there were the
tools, lying in almost sacramental order: hammers, screwdrivers, wrenches,
clamps; a metal file, a spirit level, a plumb bob and a soldering iron; shears
for cutting metal and pliers for braiding wire. Tools: the nouns of work.

All those nouns came flooding back last year, when I started working on a long
essay about tools and art, provoked by the extraordinary art collection of John
Hechinger. Since the 1970's, Mr. Hechinger, the chairman of the Maryland-based
hardware business that was started by his father in 1911, has been collecting
art revolving around the common theme of tools. I gazed at pieces by Jim Dine
and Jean Tinguely, Lucas Samaras and Claes Oldenberg, and more than a hundred
others, and was astonished by their inventiveness, humor, sense of surprise. But
all the while, I kept seeing that toolbox on a table in Brooklyn, stuffed with
nouns.

In memory, there was no bottom to that magical box. From its depths came boxes
of nails, tacks, wood screws. There came picks, gouges, drills and bits; a slide
rule and a T square; a roll-up metal measuring tape; blades for a hacksaw. And
with those tools, Billy Hamill, dispatched after eight grades of formal
schooling in distant Belfast to an apprenticeship as a stone mason, tried to
make something better of his tiny piece of America.

Sometimes his friends arrived to help. Duke, from the first floor. Harry Kelly,
from up the block. They made almost nothing new. They operated a repair shop,
using those tools, and their own ingenuity, to mend the wounds inflicted by
marauding platoons of kids. They repaired the ruined hinges of doors. They
worked on toasters and skates, sinks and baby carriages, stoves and mailboxes,
and an endless series of radios. Radios shaped like the cathedral of Notre Dame.
Radios that looked like bombs. Radios of rococo complexity.

"Where's the schematic?" my father would say, in the same voice used by mad
scientists demanding that Igor now bring them the brain. And he and Duke and
Harry Kelly would lay the schematic diagram on the table and begin matching
radio tubes to the drawing, testing each tube in some kind of electric device
(if the filaments inside the tube glowed red, it was still alive), until there
seemed to be hundreds of tubes laid out delicately on the table. Then one of the
kids would burst in, sweaty with August, bouncing a spaldeen and . . . Where's
the schematic?

From those rooms, I carried into the wider world a belief in tools. As a young
art student in the 1950's, I loved the differences in chalks and pencil leads,
in pens cut one way for drawing and another way for lettering. The tools of art
included linseed oil and turpentine, casein and water color, rubber cement and
razor blades, canvas and cardboard. If only we could afford Arches watercolor
paper or two-ply Strathmore, we told ourselves, then we'd be better artists.
Often, the words themselves were special, even lyrical: crowquill pens and sable
brushes should belong to poets.

Around this time, a major transformation of New York life was under way, but few
of us paid much attention. Artists like David Smith, Reuben Nakian and Isamu
Noguchi were beginning to use industrial tools and materials in their work: cast
iron, welding torches, stone grinders and polishers. And as artists appropriated
the tools of manual labor, blue-collar New York began to vanish. In Brooklyn and
Queens, factories began to close. In Manhattan, the teeming lofts of SoHo
emptied. At first, workers were replaced by artists; then the artists, who had
redeemed the neighborhood, gave way to the rich.

In my own life, I set aside the tools of art for the tools of a writer. There
were the old clattering Royal standards in the city room of The New York Post,
at 75 West Street, equipped with headsets to free the hands for the taking of
notes or dictation. There were thousands of sheets of copy paper folded twice to
fit into a pocket. There were ballpoint pens, felt-tip pens, fountain pens. Most
of all, there was a Hermes 3000 portable typewriter, that traveled with me to
Europe and Mexico and Vietnam, that took hundreds of stories and one novel from
my head to paper and that was stolen one summer afternoon from my apartment in
the Village. For days after the burglary, I walked the streets, offering rewards
for its return, no questions asked; but I never saw it again.

Like many New Yorkers in this era when the aroma of physical work has vanished
from the subways, I do most of my work on computers now. They are fine machines,
the best tools so far invented for writers. But in some mysterious way, this
remains work done by hand. I always start with a pen in hand, a tool as ancient
as reeds. And I still wander through stationery stores as if set loose in some
antique Mesopotamian bazaar. Perhaps this new pen will help me to write better,
perhaps that special-lined yellow pad will help bring order to the chaos of
possibilities presented each morning at my desk. We live in hope.

Occasionally, moving around in such stores, I come across racks full of
toolboxes. They gleam seductively. They urge me to touch them, handle them. I
open them, and they are, of course, empty. I can even see their bottoms. But in
their presence, I sometimes hear the whisper of an interior voice. Where's the
schematic? it says, dark with smoke and time. Get me the schematic, and the
right tools, the voice says, and I'll make everything new. I promise.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: As a child, Pete Hamill would bring the toolbox to his father.
(pg. C6)

Drawing. (pg. C1)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 27, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A Moving Wall

SECTION: Section B;  Page 6;  Column 3;  Metropolitan Desk

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A half-size replica of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial being
removed yesterday from Biertuempfel Park in Union, N.J. (Sam D'Amico for The New
York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 27, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

On Stage, and Off

BYLINE: By Peter Marks

SECTION: Section C;  Page 2;  Column 3;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1092 words



A Name in Lights, Then Another

"It gets changed daily," Alexander H. Cohen was saying over the phone. He wasn't
talking about the linen in the dressing rooms. He was talking about the theater
marquee.

O.K., so he was stretching the truth: he's a producer! But it was not all that
much of a stretch. Twice in the last week, he has had to recast a lead in the
new play he is producing, "Sacrilege." And it hasn't even opened yet.

It started near the end of the show's tryout run last week in Stamford, Conn.,
when John Forsythe, who was playing the role of the Cardinal in Diane Shaffer's
drama (and, according to some who saw it, having trouble remembering lines),
decided to call it quits.

In a prepared statement, Mr. Forsythe said his departure was the result of
"shifts in emphasis and character" that affected his role. "I felt that with the
changes the play would be better served with another actor in the role," he
added.

Mr. Cohen quickly hired an old friend, Kevin McCarthy, to replace him. But
before Mr. McCarthy could even try on his vestments, he was out of the play,
too: there just wasn't enough time for him to learn the part before next
Thursday's opening at the Belasco.

So the understudy, Herb Foster, was elevated. Now, the Belasco marquee lists
three surnames: Burstyn (as in Ellen), Esposito (as in Giancarlo) and Foster.
"When people ask me, 'Who's Foster?' I say, 'Jodie,' " Mr. Cohen said.

Another Opening, Another Glow



Across the red carpet that stretched from the curbside limos to the doors of the
Marquis Theater strode a tall man with long blond hair who appeared to be
Somebody.

"Who is that?" said a gossip reporter from a morning talk show. "Ask!"

Another reporter learned the man was with the rock group Aerosmith. Was the
opening of "Victor/Victoria" an Aerosmith kind of event? The reporters exchanged
quizzical looks. The Aerosmith guy disappeared through the doorway.

For a few hours on Wednesday night, you could almost imagine what Broadway was
like in the days when it was more of a glittery entertainment capital. Joan
Collins showed up, as did Lauren Bacall. A middle-aged woman in Row E strained
to see over Ivana Trump's hair. Army Archerd, the Variety columnist, stood
outside grabbing quotes from celebs, as if it were the Oscar ceremonies.

Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani did an onstage warm-up before the show; Dr. Ruth
walked around with a shopping bag; Alex Sirotin, a commentator with the
Russian-American Broadcasting Company, roamed the lobby, thrilled to be a part
of the biggest opening night of the season.

"Julie Andrews is a very popular actress in Russia," he said, before a guard
shooed him back behind the velvet ropes.

Second Thoughts on 'Martin Guerre'

The first time Cameron Mackintosh heard the score in progress of "Martin
Guerre," a new musical by Claude-Michel Schonberg and Alain Boulbil, he turned
it down.

Although he had produced the team's earlier super-hits, "Les Miserables" and
"Miss Saigon," Mr. Mackintosh wasn't taken with their latest creation. He
thought the story, of a man who comes to a medieval French town claiming to be a
villager's long-lost husband, lacked the sweep of the earlier shows, which were
set during the French Revolution and the Vietnam War.

Eventually, however, Mr. Mackintosh came around. And what changed his mind, he
said, was the realization that there was a larger context for the 16th-century
tale: the religious war between Protestants and Roman Catholics of the period.
"That's when I thought that it was a story that should be written by Boulbil and
Schonberg," he said in an interview in his Manhattan office.

Framed by that larger canvas, "Martin Guerre" is being readied for London's West
End. Casting began this month for a production that has a "world premiere" at
the Prince Edward Theater on June 18. Mr. Mackintosh even has the trademark
mega-musical-style poster: designed like a woodcut, with a blood-red background
and a primitive symbol shaped like a face. As for Broadway, he says it's too
soon to tell.

Brush Up Your Einstein

For Mark Nelson, the key to playing Albert Einstein was not in the bushy hair or
the mustache or even in understanding the theory of relativity. It was in the
laugh.

"I was watching a PBS documentary on him, and an old friend of his said that he
had a laugh that sounded like the bark of a demented baby seal," Mr. Nelson
said. "The thing about the laugh really connected. It got me started on the idea
of a guy who didn't care what people thought, who just reveled in the pleasures
of the universe."

Mr. Nelson, a Princeton graduate who grew up in Bergen County, N.J., plays the
world's most famous physicist in Steve Martin's new play, "Picasso at the Lapin
Agile," the story of a fictional encounter between Einstein and Picasso at a
Paris cafe.

His performance has drawn raves from critics, who praised his playful take on
Einstein. Mr. Nelson praises Mr. Martin's imagining of Einstein as not "just the
standard white-haired, abstracted, baggy-sweatered professor."

Mr. Nelson seems tickled by the attention, some of it focused on his
Einstein-like hairdo, achieved with generous amounts of gel, water and
hairspray. "I don't do a physical warm-up before the show, but my hair does," he
said.

What Goes Around . . .

Mickey Rooney and Judy Garland were clueless: there is nothing easy about
putting on a show. Just ask Stephen Hoffman, Peter Webb and Mark Campbell. For
eight years, they had been trying to get their original musical, "Splendora,"
produced. For four of those years, they were powerless to do so, having lost the
rights to the Edward Swift novel to Hollywood.

But about a year ago, the rights became available again, the Bay Street Theater
Festival in Sag Harbor, L.I., became interested, and the musical was awarded a
$100,000 Richard Rodgers grant for a New York production. Bay Street, which
produced the show on Long Island in July, is now presenting it in Manhattan. It
opens on Nov. 9 at the American Place Theater.

Footlights

Mandy Patinkin fans, be advised: the Voice is headed back to Broadway. On Nov.
27. Mr. Patinkin will perform at the Richard Rodgers Theater to benefit Broadway
Cares/Equity Fights AIDS.

Alfred Molina, the British stage and movie actor ("Prick Up Your Ears"), has
joined Jason Robards and Catherine Byrne in the cast of "Molly Sweeney," a new
play by Brian Friel, produced by Emanuel Azenberg and the Roundabout Theater at
its new Laura Pels Theater. The play opens on Dec. 23.


LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 28, 1995, Saturday

CORRECTION:

A credit listing yesterday with a review of the musical "Victor/Victoria"
omitted two cast members. Adam Heller played Henri Labisse, and Michael Cripe
played Richard Di Nardo.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Mark Nelson as Einstein, in Steve Martin's play "Picasso at the
Lapin Agile." (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 27, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Russians Have Landed in Kansas! But They've Come to Make Peace

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: FORT RILEY, Kan., Oct. 26


With a cold autumn sun flashing off their badges of double-headed eagles, a
stern Russian color guard high-stepped today across the frigid Kansas steppes.

But, contradicting decades of dire cold war-era predictions, the first Russian
soldiers to march on American soil came today not as invaders, but as
participants in a training exercise for a binational peacekeeping force.

"We have gathered here on the plains of Kansas to work together," Maj. Gen.
Randolph W. House, the base's commander, said as he reviewed rows of soldiers in
green camouflage gear -- half from Fort Riley's First Infantry Division and half
from the 27th Guards Motorized Rifle Division of Orenburg, Russia.

For the next week, 300 American and Russian troops will work together on a
peacekeeping mission to a fictional Kanza. With scores of interpreters smoothing
the way, the binational force is to sweep for mines, search cars at checkpoints,
protect food convoys and suppress riots by Kanzan refugees.

Transported by Blackhawk helicopters and Humvees, the Russian-American force
will maintain a buffer zone between belligerents in Kanza's long-running civil
war. When attacked, the Russians and Americans will fight shoulder-to-shoulder,
firing laser-equipped Kalashnikovs and M-16's at hostile Kanzans.

Although no one in camouflage green wanted to say it out loud today, "Kanza"
could be a code word for Bosnia.

On Nov. 1, the presidents of Bosnia, Croatia and Serbia are to start peace talks
in Dayton, Ohio. President Clinton has offered to send 20,000 American troops to
participate in a 60,000-soldier, NATO-led peacekeeping mission.

President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia had resisted putting Russian forces under
NATO control, but on Monday in Hyde Park, N.Y., he and Mr. Clinton reportedly
agreed that Russia would send 2,000 troops to perform noncombat duties, like
managing supplies, running airlifts and sweeping for mines.

In recent years, soldiers from the infantry division based here, the "Big Red
One," have participated in peacekeeping missions in Haiti, Somalia and
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Asked today about Bosnia, General House thought, then
replied: "We train for peacekeeping. We will go where sent, when sent."

So far, the exercise, which William J. Perry, the United States Secretary of
Defense, and Gen. Pavel S. Grachev, Russia's Defense Minister, will visit on
Friday, has provoked little controversy in the community.

The biggest gripe came two weeks ago from the local Congressman, Todd Tiahrt, a
Republican who complained that the exercise was costing the United States $1.2
million. The Pentagon is providing food and lodging for the visiting Russians as
well as aviation fuel for the return flight of two IL-76 transports to Moscow.

Asked for comment, General House, a veteran of the Vietnam and Persian Gulf
wars, said tersely, "It's not much money for peace."

Indeed, the talk of soldiers and officers today was of the distance that the two
historic rivals have traveled since the cold war.

"In the past, we could never imagine that we would one day conduct combined
operations on American soil," said Col. Gennadi M. Averyanov, his
parade-ground-style Russian booming over base loudspeakers as he addressed the
troops. "Every day brings something new."

Asked for specifics later, the cold-war-generation officer grinned and said that
on Wednesday he played his first game of golf, in Manhattan, Kan. "Maybe I will
try to popularize golf in Totskoye," the Russian commander said, referring to
his home base, where one year ago American and Russian troops conducted their
first joint exercise, Peacekeeper 94. "We would like this to become an annual
tradition.

"In Totskoye, we had a newborn baby; now this exercise has learned how to walk,"
the Russian continued. "In the long run, we would like to see a grown child."

On this first day, the American soldiers seemed intrigued with their
groundbreaking exercise, posing for souvenir snapshots in front of the Russian
color guard.

"I don't fear anything from having Russian soldiers on American soil," said
Lieut. Kevin Walker, a recent West Point graduate. "I feel camaraderie with the
Russian soldiers. I enjoy training with them."

For Col. Nikolai N. Malyshev, a 44-year-old veteran of duty with Warsaw Pact
troops in Hungary and East Germany, this was his first visit outside the former
Eastern bloc. Asked what surprised him, he said: "Here, land can be private
property. Everywhere there are fences marking people's property."

Beneath the talk of cooperation, nationalist feelings occasionally stirred.
Colonel Malyshev bridled when a reporter asked if he was happier in Kansas than
in Chechnya. Referring to the breakaway republic occupied by Russian troops
earlier this year, the colonel shot back, "What would Americans do if they had
secessionist bandits in Kansas?"

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 30, 1995, Monday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about a training exercise
involving American and Russian troops in Kansas misstated the district of
Representative Todd Tiahrt, who criticized the cost. He represents the Wichita
area, not the Fort Riley area.


GRAPHIC: Map of Kansas showing location of Fort Riley Military Reservation.


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 28, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Don Pendleton, 67, Writer Who Spawned a Genre

BYLINE: By ROBERT McG. THOMAS Jr.

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 50;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 617 words


Don Pendleton, whose "Executioner" series featuring Mack Boland spawned the
paperback genre of men's action-adventure novels, died on Monday at his home in
Sedona, Ariz. He was 67.

His wife, Linda, said the cause was a heart attack.

In the beginning there were westerns, mysteries and science fiction. But until
Mr. Pendleton, a onetime air traffic controller, brought Mack Boland to unlikely
literary life in 1969, there was no action-adventure category, in which a lone,
well-armed fantasy hero wreaks unremitting havoc on the forces of evil in modern
society.

Within a decade of Boland's first appearance, the action-adventure genre was a
publishing phenomenon, for a while rivaling if not eclipsing its women's
counterpart, romance novels.

As surely as Owen Wister's "Virginian," gave the world William S. Hart, Hopalong
Cassidy, Roy Rogers and the rest, Mr. Pendleton brought forth Rambo, and scores
of other copycat heroes. (Curiously, although there have been two projects, "The
Executioner" has never made it to the screen.)

Indeed, a 1988 survey found a total of 66 separate action-adventure series in
print. But the genre has been in a sharp decline recently, and only a half-dozen
or so survive, "The Executioner" among them.

The title of the first book, "War on the Mafia," could stand for the entire
series since Boland, who comes home from Vietnam to find that his family has
been wiped out by the Mafia, spends 38 books getting even, rarely killing fewer
than half a dozen gangsters at a time.

Although Boland lives in Pittsfield, Mass., the action of each book takes place
in a different city, a virtual necessity since by the time the gun-wielding hero
has come to the end of his 224-page run, there could hardly be enough Mafiosi
left in a city to justify a sequel.

Indeed, after Mr. Pendleton's 38 books there were apparently so few Mafia-ridden
cities left that in the next 200 or so books, turned out by other authors under
a licensing agreement with the publisher, Harlequin, Boland has to go abroad to
find terrorists worthy of his slaughter. With Harlequin cranking out 24 Boland
books a year, there are now more than 200 million copies in print.

Mr. Pendleton, who was born in Little Rock, Ark., enlisted in the Navy at the
age of 14 and honed his precocious literary skills composing love letters for
his shipmates during World War II.

While holding a series of civilian jobs he began his literary career in 1957
when he enrolled in a mail-order creative writing course he never finished. He
was so impressed with his first assignment that he sent it to an agent and had
it published.

For all his later impact, Mr. Pendleton, who began writing full time at the age
of 40, turning out a couple of mysteries and science fiction books with little
success, created the action-adventure genre by accident.

"He just thought of it as another novel," his wife said yesterday, noting that
the first Boland book made such an impact his publisher immediately pressed him
for sequels.

After tiring of the Boland series, he turned out six books, published in
hardcover, about a psychic detective named Ashton Ford, and six others about a
private detective named Joe Copp.

His last book, "To Dance With Angels," written with his wife about their
experiences conversing with spirits through channeling, was published in 1990.

In addition to his wife, he is survived by six children from a previous
marriage, Stephen, of Porterville, Calif., Gregory, of Madison, Ind., Rodney, of
Ellettsville, Ind., Derek, of Covina, Calif., Melinda Margulies of Poughkeepsie,
N.Y., and Jennifer Dalto of Rialto, Calif.; a sister, Melba Buffalo of Little
Rock, and 24 grandchildren.

NAME: Don Pendleton

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 270 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 29, 1995 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Maya Lin's Power of the Serene

BYLINE: By Paul Goldberger

SECTION: Section 2; Column 3; Arts & Leisure Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1100 words


LAST SPRING, THE BEST-KNOWN fact about the film "Maya Lin: A Strong Clear
Vision" was that it was not "Hoop Dreams," the acclaimed documentary about
inner-city basketball players that was widely expected to win the Oscar for best
documentary -- until it turned out not even to be nominated. The Oscar went to
"Maya Lin" instead.

Now, "Maya Lin: A Strong Clear Vision" has a chance of becoming known for
itself. A feature-length look at the architect-artist whose most celebrated work
is the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, the film was little seen last
year, despite its Oscar eligibility. But last week it began a nationwide
commercial release, starting in Washington, and on Friday it will open in New
York and Los Angeles. Its producers, Freida Lee Mock and Terry Sanders, and
Ocean Releasing, the distribution company they own, are trusting that Ms. Lin's
increasingly high profile, plus the lingering halo of the Oscar, will lift this
film out of the limbo in which the overwhelming number of full-length
documentaries end up.

Maya Lin would not seem, despite her fame, to be an ideal subject for a
documentary. Now 35, she achieved national prominence as a Yale undergraduate in
1981 when her proposed design for the Vietnam Veterans Memorial beat out more
than 1,400 other entries in a design competition. She is soft-spoken and
understated in manner, and like all gifted artists she prefers to have her work
speak for itself. Her designs are highly abstract, making the story still harder
to tell. What dramatic tension can there be in the story of a quiet woman who
makes simple geometric forms in stone?

There turns out to be plenty, beginning with the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
itself. Ms. Lin's design, a V-shaped wall of black granite sliced into the
ground, on which has been carved the name of every one of the more than 56,000
Americans who died in Vietnam, ignited deep, even violent opposition when it was
first announced, and a movement arose to reject it in favor of a more
traditional, less abstract design.

Ms. Lin, supported by the courageous veterans who sponsored the memorial and
never imagined that their quest to find a design would take them to a stark
black wall by a young Asian-American woman, held her ground. The memorial was
built almost, if not quite, as designed, and it has become one of the iconic
pieces of American design of the last generation. It is as moving and awesome
and popular a piece of memorial architecture as exists anywhere in the world,
and a profound statement about the potential of carefully wrought abstract form
to strike a deep, resonant chord through all levels of society.

Ms. Lin herself is at once serene and powerful, and seems, at first, to be
gentle and low-key. Yet film and subject are perfectly matched in that both
possess an inner intensity that reveals itself slowly, but decisively.

"Maya Lin: A Strong Clear Vision" opens with Ms. Lin sitting at her drafting
board; 20 minutes later, archival film from the hearings about the memorial and
new film of people visiting it today have pulled viewers deep into the vortex of
the Vietnam War, and we are again wrenched emotionally by its pain. Then the
movie gently brings us back to the quietude of a contemplative work of Ms.
Lin's, the Peace Chapel at Juniata College in Huntingdon, Pa., only to dive back
into the pool of historical emotion with the story of Ms. Lin's most important
work after the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, a 1989 memorial built in Montgomery,
Ala., to honor the sacrifices made in the civil rights movement.

This portion of the film no more tries to tell the whole story of the civil
rights struggle than the portion on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial tries to tell
the whole story of the war. Yet both of these sections are particularly
evocative, for in letting Ms. Lin speak of the thinking behind the making of
these two extraordinary monuments, and in showing the responses people have had
to them, the film reveals whole layers of history. Ms. Mock, who also wrote and
directed the film, has the rare ability among documentary film makers to
maintain a sense of respectful distance and emotional engagement at the same
time, and her style aligns perfectly with Ms. Lin's way of doing things.

The film is blessedly free of talking heads, aside from Ms. Lin's own and that
of Vincent Scully, the Yale architectural historian who was Ms. Lin's mentor and
who manages to view her work with an endearing combination of surprise and
admiration. Ms. Lin is uncharacteristically articulate for an artist who speaks
most comfortably through abstract form; she actually understands what she is
doing and is able to explain it in words that make sense to a lay audience. How
many other artists could say, as she does, that "I create places in which to
think, without trying to dictate what to think"?

IN FACT, WHAT COMES through most clearly is her ability to communicate her
belief in public art that speaks to the public rather than to a closed circle of
artists. She talks about her work in terms of private sadnesses and public
rituals, and speaks of the cathartic act of healing that can come from searching
for the name of a loved one on the wall of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial and
walking up to it, or of hands joining in a circle around the fountainlike
granite table of the Civil Rights Memorial.

In each case, Ms. Lin has given concrete form to a set of social values, and
manages to do so in a way that is striking in its grace, its purity and its
focus. She comes across in this film as being utterly without cynicism, yet free
also of the cloying earnestness of so many believers: she is self-assured
without being arrogant, and committed to creating art that is deeply, profoundly
connected to the realities of politics and culture.

All her good intentions would mean little, of course, if she were not as gifted
at the making of form as she is at thinking about the meaning of public art. Yet
all her work, from the Vietnam Veterans Memorial to her latest project, the
undulating landscape of "The Wave Field" at the University of Michigan,
dedicated just a few weeks ago (long after this film was finished), demonstrates
the sureness of her hand. The proportions of the stones, the finish of the
granite, the placement of the lettering, the balancing of different formal
elements -- it is things like these, as much as the underlying concepts, that
make Maya Lin's work as good as it is, and bring it beyond social commentary,
beyond the genre of public monuments, into the realm of true and lasting art.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Maya Lin working on the Civil Rights Memorial in
Montgomery,Ala., in 1989--Pure focus. (Adam Stoltman)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION;
Things They Weren't Expecting

BYLINE: By RICHARD E. NICHOLLS

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 42;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 249 words


The settings of the exuberantly varied short stories in Robert Flynn's second
collection, LIVING WITH THE HYENAS (Texas Christian University, $22.50), range
from the Vietnamese countryside to drowsy, prim American towns to a surly
working-class bar in Paris. The protagonists include baffled children and men
struggling to hold together uneasy marriages and uncertain careers, as well as
two very different yet equally resilient women taking stock of their long lives.
But while these 16 stories are in most ways insistently diverse, they do share
one central feature: each turns on a sudden moment of self-revelation, inspired
by accident, violence or loss. In "A Boy and His Dog," which takes place during
the Vietnam War, a marine given an impossible job betrays with fatal
consequences the one figure he can depend on -- the dog he uses to clear booby
traps from jungle trails. "Defender of the Faith" is a bittersweet sketch of
what happens when a naive adolescent discovers the irrational sway of desire. In
the title story, Mr. Flynn traces with subtlety and humor how a widow, thinking
back over her stifling history while visiting her husband's grave, is stunned
into a realization of the possibilities that are still open to her. It's an
exhilarating moment, entirely convincing. And it perfectly demonstrates how
these wise, artful stories catch the ways in which we accept or deny what we see
when the unexpected casts a bright light on our lives.   RICHARD E. NICHOLLS

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WESTCHESTER GUIDE

BYLINE: By ELEANOR CHARLES

SECTION: Section 13WC;   Page 18;   Column 4;   Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1232 words



OPERATIC MASTER CLASS

Licia Albanese, the Metropolitan Opera soprano whose interpretations of
Puccini's heroines in "La Boheme," "Tosca," "Madama Butterfly" and "Manon
Lescaut" made her an international operatic star for decades, will hold a master
class today at 3 P.M. in New Rochelle.

In her retirement she has assisted dozens of young singers through her Licia
Albanese-Puccini Foundation, and today's master class will give some aspirants
an opportunity to perform before an audience and profit by her critique.

The session, organized by the New Rochelle Council on the Arts and the New
Rochelle Opera Company, will be held at St. Gabriel's Church, 50 Washington
Avenue. There is no charge for singers or spectators, and everyone is welcome to
stay for a reception afterward.

While it is doubtful that singers will still be accepted to perform today, call
633-7843 to inquire or obtain more information.

ENTREPRENEURIAL TIPS

"Marketing Mania," an all-day conference dedicated to getting entrepreneurial
ideas to work in the real world, will be held next Saturday at the Nestle U.S.A.
Building, 100 Manhattanville Road in Purchase. A fee of $149 covers meals,
materials, parking and seminars with small business owners and corporate
employes.

Starting at 8:30 with breakfast and ending at 6:30 with a wine and cheese
reception, the day will be filled with talks by people who have made it in
unusual occupations. Tim and Nina Zagat, authors and publishers of the Zagat
Restaurant Surveys, will be the keynote speakers, and Spencer Putnam, chief
operating officer of the Vermont Teddy Bear Company, will give the lunch
address.

Other talks will be given by Lloyd Shefsky, a lawyer and author of
"Entrepreneurs Are Made Not Born" (McGraw- Hill); Carole Reilly and Kelli
Givins, who talked McDonald's into an unusual marketing technique for opening
franchises, and Frank Montemurro, head of E. M. Associates of West Chester, Pa.,
consultants to home-shopping networks. Mr. Montemurro travels the world looking
for products to be sold on television.

An award will be presented by the Entrepreneurial Center, sponsor of the event,
to Ruth Henderson, proprietor of the Silo in New Milford -- a culinary shop, art
gallery and cooking school. For reservations or more information, call 694-4947.


YALE GLEE CLUB CONCERT

Traditional Yale songs, classics of the choral repertory, both sacred and
secular, spirituals and contemporary works will be sung by the Yale Glee Club in
a concert on Friday at 8 P.M. at the Hitchcock Presbyterian Church in Scarsdale.

The glee club, directed by David Connell, has managed to keep the quality of its
performances at the highest level for 132 years. More than 80 men and women are
members.

A reception will be held after the performance, when Yalies, alumni and
non-Yalies may mingle. Tickets at $15 may be ordered by calling 723-3311. The
church is at 6 Greenacres Avenue.

CHRISTIANITY IN ART

Twenty-two artists, including Antonio Frasconi, Ilse Schreiber, Randy Williams,
Michael Patterson and Carla Rae Johnson, are represented in a show titled
"Christianity -- Good or Evil?" opening at One Station Plaza in Peekskill next
Saturday and remaining through Nov. 28.

"The artists were told that this is a debate, and the show presents opposing
views," said Valerie Courreges, founder with Ms. Schreiber of Artists for the
People, organizers of art exhibitions on politics, values and other issues.

Ms. Courreges is avowedly anti-religion, and Christianity was the religion she
chose for this exhibition "because it has the strongest impact on politics," she
said. "Maybe Christianity had something to do with the exploitation of Africa,"
she said. "Its morality can be negative, creating psychoses in some people. Its
association with the Christian Right, various wars," she said, are some of the
issues addressed by the artists in the show.

"Some of the artists, like Ron Sumner, are characterized as Christian artists,
working entirely within religious subjects," she said. And there are crossovers,
where a Muslim artist will assert his religion's superiority over Christianity.

Some of the works will be for sale. One Station Plaza is at 38 North Divisionn
Street; the phone number for more information is 737-4059.

CREATING MOOD MUSIC

In a children's program called "Stories in the Wind," two musicians from the
Westchester Philharmonic Orchestra will illustrate on instruments like the
flute, the oboe, the clarinet, the bassoon and the saxophone, how composers
create moods for stories like "Peter and the Wolf," "The Sorcerer's Apprentice,"
"Scheherezade" and "Pictures at an Exhibition."

Three sessions will be held today at 1:15, 2 and 2:45 P.M. at the Jewish
Community Center, 371 South Broadway in Tarrytown. After half an hour with the
musicians, the children will spend another half hour with Gary Plotkin, a staff
member of the community center, acting out the stories. Each hour-long program
costs $15; more information may be obtained by calling 366-7898.

COUNTERING ASSASSINS

The Rev. Roy Bourgeois, a Maryknoll priest and Vietnam veteran, will speak on
the "School of Assassins" at South Presbyterian Church, 343 Broadway, in Dobbs
Ferry on Friday at 7:30 P.M. He was featured in the Oscar-nominated documentary
of that title, and he currently directs an organization called S.O.A. Watch,
dedicated to eliminating what he views as U.S.-sponsored violations of the civil
rights of Salvadorans and South Americans.

According to Father Bourgeois, the school in Fort Benning, Ga., sometimes called
the Academy of Torture but officially known as the United States Army School of
the Americas, trains military personnel of governments friendly to the United
States in counter-revolutionary techniques. Among its alumni are Manuel Noriega,
Hugo Banzar of Bolivia and Roberto D'Aubuisson of El Salvador.

The skills learned by these and other South Americans at the school, he said,
are then taken to their respective countries and used to counter opposition by
torture and murder.

Admission will be $7. Call 693-0473 for more information.

A HALLOWEEN CIRCUS

A Big Top Halloween Party is scheduled today from 1 to 4 P.M. at the Hudson
River Museum in Yonkers. Children under 13, accompanied by an adult paying
$3.50, will be admitted free if they come in costume. Otherwise, they will pay
$1.50.

Dikki Ellis from Circus to Go of the Big Apple Circus will perform a comedy
slackwire act in the courtyard, and David Sharps will put on a display of
stilt-walking and juggling. Children will make pinwheels to carry in the costume
parade at 3:15.  Refreshments and prizes will be distributed.

Later in the week the museum will present Tchin, a Narragansett- Blackfoot
Indian jewelry maker who hews to the Northeastern Woodland Indian tradition of
fashioning "trade silver" and gold jewelry.

Tchin, a graduate of the Rhode Island School of Design, will give two talks and
demonstrations of his ancient craft, using old-fashioned tools, which he has
re-created from earlier models.

On Wednesday at 1:30 P.M. his program and museum admission are free for people
62 and older. The second session, at the same time next Sunday, is free with
museum admission of $3, $1.50 for children under 13. The museum is at 511
Warburton Avenue. For more information, call 963-4550.   ELEANOR CHARLES

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD

SECTION: Section 13;   Page 13;   Column 1;   The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 614 words



UPPER WEST SIDE
Children's Tales, as Sung By a Touring Octet

A St. Louis a cappella octet, Pieces of Eight, combines rich vocal harmonies
with popular children's tales to produce jazzy renditions of such stories as
"The Gingerbread Man" and "City Mouse, Country Mouse." Some selections are
geared toward adult audiences. "As Time Goes By" and "Anything Goes" are
included in the group's repertory.

Beginning next Saturday, Pieces of Eight (below) will start its first New York
City tour, including performances at branches of the New York and Brooklyn
Public Libraries. The group's music is written or arranged by it artistic
director, Charles Mead, who weaves together elements of classical music with
gospel, reggae, doo-wop and Cajun.

Pieces of Eight, Riverside Branch of the New York Public Library, 127 Amsterdam
Avenue (at 65th Street); Saturday, 3:30 P.M.; free; (212) 870-1633.

BOWLING GREEN

Museum Demonstrations Of Latin American Weaving

Visitors to the program marking the first anniversary of the Museum of the
American Indian will be able to watch female artists from Ecuador, Bolivia and
Mexico weave, knit and embroider shawls, clothing and blankets. Interpreters
will be on hand to help with questions and answers. The program, "The Market
Place: A Latin American Women's Arts Program," will also feature slide shows and
lectures on the development and significance of textile art forms in Latin
America, and community-based collectives and art as engines of economic
development for the continent and its people.  Among the featured speakers will
be an anthropologist, June Nash.

"The Market Place: A Latin American Women's Arts Program," National Museum of
the American Indian, 1 Bowling Green; today and tomorrow, noon to 5 P.M.; free.

FLUSHING

Photos of Landmarks, And Memories of Vietnam

"I like to get to know my subject, whether it be a person or a building," said
Tony Valez, a photographer and former adjunct professor in the art department at
Queens College. "There is a time element you have to put in to get the right
light or mood and personality."

Highlights of Mr. Valez's work over the last eight years, as well as some older
photographs, will be featured in an exhibition at Queens College that opens on
Thursday.

More than 50 photographs will be on display, including those of Brooklyn
landmarks and historic buildings, like the Brooklyn Bridge and the Fulton Ferry
historic district (above).

The show will also feature arresting photographs from Mr. Valez's tour of duty
in Vietnam in 1966-67.

Art Center, Rosenthal Library at Queens College, 65-30 Kissena Boulevard,
Flushing; Thursday through Dec. 22; Monday to Thursday, 9 A.M. to 7 P.M., and
Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; free; (718) 997-3770.

ALSO AROUND TOWN

FAIR FUN Three hundred booths with food, games and craft items, as well as dance
performances and trick-or-treating, will highlight a street fair to benefit the
53d Street Y.W.C.A.; today, 53d Street between Lexington and Fifth Avenues; 11
A.M. to 6 P.M.; (212) 755-4500.
 CORSICAN DEBUT A contemporary Corsican musical group, I Muvrini, will present
its first United States performance at the French Institute-Alliance Francaise's
Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street; Friday, 8 P.M.; $16, or $25 with
reception and refreshments; reservations: (212) 355-6160.
WIZARDS, SPIRITS AND SPELLS The Queens Symphonic Band's 25th season opens with
"Phantasmagorical Fantasies," featuring works by Berlioz, Wagner and others.
Queensborough Community College Theater, Springfield Boulevard and 56th Avenue,
Bayside; Saturday, 8 P.M.; $8; $7, the elderly; (718) 631-6311.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Powell Takes a Hit

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 579 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WHEN Bosnia's three warring factions sit down to talk peace this week, it's only
fitting that they will meet at a United States Air Force base.

NATO air power, dominated by United States fighter jets, bombed the Bosnian
Serbs to the bargaining table. A two-week bombardment this summer demolished
their ammunition dumps, air defenses and command bunkers. It wrecked their will
to wage wide-scale war and broke the siege of Sarajevo. But it stopped short of
breaking their army.

And in doing so, NATO's strikes also challenged the doctrine set forth by Gen.
Colin L. Powell: If you use military force, use it overwhelmingly and use it to
win.

The Wrong Time

This comes at an inopportune time for General Powell. The former Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff conferred last week with top Republican strategists on his
potential Presidential bid. As he approaches a decision, it seems that his most
famous idea might have just been proved wrong.

In his autobiography, General Powell says he told President Bush and President
Clinton that limited air strikes or heavy bombing of Serb positions would
probably fail. "I emphasized that none of these actions was guaranteed to change
Serb behavior," General Powell wrote.  "Only troops on the ground could do
that."

The General's critics say this thinking has encouraged an all-or-nothing
approach that is ill-suited to conflicts like Bosnia.

"We did not set out to win a war," Kenneth Bacon, a Pentagon spokesman, said
last month after the two-week bombing campaign. "We did not set out to inflict
damage on the population of the Serbian sections of Bosnia, nor did we set out
to destroy the Serbian army."

The specific goals were to force the Bosnian Serbs to stop shelling Sarajevo,
withdraw many of their heavy weapons from around the Bosnian capital and push
the parties into talks. And NATO did just that.

Air power has its limits. Bombing alone did not bring Nazi Germany to its knees.
Waves of B-52's did not crush North Vietnam. And it was ground troops that
finished off the Iraqi army in the Persian Gulf war.

Allied air power had a lot of help in bringing the Balkan peace talks to this
point. The fall of Srebrenica and Zepa, two Muslim enclaves under United Nations
protection, shamed the West into action. A ground offensive by Croatian and
Bosnian Government troops rolled back the Bosnian Serb army. President Slobodan
Milosevic of Serbia decided that ending the economic embargo against his country
outweighed the temptation of continued combat.

Would the same bombing have achieved the same results two or three years ago,
sparing many of the 200,000 people killed since fighting broke out in 1991? Many
diplomats and military experts familiar with the Balkans answer, resoundingly,
yes.

"Swift and disproportionate force is the only way to deal with bullies," said
Charles H. Thomas 2d, who retired last month as the top American envoy in
Bosnia. "The Serbs would have seen our use of air power as a symbol of our
willingness to dish it to them. Diplomacy without force is like baseball without
a bat."

While the warplanes cut off the Serbs' communications and supply lines and
hampered their ability to wage wider war, they avoided most of the tanks and
artillery guns that Bosnian Serb troops needed to defend themselves.

"We could have done the same thing two or three years ago," a senior NATO
commander said ruefully. "We just didn't have the stomach for it then."

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Smoke from a munitions factory during the bombing around
Sarajevo. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Soldiering On, Without an Enemy

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1287 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


IN preparing to send 20,000 American troops to Bosnia, one of President
Clinton's biggest problems is how to market the mission.

The polls explain why.

Only 37 percent of Americans favor sending in American ground troops to
participate in a NATO-led force in Bosnia, while 57 percent are opposed, even
though the troops would be going there to keep peace, not wage war, according to
a New York Times-CBS Poll released last week.

Some of the reasons are familiar. Historically, Americans have always questioned
the need for sending their soldiers to some new faraway place, even when the
stakes were high and the risks low.

In this Administration, the television footage of Somalians dragging a dead
American soldier through the streets of Mogadishu in 1993 had a chilling effect
on future use of American troops in "peacekeeping" operations, particularly when
there is no peace to keep. It's what Richard Holbrooke, the chief American
negotiator, calls the "Vietmalia syndrome": the placing of constraints on
policies by the memories of the worst cases rather than the successes.

But there is another problem as well. In arguing for the proposed Bosnia peace
mission, the Administration finds itself describing something that sounds
suspiciously like a war. It isn't supposed to be a war, of course -- American
soldiers would be asked not to fight anyone, only to stand between adversaries
who have already agreed to stop shooting at each other. But they still could be
killed by mines or ambushed by trouble-makers, even if war doesn't resume.

So because of the scale of the overall NATO commitment (60,000 troops), the
blood-soaked history of the Balkans and the risk to American soldiers,
supporters of the mission find themselves facing the language of the
battlefield.

The starkest -- but clearest -- moment in the debate so far came in a recent
hearing on Capitol Hill, when Senator James Inhofe, the Oklahoma Republican,
asked Administration witnesses point-blank whether the Bosnia mission justified
"hundreds of young Americans dying over there."

Secretary of Defense William Perry: "Yes.

Secretary of State Warren Christopher: "Yes."

So the first question to Mr. Christopher on "Larry King Live" the other night
from a caller in Henderson, Nevada, should have surprised no one. "Secretary of
State, what is the difference of sending troops to Bosnia or to Vietnam?" she
asked.

NATO Yes, Body Bags No

To be sure, the decision of whether to commit troops is not going to be made by
referendum, but by the President and Congress. And although lawmakers of both
parties have raised objections to the mission, ultimately Congress is likely to
be won over by the argument that the preservation of NATO is at stake. Still,
there is great concern in Congress about the reaction from voters if body bags
arrive home in the middle of re-election campaigns.

Indeed, American support for peacemaking in Bosnia falls dramatically when the
hypothetical casualties rise. Americans favor the mission by more than a
two-to-one margin if no Americans are killed, and oppose the mission by nearly
the same margin if 25 Americans are killed, according to a USA Today/ CNN/Gallup
poll released last week.

But the selling of wars, unlike peacekeeping missions, usually requires enemies.
And usually these are not so much evil principles as the evil, larger-than-life
actors who personify them -- a Hitler or a Saddam Hussein. Even little wars have
people to hate: President Antonio Manuel Noriega in Panama in 1989, the specter
of Fidel Castro looming over Grenada in 1983.

In his memoirs, former Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d acknowledged the
folly of saying that what was at stake with Iraq's invasion of Kuwait was
American jobs. ("I overreacted to the growing complaints that the only reason we
were in the Gulf was because of oil," Mr. Baker wrote. "I still believe I was
right, but it didn't work.")

It took the vilification of Mr. Hussein as a dictator "worse than Hitler" whose
country was on the verge of becoming a nuclear power before President Bush had a
message with resonance.

Bosnia has plenty of bad guys, but none of them make much of an enemy. It is
simply too difficult for the average American to understand why the political
leader and the military commander of the Bosnian Serbs have been indicted (but
not arrested) by an international war crimes tribunal, but why the President of
Serbia who speaks for them will be sitting at the peace table in Dayton, Ohio,
this week.

"It is a hard argument to make," admits Michael McCurry, the White House
spokesman. "Most Americans throw up their hands when they try to wrestle with
the dazzling complexity that is Bosnia. Americans by nature would say, 'What
does Bosnia have to do with me?' "

And by deciding not to declare Serbia an aggressive and genocidal enemy, the
Administration has had to fall back on abstract and difficult-to-prove
predictions to justify peacemaking: that the war will spread to the rest of
Europe and the NATO alliance will collapse if American troops do not serve in
the force.

But even Mr. Christopher resorted to war-like words in arguing for peacekeeping
recently, when he suggested to a recent Congressional hearing that the stakes
were nothing less than avoiding World War III. Asked what he would tell a mother
whose son died for Sarajevo, he said: "I would recall that twice before this
century the United States has had to send not a limited number of troops, but an
almost unlimited number of troops to take part in a war that started from
Central Europe -- once again from the very city that we're talking about here
now. We have an opportunity to avoid being put in that situation again."

One problem with that argument is that it seems to overstate the risks of
staying out, while shrinking from a more plausible, if less dramatic,
explanation: If the United States wants a stable Europe with which to trade and
share a democratic future, it's going to have to help police the danger zones.
And if that requires troops, some will have to be Americans.

Another big problem with Mr. Christopher's argument is that this is the first
time it's been used. For four years after the Yugoslav wars began, neither
President Bush nor President Clinton told the American people that the United
States, together with NATO, had to stop these wars because they could spread and
because the future of NATO was at stake. On the contrary, with few exceptions,
both Administrations argued that saving Bosnia was not in America's vital
national interest.

But now that peace looks more likely, suddenly the argument is being put forward
that it is a vital national interest for American troops to help keep a peace
settlement because to fail to do so would risk a European-wide war and destroy
NATO.

"All of a sudden, Clinton is trying to make the case that he is best friends
with the heads of Europe and that he is doing this to solidify the Atlantic
alliance," says Barbara Bardes, professor of political science at the University
of Cincinnati and an expert on public opinion and foreign policy. "That's a big
stretch. It's going to be a slippery sell."

Indeed, when asked on NBC's "Meet the Press" last week, "What's so sacred about
NATO?" Mr. Perry found himself in the peculiar position of using the arguments
of war -- the cold war, to be exact..

"There are still 20,000 nuclear weapons in the former Soviet Union," Mr. Perry
said. "And the political and the economic recovery going on in those countries
is extremely fragile. Extremely fragile. So we have a very strong interest in
the security and stability of Europe. NATO, in my judgment, is the linchpin of
maintaining that stability."

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: World War I: The German as enemy.; World War II: Hitler.; Cold
war: Communism.; Gulf war: Saddam Hussein. (Bettmann Archive)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Word for Word/Incredibility at the U.N.;
Forget What I Do, World; Listen to What I Say

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1386 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


FOR three days last week, leaders from every continent got together at the 50th
birthday party of the United Nations to make grand speeches about the state of
the world. For some, it was the opportunity to revive old shibboleths about a
global "them" versus "us." For others, it was the chance to make noble
commitments to ideals of democracy and fair play that they do not apply at home.

Like politicians everywhere, they made promises they won't keep and criticized
somebody else for their shortcomings. And because the usual right of reply was
denied to accommodate the large number of speakers, leaders (though limited to
only five minutes) spoke without fear of contradiction from the floor. But not
from the record.   BARBARA CROSSETTE

President Robert Mugabe, Zimbabwe

Words: "Somalia is left burning while catastrophe stalks. Western United Nations
forces withdraw from Somalia only to deploy them under the cover of NATO is
Bosnia. Where, we ask, is the brotherhood of man? Where, we ask, is man's
impartiality? Where, indeed, is the proof of nonracialism? Is it a scourge to be
black, we ask? . . ."

Deeds: The Organization of African Unity, of which Zimbabwe is an important
member, has not been noted for showing leadership on Somalia, or on any other
African nation in trouble. The United Nations pulled its peacekeepers -- though
not its relief and development workers -- out of Somalia last year because the
faction leaders refused to work for a political settlement. Among the lessons
learned in Somalia and elsewhere is that unless there is a willingness to end
conflict and strong regional support for peace initiatives, intervention by
outsiders is likely to be doomed.

President Mobutu Sese Seko, Zaire

Words: "As regards Africa, with its mosaic of ethnic communities, with its
economic lag, with its social handicap, I affirm that both within and outside
the continent, we must make solidarity, security and development our watchwords
for action and the spearhead of the fight against discord and injustice in the
world."

Deeds: For more than 30 years, President Mobutu has ruled oppressively, mainly
to enrich himself and his inner circle as the lot of ordinary Zaireans has
deteriorated. He served notice recently that he would expel hundreds of
thousands of refugees from Rwanda by the end of the year if the United Nations
did not move them first. He has allowed extremists who threaten renewed civil
war in Rwanda and Burundi to operate from his country. In a land where
development has been in reverse for years, a presidential palace with an
international airport may be his most durable legacy.

President Jacques Chirac, France

Words: "Let no one doubt France's determination to ensure the success of the
negotiations on the definitive comprehensive and verifiable ban on nuclear
testing in 1996. It was the first to speak out for the zero option."

Deeds: In the month before Mr. Chirac's speech, France carried out two nuclear
tests -- and promised more, including another last week -- on distant Pacific
atolls far from French soil. The nuclear detonations provoked strong comments
from the leaders of Japan and New Zealand, among others, reflecting the outrage
of Pacific nations. Only France and China continue nuclear test explosions,
after pledging this year at an international conference to phase them out.

Gen. Muang Aye, Vice President, Myanmar (formerly Burma)

Words: "As responsible members of the United Nations, we pledge ourselves to
cooperate with organizations to maintain international peace and security. We
recognize that the security of each and every member state is important. Seen
from our perspective, security is noninterference in internal affairs and
freedom from external pressures. Security is synonymous with the basic rights --
security, truth, political, economic, social systems -- and keeping in mind
one's future and one's peace in accordance with cherished values and ideas."

Deeds: The military leaders of Myanmar seized power in a 1988 coup, put the
democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi under house arrest for six years and ignored
the results of an election in 1990 won by her party. They define security
narrowly to protect themselves from the intrusion of human rights groups and
international organizations seeking to promote democracy. Though he talks of
internationalism, the representative of Myanmar is telling the world to leave
his country alone.

President Fidel Castro, Cuba

Words: "Breakthroughs in science and technology are increasing daily by the
numbers. But their benefits do not reach the majority of mankind. And they
essentially continue to be at the service of a reckless consumerism which is
wasting limited resources and seriously threatening life on earth. . . . The
forests are decreasing. The air is being poisoned. The rivers are being
contaminated. Countless species of plants and animals are perishing. The soils
are impoverished. Old and new epidemics are expanding while the population grows
and the legions of the dispossessed continue to multiply."

Deeds: Mr. Castro for decades practiced some of what he now preaches against.
During the cold war, Cuba sacrificed small-scale, family-based farming in favor
of large-scale cultivation of export crops for the Soviet bloc. Cuba, like
Vietnam, became something of a 20th century neocolonial plantation. In many poor
countries, the simple explanation for the degradation of land and impoverishment
of people is the consumerism of industrial nations. But often the problems arise
from choices the leaders of poor countries have made without regard to their own
people.

Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Velayati, Iran

Words: "Principles drawn up in the charter of the United Nations became the
cornerstone of international law set to resolve disputes and promote peaceful
solutions to conflict. In retrospect, what is vividly clear is the wisdom of the
underlying principles of the United Nations. Indeed, what has united us in this
world body is our collective embrace of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations so eloquently enshrined in the charter."

Deeds: In 1988, Iran's Islamic leandership called publicly and internationally
for the death of the British writer Salman Rushdie, whose novel, "The Satanic
Verses," displeased the ayatollahs. The sentence remains in force, placing in
question Iran's commitment to the United Nations charter's call for "respect for
human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to
race, sex, language or religion."

President Franjo Tudjman, Croatia

Words: "The boundaries of our freedoms are set by the the boundaries of the
freedom of others. The affirmation of human dignity and the universal rights of
the individual upheld by the charter of the United Nations can be achieved only
through respect for different ethnic, cultural and political identities, through
an efficient system of collective security and through respect for a
law-governed state and international law."

Deeds: This summer, Croatia's army swept into the Krajina region of the country,
which had been occupied by Croatian Serbs, and forced 120,000 of them to flee
amid looting and murder. Croatian forces are poised to retake another Serb-held
enclave, Eastern Slavonia, where many thousands more Croatian Serbs would likely
be driven from their homes. Peacemakers in the Balkans -- and the Croatians'
Bosnian allies -- fear that contrary to his pledges of respect for differences,
Mr. Tudjman intends to "cleanse" Croatia, and perhaps large areas of Bosnia, of
all but Croatians.

President Clinton

Words: "So at the dawn of a new century so full of promise, yet plagued by
peril, we still need the United Nations. And so, for another 50 years and
beyond, you can count on the United States."

Deeds: Even as the President spoke, officials in his Administration were
bargaining with isolationist Congressional leaders to sacrifice funding for a
handful of United Nations agencies in return for concessions on other foreign
policy issues. And the United States, which owes the United Nations more than
$1.2 billion in overdue assessments, has plunged the organization into financial
crisis.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Near the U.N., making an example of President Chirac. (Linda
Rosier/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Rights Laid Out in New Civil Code

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 6;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 470 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Oct. 28


The Communist Government of Vietnam approved its first civil code today, setting
out intellectual, inheritance and property rights for its 72 million citizens.

The legislation, with dozens of chapters and hundreds of articles, has taken 10
years to complete. Articles have been debated at 15 semiannual legislative
sessions.

"The civil code is very important," said a National Assembly spokesman, Vu Mao.
He added that it was considered just slightly less important "than the
Constitution of our country."

"This is the first time we have completed a civil code," he said. "We have taken
into account the civil codes of other countries, but at the same time we have
synthesized this with what we have" in Vietnam.

Mr. Mao said the code had been approved today by the 392-member Assembly, with
about 90 percent of members voting in favor. He said 38 members were not present
at the final session.

Full copies of the new legislation were not available today, but Mr. Mao said it
encompassed a number of important issues. It gives residents of rural areas
legal rights to their land and property, for example, though previously the
rights had been retained by the state.

While the state will continue to have ownership, farmers and other rural
dwellers will be able to occupy and mortgage their land to raise capital, he
said.

Mr. Mao said that the code also covered inheritance rights, rights to
intellectual property ownership and civil obligations. He did not elaborate
further.

The code is due to go into effect next July 1.

The vote on the landmark legislation brought to an end a monthlong session of
the National Assembly, which also approved a series of far-reaching political
and budgetary proposals.

The Assembly voted for the biggest shake-up of Vietnam's state bureaucracy in
years.

The measure is intended to streamline the multilayered and vast state apparatus.
Eight ministries were merged into three larger ones, and a series of Cabinet
ministers were shuffled.

Mr. Mao said the move had legally gone into effect already and was likely to
result in the loss of at least a third of jobs in the affected ministries.

The changes were proposed by Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet. The state bureaucracy
has been criticized for having failed to keep pace with Vietnam's economic and
social changes of the last few years.

In what was seen as a prelude to the move, senior Government officials in recent
weeks were openly critical of the state administrative apparatus.

Mr. Mao said the Assembly had amended and approved tax laws aimed at providing
for integration of Vietnam's tax system with that of the international
community.

He also said members had discussed budget proposals aimed at limiting inflation
to about 14 percent this year and 14 percent or lower next year.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD

SECTION: Section 13; Page 4; Column 1; The City Weekly/Queens

LENGTH: 612 words



UPPER WEST SIDE
Children's Tales, as Sung By a Touring Octet

A St. Louis a cappella octet, Pieces of Eight, combines rich vocal harmonies
with popular children's tales to produce jazzy renditions of such stories as
"The Gingerbread Man" and "City Mouse, Country Mouse." Some selections are
geared toward adult audiences. "As Time Goes By" and "Anything Goes" are
included in the group's repertory.

Beginning next Saturday, Pieces of Eight (below) will start its first New York
City tour, including performances at branches of the New York and Brooklyn
Public Libraries. The group's music is written or arranged by it artistic
director, Charles Mead, who weaves together elements of classical music with
gospel, reggae, doo-wop and Cajun.

Pieces of Eight, Riverside Branch of the New York Public Library, 127 Amsterdam
Avenue (at 65th Street); Saturday, 3:30 P.M.; free; (212) 870-1633.

BOWLING GREEN

Museum Demonstrations Of Latin American Weaving

Visitors to the program marking the first anniversary of the Museum of the
American Indian will be able to watch female artists from Ecuador, Bolivia and
Mexico weave, knit and embroider shawls, clothing and blankets. Interpreters
will be on hand to help with questions and answers. The program, "The Market
Place: A Latin American Women's Arts Program," will also feature slide shows and
lectures on the development and significance of textile art forms in Latin
America, and community-based collectives and art as engines of economic
development for the continent and its people. Among the featured speakers will
be an anthropologist, June Nash.

"The Market Place: A Latin American Women's Arts Program," National Museum of
the American Indian, 1 Bowling Green; today and tomorrow, noon to 5 P.M.; free.

FLUSHING

Photos of Landmarks, And Memories of Vietnam

"I like to get to know my subject, whether it be a person or a building," said
Tony Valez, a photographer and former adjunct professor in the art department at
Queens College. "There is a time element you have to put in to get the right
light or mood and personality."

Highlights of Mr. Valez's work over the last eight years, as well as some older
photographs, will be featured in an exhibition at Queens College that opens on
Thursday.

More than 50 photographs will be on display, including those of Brooklyn
landmarks and historic buildings, like the Brooklyn Bridge and the Fulton Ferry
historic district (above).

The show will also feature arresting photographs from Mr. Valez's tour of duty
in Vietnam in 1966-67.

Art Center, Rosenthal Library at Queens College, 65-30 Kissena Boulevard,
Flushing; Thursday through Dec. 22; Monday to Thursday, 9 A.M. to 7 P.M., and
Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; free; (718) 997-3770.

ALSO AROUND TOWN

FAIR FUN Three hundred booths with food, games and craft items, as well as dance
performances and trick-or-treating, will highlight a street fair to benefit the
53d Street Y.W.C.A.; today, 53d Street between Lexington and Fifth Avenues; 11
A.M. to 6 P.M.; (212) 755-4500.
 CORSICAN DEBUTA contemporary Corsican musical group, I Muvrini, will present
its first United States performance at the French Institute-Alliance Francaise's
Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street; Friday, 8 P.M.; $16, or $25 with
reception and refreshments; reservations: (212) 355-6160.
WIZARDS, SPIRITS AND SPELLS The Queens Symphonic Band's 25th season opens with
"Phantasmagorical Fantasies," featuring works by Berlioz, Wagner and others.
Queensborough Community College Theater, Springfield Boulevard and 56th Avenue,
Bayside; Saturday, 8 P.M.; $8; $7, the elderly; (718) 631-6311.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

In America;
Kids Pay the Price

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A;   Page 17;   Column 1;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 685 words


Paul Newman, in the 30-second television spot, is reading from a newspaper:
"Matilda Crabtree, 14, jumped out of a closet and yelled 'boo' to scare her
parents." He pauses very briefly before adding, "And was shot to death when her
father mistook her for a burglar."

Mr. Newman continues: "Matilda was supposed to be sleeping at a friend's house
but decided to sneak home and play a joke on her family. Her last words were, 'I
love you, Daddy.' "

This is followed by a stark message displayed full-screen against a black
background: "A gun in the home triples the risk of homicide in the home."

We then hear Mr. Newman say, "Before you bring a gun in the house, think about
it."

The Newman spot is one of many compelling moments in a special two-part Oprah
Winfrey program devoted to the terrible toll that gun violence is taking on
young people, especially children. The first part airs today.

The program opens with Ms. Winfrey standing in front of a blackboard that says
15 children are killed by guns in the United States every day, and that a
teen-ager commits suicide with a gun every six hours. "If we were to build a
memorial" to the kids killed by gunfire in the last 13 years, Ms. Winfrey says,
"the names on that memorial would outnumber" the American lives lost in Vietnam.

The program uses the terms children and kids in the broadest sense, so that they
cover the entire period from infancy through the teen years. In 1992, the last
year for which complete statistics are available, 37,776 people were killed by
firearms in the U.S. Of those, 5,379 were 19 years of age or younger. Those are
extraordinary numbers, and they have risen since 1992.

And yet we pay very little attention to the problem of guns and children, in
part because of denial, and in part, as Ms. Winfrey points out, because "the
frequency of death has numbed us to what the death of one child really means."

Today's show takes a step toward remedying that. For example, we see glimpses of
the exuberant life of Kenzo Bix from home videos and a photo album and the
comments of his mother, Lynn. We see him as a toddler, and in that angelic guise
peculiar to the first grader, and romping as a teen-ager.

"He was kind of whimsical," his mother said. She shows us a Mother's Day memo he
posted: "Do not go in the kitchen. Your gifts are in there."

"That was actually the year just before he died," she said.

When he was 14, Kenzo was accidentally shot and killed by a friend who was
playing with a gun.

One of the things that comes through in Ms. Winfrey's program that is usually
missing from news accounts of homicides and suicides is the sheer suddenness of
the absence of the one who dies. Those who knew the child, were close to the
child, loved the child, cannot believe that he or she is gone, and gone for good
-- gone irrevocably because of the absurdity of the pulling of the trigger of
some cheap and deadly mechanism, usually for some cheap and stupid reason.

Larry Elizalde, 18, was a high school track and football star, and Olympic team
hopeful, who was shot to death on the street in Chicago by gang members who
mistook him for someone else.

Mr. Elizalde died in the arms of a young seminarian, a stranger named Doug
Mitchell, who happened to have witnessed the shooting. Mr. Mitchell, in an
interview with Ms. Winfrey, said he did not want "the hatred of the gun, the
violence of the gun" to be the last thing the mortally wounded youth would
experience, "but rather the love and concern of another human being."

This was clung to as a blessing by Mr. Elizalde's anguished mother, Lynette, who
at first had harbored the desperate fear that her son had died alone.

Throughout the program, Ms. Winfrey offers us evidence of the humanity that is
sacrificed -- not just the lives lost, but the humanity in all of us that is
sacrificed by our acceptance of the mass manufacture, mass sale and mass use of
firearms in this country.

She tries to lift at least a corner of our blanket of denial, to disturb and
maybe even awaken us.

After all, she seems to be saying, children are dying.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 31, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

A Freshman Who Doesn't Aim to Please . . .

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A;   Page 22;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 738 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 24


Who among the ambitious Republicans in Congress would not yearn to become a
trusted friend of Speaker Newt Gingrich, the field commander of the conservative
assault?

Representative John Shadegg, for one.

It is not that Mr. Shadegg, a first-term Republican from Arizona, has anything
but blazing admiration for Mr. Gingrich and his philosophy. But Mr. Shadegg is a
leader among the many freshman Republican House members who see their role as
resisting the lure of that inevitable element of legislative politics:
compromise. And for John Shadegg, a 46-year-old lawyer from Phoenix, a
friendship with Mr. Gingrich could lead to a painful moment when the Speaker
might touch him on the shoulder and ask him to vote against his rock-hard
principles for a short-term goal.

"I haven't tried to build a close personal friendship by chatting with him," Mr.
Shadegg said in a recent interview. "I studiously avoid doing so in an attempt
to keep some personal distance, to keep my edge so I wouldn't be reluctant to
pick fights because I don't want to cause trouble for a friend."

Mr. Shadegg's studied wariness is emblematic of what Mr. Gingrich and his
lieutenants must deal with among their idealistic troops as the leadership makes
its way toward its legislative destination.

Mr. Shadegg has already challenged the leadership on two issues, albeit
unsuccessfully. He fought and lost a battle to insure that any tax increases
would require a three-fifths majority, and he pressed for the immediate and
complete elimination of the National Endowment for the Arts, rather than the
more politically feasible option of phasing out the agency.

He is also the founder of an occasional breakfast group in which four to eight
freshmen hash out their feelings and bolster their resolve against being
"housebroken," or more precisely, "House-broken."

At one recent breakfast in the members' dining room, Mr. Gingrich ambled by like
a professor glancing at some precocious students and joked that the freshman
were probably hatching a conspiracy.

But despite Mr. Shadegg's assertion that he has studiously avoided a close
relationship with the powerful Speaker, he did accept Mr. Gingrich's offer to
head of Gopac, the political action committee the Speaker founded and from which
he resigned in May.

Gopac is the subject of inquiries by the Federal Election Commission. The House
Ethics Committee may soon appoint an independent counsel who could, in part,
look into whether laws governing donations to the political action committee
were skirted.

Mr. Shadegg said that because he wanted to stay independent from Mr. Gingrich,
he took the post reluctantly and felt he was picked because of his experience in
Arizona as an assistant Attorney General overseeing the state's enforcement of
campaign laws.

Mr. Shadegg's political life tracks the evolution of conservative Republican
philosophy from the fringe to center-stage over the last three decades. John
Barden Shadegg was born on Oct. 22, 1949, in Phoenix.

His father, Stephen Shadegg, ran Barry Goldwater's 1952 Senate campaign. Father
and son watched Mr. Goldwater win the Republican Presidential nomination at the
Cow Palace in San Francisco in 1964 before his crushing defeat by President
Lyndon B. Johnson. The elder Shadegg later ran Senate campaigns for other
Republicans. His son watched, learned and went on to help run campaigns that
elected Steven D. Symms of Idaho to the House and Paul Laxalt of Nevada to the
Senate.

He graduated from the University of Arizona and its law school. He said he
opposed the Vietnam War, but not vigorously, and enlisted in the National Guard.

Although his working life has largely been spent at a desk, he shares the
sentiments of those who ride the range. He has sponsored the strictest overhaul
of the Endangered Species Act, which would replace controls on private
landowners with financial incentives to encourage them to protect habitats.

Mr. Shadegg was the only member of Congress who rattled Attorney General Janet
Reno's vaunted stolidness during recent hearings on the siege by Federal agents
of the Branch Davidians' compound near Waco, Tex. As Ms. Reno was testifying
that the destruction by Government vehicles of the sect's gym was not
intentional, she snapped at him, "Don't laugh at me." Mr. Shadegg said he smiled
because, "I just thought her answer made her look goofy."

He stopped smiling, though.


NAME: John Shadegg

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Representative John Shadegg, in his Capitol Hill office, is a
first-term Republican from Arizona who says he has tried to maintain his
independence from Speaker Newt Gingrich in order to protect his political
principles. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 31, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Real Politics: Why Suharto Is In and Castro Is Out

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section A;   Page 3;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1236 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 30


Fidel Castro never got so much as a smile or a handshake when he stepped into
the same reception with President Clinton last week; the Secret Service deftly
kept them from coming face to face.

President Jiang Zemin of China did a bit better. The Administration quashed his
hopes for a state visit, but insisted that a largely empty two-hour meeting in
New York had advanced the cause of "comprehensive engagement" with the Chinese,
the kind of engagement Mr. Castro is desperate to win.

And then came Suharto, the aging, military-backed leader of Indonesia, and a man
who also knows a good deal about how to keep dissenters under control. When he
arrived at the White House on Friday for a "private" visit with the President,
the Cabinet room was jammed with top officials ready to welcome him. Vice
President Gore was there, along with Secretary of State Warren Christopher; the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. John Shalikashvili; Commerce
Secretary Ronald H. Brown; the United States trade representative, Mickey
Kantor; the national security adviser, Anthony Lake, and many others.

"There wasn't an empty chair in the room," one participant said. "No one used to
treat the Indonesians like this, and it said a lot about how our priorities in
the world have changed."

For a quick understanding of how the Clinton Administration balances American
economic interests abroad, Presidential election politics at home and human
rights concerns around the world these days, simply look at how President
Clinton dealt with three very different, very authoritarian foreign visitors.

For years Washington has embraced dictatorial leaders, particularly
anti-Communist ones, when it served the national interest. But in interviews in
recent days, Administration officials said the treatment of Mr. Castro, Mr.
Jiang and Mr. Suharto was driven by very different litmus tests, a potent mix of
power politics and emerging markets.

Of all the three leaders, Mr. Castro probably evokes the strongest emotional
response, especially in the Cuban community in Florida, where anti-Castro
sentiment remains at a fever pitch and a crucial state in the coming election.
"There are no votes riding on how we deal with Indonesia, and not many on how we
deal with China," one of Mr. Clinton's foreign policy advisers said the other
day. "Castro is still political dynamite."

And of the three, he has the fewest strategic and economic cards to play. Russia
no longer cares about Mr. Castro's fate. And he has few other sources of capital
to reach for. The Europeans, the Japanese and the overseas Chinese, who are
vying for manufacturing footholds in Indonesia and China, could care less about
his little island.

That allows the United States the luxury of continuing a policy of isolating
Cuba while proclaiming that "engaging" other hard-line Communist countries,
including China, Vietnam and North Korea, is the best way to bring about change
in their Governments.

"You use your leverage where you can find it, and we are in a unique position to
isolate Castro," a senior Administration official said on Friday when asked what
it would have cost Mr. Clinton to shake Mr. Castro's hand. "It is a real power
politics approach, but why would we want to give him the status and
respectability that would come from a meeting with the President until he has
given way? And if he doesn't deal with us, who else can he turn to?"

Fred Bergsten, who heads the Institute for International Economics in
Washington, noted recently: "Cuba is the anomaly. Not only are its relations
with the U.S. driven by domestic politics here, it has nothing to offer. Vietnam
at least has 90 million people in a terrific neighborhood, a place where
everyone wants a plant." And those who want to deal with Mr. Castro -- including
most of the nations in Latin America -- do not have the billions of dollars in
capital available to build highways, plants and factories there, even if they
were willing to take the political risk.

Mr. Jiang presented a far more complex case for the White House. Since the
beginning of the summer, when China was outraged by the Clinton Administration's
decision to allow Taiwan's President, Lee Teng-hui, to make a so-called private
visit to Cornell University, the State Department has been consumed with getting
back on speaking terms with Beijing. The rebuilding process began with Mr.
Christopher, who met his Chinese counterpart in Brunei, and then New York. The
Chinese responded by releasing Harry Wu, an American who had been seized and
charged with espionage during one of his human rights investigations in China.

But Mr. Clinton is having a harder and harder time making the case that his
decision two years ago to "delink" the issue of human rights from the annual
extension of preferential trade treatment is paying off. Nor is there much
evidence that "commercial engagement," a phrase coined by Mr. Brown, has
resulted in significantly better treatment for dissidents.

Moreover, he can hardly boast too loudly about the economic benefits reaped by
his new approach. American exports to China have risen slowly -- they now stand
at about $9 billion -- but the trade deficit has exploded to Japan-like levels.

Certainly there is huge pressure from American businesses to keep all channels
to the Government open, but privately American business executives tell tale
after tale of frustration. Of the $6 billion in deals signed with great fanfare
by Mr. Brown in Beijing last year, two-thirds have barely made progress.

But unlike Cuba, China is all about huge potential, upside and downside. Failure
to get into the market is seen as tantamount to surrender to Japanese, Taiwanese
and European business interests. And everyone in Asia expects the United States
to continue acting as the counterweight to Chinese military power -- without, of
course, feeding China's fear that a containment policy is under way.

"This is a case where you are dealing with a great power, and you have no choice
but to make sure that your contacts stay open," one of Mr. Clinton's top foreign
policy advisers said last week. "But bring Jiang to a state dinner, with
trumpets and everything? That would be a bit much for everyone to take."

That leaves Mr. Suharto, who is sitting on the ultimate emerging market: some
13,000 islands, a population of 193 million and an economy growing at more than
7 percent a year. The country remains wildly corrupt and Mr. Suharto's family
controls leading businesses that competitors in Jakarta would be unwise to
challenge. But Mr. Suharto, unlike the Chinese, has been savvy in keeping
Washington happy. He has deregulated the economy, opened Indonesia to foreign
investors and kept the Japanese, Indonesia's largest supplier of foreign aid,
from grabbing more than a quarter of the market for goods imported into the
country.

So Mr. Clinton made the requisite complaints about Indonesia's repressive
tactics in East Timor, where anti-Government protests continue, and moved right
on to business, getting Mr. Suharto's support for market-opening progress during
the annual Asian Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting in Osaka in mid-November.

"He's our kind of guy," a senior Administration official who deals often on
Asian policy, said the other day. "The message of his visit was clear: this is
the kind of relationship we want to have with China."


LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Fidel Castro was seated as President Clinton entered the
luncheon room for heads of state at the United Nations last Monday. The Secret
Service managed to keep the two leaders from meeting face to face. (Monica
Almeida/The New York Times)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 2, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Political Memo;
Right Tries to Mobilize Against Powell Candidacy

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE

SECTION: Section B;  Page 11;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1107 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 1


At first glance, conservative leaders appear to be mounting the most sustained
effort in modern American politics to scare a potential candidate -- Colin L.
Powell -- out of running for President.

"They're trying to make him the political Antichrist," said Patrick H. Caddell,
a former Democratic strategist who is finishing a book on American politics. "If
he runs as a Republican, it's the biggest mistake in his life. This party
doesn't want him."

Maybe so.

Certainly, the vitriol will intensify on Thursday, when more than a half dozen
conservative leaders call a news conference to ridicule the notion of General
Powell running in the Republican primaries, and to attack him as a Democrat
masquerading behind an embellished military record.

The rallying among conservatives is reminiscent of the drive by the right wing
that forced President Gerald R. Ford to dump Nelson Rockefeller as his running
mate in 1976 in favor of a more conservative Senator: Bob Dole.

"Powell's statement that he wants to revitalize Rockefeller is tantamount to a
declaration of war on the Contract With America," said Craig Shirley, a public
relations specialist who helped organize the Thursday gathering.

Outspoken as these conservatives are, it has yet to be demonstrated that these
sentiments are deeply felt beyond conservative circles in the capital. People
close to General Powell contend that rather than discourage him, the attacks may
allow him to portray himself as more palatable to the party's mainstream.

Not that the resistance from some leading conservatives has been good news for
General Powell. His advisers said that they were taken aback by the vehemence of
some of the attacks and that they had no doubt that if the former Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff ran, he would find himself at the center of a
contentious fight for the Republican nomination.

But as much as his conservative detractors are put off by General Powell's
support of abortion rights, some gun-control measures and affirmative action,
and fear that he would undo the Republican wave that swept Congress last year,
many are also motivated out of self interest. For example, David A. Keene, the
chairman of the American Conservative Union, who is a prime mover behind the
news conference on Thursday, is also an adviser to Mr. Dole, whose status as the
front runner would instantly be challenged by a Powell candidacy.

Patrick J. Buchanan, the only Republican candidate who is vociferously taking on
General Powell, is doing so because he can best afford to. Mr. Buchanan has
little hope of appealing to moderates in the party, and his low-budget campaign
is fueled by attention from the news media, so why not level the most
provocative attack? Terry Jeffrey, Mr. Buchanan's campaign manager, wrote in an
internal memorandum recently that General Powell would be "the perfect foil for
our campaign."

The news conference on Thursday will include conservatives whose groups carry
weight inside the Washington Beltway, but are not well known around the country:
Paul Weyrich, Gary Bauer, Gordon Jones and Grover Norquist.

But two conservatives who are far better known in the grass roots were not
scheduled to participate, and they have been careful to keep their sentiments
about a Powell candidacy muted: Speaker Newt Gingrich and Ralph Reed, president
of the Christian Coalition.

In addition, General Powell won an important vote of confidence this week from
Haley Barbour, chairman of the Republican National Committee, who said that the
retired general was "very much in the mainstream of the Republican Party." Mr.
Barbour, interviewed on the CNBC program, "Equal Time," also said, "You don't
have to agree with Pat Buchanan on everything -- or Bob Dole or anybody else."

The reality is that the ultimate success of a Powell candidacy might have less
to do with how aggressively the conservatives oppose him than whether he can
assemble a winning coalition among the other primary voters. The latest New York
Times/ CBS News Poll suggests that it is possible because people who vote in
Republican primaries are far more diverse on issues like abortion and Medicaid
than some conservatives assert.

For General Powell to overcome conservative opposition, he would have to draw
heavy support from independents and Democrats in the more than 30 states where
they are allowed to cross over and vote in Republican primaries and caucuses.

But an important question is whether the harsh opposition to General Powell is,
or will be, deep enough to mobilize grass-roots conservatives to oppose him
should he run. Already, Mr. Bauer, president of the Family Research Council, has
attacked General Powell as "Bill Clinton with ribbons."

Oliver L. North said on his radio show the other day, "This guy is not a
Republican."

Mr. North did not stop there. "I hope he lays himself bare," he continued, "so
that we can get some of the answers we have wanted to know for a long time: his
real role in the so-called Iran-contra affair, his real real role in the
cover-up of the My Lai massacre in Vietnam, his role in what was done to prevent
Desert Storm."

Organizers of the news conference on Thursday said they were planning to build
on such strident rebukes, like assertions that General Powell has taken too much
credit for his military accomplishments, particularly his role in the war in the
Persian Gulf.

And they are also turning on three conservatives who drew the ire of many of
their compatriots by speaking out on behalf of General Powell: William J.
Bennett, the former Education Secretary; Jack F. Kemp, the former Housing
Secretary, and William Kristol, the former chief of staff for Vice President Dan
Quayle who is now publisher of the Weekly Standard. All three were to be singled
out for attack along with General Powell at the news conference.

Even so, many conservatives, though edging closer to going after General Powell,
are still hesitant to join the demonization of such a popular figure. Bill
Adams, whose company monitors talk radio around the country, said commentators
like Rush Limbaugh "are doing a tap dance around Powell."

Daniel Lapin, an Orthodox rabbi who is a popular conservative radio host in
Seattle, said the opposition to General Powell among callers had intensified.
"At the beginning no one took him seriously because the sense was that he was
not really running but trying to sell books," Rabbi Lapin said. But he said that
now the prevailing sentiment was not animosity toward General Powell, but
"chiefly bewilderment over why would we nominate someone who doesn't represent
us?"

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 3, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

House G.O.P. Seeking to Bar G.I.'s in Bosnia

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 742 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 2


House Republicans, spurred on by their aggressive freshman class, are planning
stronger measures to try to block President Clinton from sending American troops
to enforce a peace in the Balkans.

House members are trying to provoke a constitutional confrontation by
introducing legislation to cut off funds for any United States peacekeeping
mission, said Representative Mark W. Neumann, a Republican from Wisconsin.
Republican legislators said they believed that such a bill had a good chance of
passing in the House, although its chances in the Senate were considered less
certain.

Mr. Neumann, one of the freshmen eager to demonstrate their unwillingness to
compromise with the White House, said: "What's being talked about is putting
U.S. troops under foreign command alongside Russian soldiers as neutral
peacekeepers in one country we just bombed the daylights out of. I wouldn't want
my own kids to do that, and I don't think any other American would."

Representative Robert Livingston, the Louisiana Republican who is chairman of
the Appropriations Committee, predicted that the House could consider such
legislation within the next 10 days.

Mr. Livingston urged that Mr. Clinton "come up here to Congress and make his
case." He said that if the President did not begin to persuade members of the
House to support his plan, he faced a real threat because "the intensity of
feeling on this issue has grown strongly in the last few days."

Although the campaign is being fueled by the ardor of many of the House's 73
first-term Republicans, Mr. Livingston said he, too, remained unconvinced that
it was wise to send Americans to Bosnia to police a peace plan.

"I don't think there's any strong national interest at stake here, and we
shouldn't be exposing our young folks to unnecessary danger," he said.

Michael McCurry, the White House spokesman, said today that Congressional
efforts to restrict the use of American forces could harm the current peace
talks at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio.

"If Congress tries to force the issue in the midst of the talks, there won't be
a peace agreement," Mr. McCurry said, because some participants have already
said United States forces would be a prerequisite to any agreement.

On Monday, the House passed a nonbinding resolution stating that Mr. Clinton
could not send or even pledge to send American troops to help enforce a peace in
the Balkans without Congressional approval. The resolution passed 315 to 103,
with 99 Democrats supporting it.

Whether Congress has any role in deciding to send troops abroad has vexed
policymakers and legal scholars since the nation's founding. Although Congress
has periodically demanded to be included in such decisions, it has regularly
backed off, content to let the President bear full responsibility for dangerous
military decisions.

Most of those efforts involved persuading a President to consult with Congress,
producing an ambiguous resolution far short of a confrontation. Most scholars
agree, however, that if Congress explicitly prohibited the use of funds for a
specific mission, the President would almost certainly be obliged to comply.

One official said that the White House was confident the Senate would not
approve such a measure, and that if it did, the Senate would not be able to
override a certain Presidential veto.

But officials acknowledged that Mr. Clinton would be hampered in offering to use
American forces in the Balkans if Congress voted to cut off funds.

Even if the effort is ultimately unsuccessful, it undermines the
Administration's position at the peace talks. As the Vietnam War wound down,
Congress passed a series of resolutions limiting the use of funds for various
activities including bombing in Cambodia and Laos. More recently, Congress in
1993 put a time limit on the use of funds for military operations in Haiti.

When the issue of using United States troops as peacekeepers in the Balkans
first arose in May 1993, Mr. Clinton strongly suggested that he would not take
that course without seeking some kind of congressional approval. Most modern
Presidents have ardently resisted ceding any real authority to Congress for
sending troops abroad. President Bush sought congressional approval for the
American-led military operation to drive Iraqi invaders from Kuwait in 1991, but
he did so reluctantly and portrayed his action as a courtesy to Congress rather
than an obligation.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 3, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Sending Troops Without an Enemy

SECTION: Section A;  Page 28;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 289 words


To the Editor:

How will the Clinton Administration sell military intervention in Bosnia to the
American people?

The lesson of the Persian Gulf war, you say in "Soldiering On, Without an Enemy"
(Week in Review, Oct. 29), is that the vilification of a foreign leader, like
Saddam Hussein, can stir the passions of Americans and give a President
sufficient support for military action.

But with no Saddam Hussein in the Bosnia story, you think that President Clinton
will have a hard time justifying a military commitment.

I think you misread the logic of the Bush Administration campaign to win
approval for the Persian Gulf war and thereby miss the clue to how it can be
done again.

Essentially, the Bush Administration paralyzed rational discourse by putting
forth one reason after another for war. By December 1990 reasoning within a
means-end framework was rendered impossible because the ends kept changing.

At that point, decision making defaulted to emotion and symbolism, and the
Administration, ably assisted by the highly orchestrated yellow-ribbon campaign,
used the soldiers in the Persian Gulf as the reason the war should be supported.

The means of war became the ends of war.

The Nixon Administration used "the troops are there, we have to support them" to
extend the Vietnam War long after there was any other reason for it to go on. In
both Grenada and Panama, troops were sent and then public approval was sought
for the commitment.

The lesson I draw is that when there is no reason for war, reason is abandoned,
means and ends are conflated, and the rhetoric of unreason takes over.

JERRY LEMBCKE
Associate Professor of Sociology
College of the Holy Cross
Worcester, Mass., Nov. 1, 1995

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 3, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER REVIEW;
Nun of a Thousand Causes Takes On Even the Pope

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1058 words


SISTER GRACE (Ellen Burstyn) is one dynamite nun, which is fine with her
superiors in the Roman Catholic Church as long as she sticks to her duties as
the head of the Houston Street Crisis Center in SoHo. Drug pushers, would-be
muggers, petty thieves and lapsed Catholics never have the last word when she's
around. She has an answer for everything, including a lot of questions the
church would prefer that nobody asked.

Ever since her association with the Rev. Daniel Berrigan's protests against the
Vietnam War, Sister Grace has been speaking out on matters the church considers
controversial. Most recently: sex education in parochial schools and the
distribution of condoms -- not just any condoms, but inexpensive condoms that
have, according to her, thicker latex than the pricier brands.

She's unstinting in her support of good causes, of candlelight vigils that
attract celebrities like Madonna. Talk show hosts adore her as the nun who
persists in issuing unnunlike pronouncements. She's not only in love with her
calling, but she also possesses a natural gift for manipulating the media.

At the start of Diane Shaffer's "Sacrilege," the sincerely argumentative drama
that opened last night at the Belasco Theater, Sister Grace seems finally to
have gone too far. We are told that even Pope John Paul II has read and "is
deeply disturbed" by her latest bombshell: a Village Voice interview in which
she calls for the abolition of "sexual apartheid" within the church. She's
demanding that women be admitted to the priesthood.

You get the feeling that the Pope is at the end of his tether. What next?
Priests who want to become nuns?

The Pope is so upset that he has dispatched his closest adviser, Cardinal King
(Herb Foster), to chastise Sister Grace. Complicating the situation is the large
coincidence that the Cardinal is the former parish priest who, many years ago,
allowed her to be his altar girl. He encouraged her devotion to the church,
possibly even her dreams of becoming a priest.

Now ask yourself: should the church welcome women into the priesthood? Do you
believe, with Sister Grace, that "the nature of God transcends the duality of
sex?"

Or do you side with Cardinal King, who says that the church should be "immune to
time," that is, unaffected by "social, cultural or political trends," meaning,
in this case, today's feminist movement? It helps to have a point of view.

In "Sacrilege," Sister Grace gets all the best lines. When it's pointed out to
her that women were not present at the Last Supper, her answer is a snappy: "No,
they only served it." Sister Grace has more substantial arguments than that,
including the suggestion that in the church's early years women served alongside
men. It wasn't until later that they became second-class citizens as the result
of rules written by men. Even today, she says, "there is no formally declared
doctrine stating that women can't be priests."

"Sacrilege" is a 1990's update on an old-fashioned problem play. In the days
before the theater became so economically elitist, it could have found an
audience among people who today stay home and watch problem teleplays.

It has a carefully constructed plot that involves not only Sister Grace's battle
with the hierarchy but also her intense relationship with Ramon (Giancarlo
Esposito), whom she first meets in Washington Square Park one dawn. She's doing
her tai chi exercises and he's going through her knapsack. Ramon is a
foul-mouthed but sensitive young con artist whom she guides into the priesthood,
even as her own ambitions are dashed and her faith is tried.

The play has its share of big scenes that seem more obligatory than dramatically
affecting. There's a moment when Sister Grace, against her better judgment, is
moved to give last rites to a dying man because a priest can't be summoned in
time. It's a decision that will later be her undoing. There's another big moment
when, much like an acting teacher, she coaches Ramon on how to reach his inner
being as he delivers his first homily. The result is a passionate, argot-filled
sermon of a kind that will insure his success as shepherd to the
underprivileged.

Ms. Shaffer's script, her first produced work, has the efficiency of something
written not for the stage but for television. The ideas are presented simply and
with textbook clarity. The dialogue is brisk. Characters are drawn in such blunt
outlines that you know everything about them from the beginning. They don't
invite analyses that would invade their psychosexual natures. They mean exactly
what they say. Ambiguity of motive doesn't exist.

In problem plays of this sort, characters aren't revealed by events. Instead
they recognize those events and announce their reactions to them. Subtlety and
surprise are in short supply.

Ms. Burstyn gives a good, hefty performance as the driven if not very complex
Sister Grace. Her technical skill makes up for much of the thinness of the
writing. Mr. Esposito, who has played variations on Ramon-as-street-kid many
times, is also convincing as the dedicated priest he becomes. Mr. Foster's
performance is limited by the dimensions of the character as written.  Cardinal
King is never very persuasive as a sophisticated Vatican trouble-shooter. When
he later reveals his special bond to Sister Grace, the character is
unbelievable, almost wimpish.

Don Scardino, the director, has given "Sacrilege" a decently theatrical
production. John Arnone's handsome unit and the lighting by Howell Binkley have
Broadway class. Yet you never escape the suspicion that "Sacrilege" might as
easily have been filmed, preferably in the unending close-ups that often make
television drama look like comic books for people who don't want to read.


SACRILEGE

By Diane Shaffer; directed by Don Scardino; set by John Arnone; costumes by
Alvin Colt; lighting by Howell Binkley; sound by Aural Fixation; production
stage manager, Bob Borod. Presented by Alexander H. Cohen and Max Cooper. At the
Belasco Theater, 111 West 44th Street, Manhattan.

WITH: Ellen Burstyn (Sister Grace), Brian Tarantina (Crackerjack), Giancarlo
Esposito (Ramon), Jane Cecil (Sister Joseph), Damian Young (Father Jerome), Herb
Foster (Cardinal King), Augusta Dabney (Sister Virgilia), Reno Roop (Bishop
Foley) and Frank Raiter (Monsignor Frigerio).

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Challenging the Vatican: Ellen Burstyn in the role of Sister
Grace, an unconventional nun. (pg. C1); Giancarlo Esposito, in the role of Ramon
in "Sacrilege. (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times) (pg. C29)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 3, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

FILM REVIEW;
Paying Tribute to History in a Personal Way

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 628 words


When Maya Lin, as a 21-year-old college student, envisioned an eloquently simple
black wall and won the competition to design the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in
Washington, her ideas were summarily attacked. Something similar happened to
Freida Lee Mock's documentary, "Maya Lin: A Strong Clear Vision," when it won
last year's Academy Award at the expense of "Hoop Dreams," widely regarded as a
more suitable and deserving Oscar choice.

As it turns out, there was good reason for the latter uproar. While Ms. Mock's
film offers an admiring look at a bold, iconoclastic artist, it is not remotely
on a par with either "Hoop Dreams" or "Crumb" (also among the documentaries
"Maya Lin" eclipsed) when it comes to insight or daring. Directed dutifully but
unsurprisingly as a portrait of the artist at work, this film offers articulate
analysis without generating any particular passion. There are lengthy scenes of
tearful visitors to monuments that Ms. Lin has designed, but these supply only
secondhand emotion.

Certainly the power and imagination of Ms. Lin's work comes through. But it is
not matched by comparable resourcefulness from Ms. Mock, the longtime head of
the documentary division of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.
(She recused herself from that role last year, when her own film was eligible.)
After less than half an hour devoted to the Vietnam monument and its attendant
controversy, "Maya Lin" examines a series of Ms. Lin's other projects in
patiently repetitive fashion. The film alternates glimpses of the architect
sitting at her desk or overseeing construction sites with planning sessions,
inaugural ceremonies, laudatory speeches and overviews of completed monuments or
buildings.

In this documentary, opening today at the Quad Cinema, Ms. Lin emerges as an
impressive figure, whether she is describing how her thoughts evolve or
presiding authoritatively over works in progress.  "She's like an absolutely
pure cutting blade," says Vincent Scully, who taught Ms. Lin art history at Yale
and exudes admiration for her. And when Ms. Lin speaks for herself, she is
especially confident and articulate in explaining the genesis of each project.
She explains how she attains her tranquil Minimalism through an appreciation of
physical settings and a sense of history.

Of the Vietnam memorial, she says: "I guess I just imagined taking a knife,
cutting open the earth, opening it up, pointing one end to the Lincoln, one to
the Washington and having names be chronological." Her Alabama monument to the
civil rights movement, she says, became a record of landmark events carved on
black stone underwater when she thought of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s
phrase "righteousness like a mighty stream." When Julian Bond pronounces the
latter monument "majestic in its simplicity and overwhelming in its power," the
film conveys a full sense of that accomplishment. (Rosa Parks, visiting the
monument, is seen touching her own name in stone, redirecting the water with her
hand just as Ms. Lin wants visitors to do.)

But too much of "Maya Lin" is coolly workmanlike and dispassionate, underscoring
that Ms. Lin has an essentially private way of leaving her mark on public
places. In the end, this tasteful documentary celebrates the courage and
brilliance of her work without often penetrating that work's smooth surface.

MAYA LIN
A STRONG CLEAR VISION
Written and directed by Freida Lee Mock; directors of photography, Don Lenzer
and Eddie Marritz; edited by William T. Cartwright Sr.; music by Charles
Bernstein; produced by Ms. Mock and Terry Sanders; released by Ocean Releasing.
At the Quad Cinema, 13th Street west of Fifth Avenue, Greenwich Village. Running
time: 96 minutes. This film is not rated.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 14, 1995, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

A film review of "Maya Lin: A Strong Clear Vision" in Weekend on Nov. 3 referred
incorrectly to the background of its director and producer, Freida Lee Mock. Her
tenure as chairwoman of the documentary division at the Academy of Motion
Picture Arts and Sciences was two years, not longtime.


TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 4, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

As Powell Ponders, Friends And Family Proffer Advice

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1758 words


Late in August, Colin L. Powell spent a weekend at Walker's Point in
Kennebunkport, Me., talking politics and the Presidency with George and Barbara
Bush. A Bush cousin, George Herbert Walker 3d of St. Louis, who is active in the
draft-Powell movement, sat in, as did the retired general's wife, Alma.

Toward the end of the international tour promoting his book, General Powell
spent an evening at the Atlanta house of James Bostic, a good friend since 1972,
when the two were White House fellows together. The general also slipped,
unannounced, into Jimmy Carter's office at the Carter Center for a chat. Again,
the Presidency was a topic.

The weekend before last, the general called his family together for a powwow at
his house in McLean, Va., across the Potomac from Washington. The group,
including the three children -- Michael, a Washington lawyer; Annemarie, a
production assistant on Ted Koppel's television program, and Linda, a New York
actress -- debated at some length whether he should run for President next year.

Mrs. Powell again voiced fierce -- some say absolutely adamant -- opposition to
the idea. In the past, she has expressed fears to her friends that "some nut"
might take a shot at her husband. The children were split, pro and con.

There has also been a veritable fusillade of telephone calls in the last couple
of weeks from the general to friends, family members, governors, potential
fund-raisers, former Cabinet members and onetime colleagues at the Pentagon and
the White House, seeking advice. General Powell had a reputation as a
hyper-cautious officer, stringing out decisions until the last possible moment,
weighing every factor, and he is proving to be that kind of
politician-in-the-making.

Col. William Smullen, retired, the 54-year-old infantry officer who served as
General Powell's spokesman when he was Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
has stayed with him as a jack-of-all-trades and buffer against an importuning
world. The decision on running has not been made, Colonel Smullen tells callers,
but it is close now.

"Even the people he confides in," said one friend, "still don't know whether it
will be black smoke or white, or exactly when it will come."

According to a number of those who have spoken with General Powell, he is now
focusing on a campaign for the Republican nomination, having set aside the
notion of an independent candidacy. Theoretically, he has until Dec. 15, the
deadline for entering the New Hampshire primary. In fact, the insiders say, an
announcement is most likely between Nov. 18, the date of a Florida straw poll,
and Thanksgiving, five days later.

At the center of the many overlapping circles around General Powell, in addition
to his family, are three close friends: Kenneth M. Duberstein, 51, a Washington
political operative and lobbyist who served as White House chief of staff late
in the Presidency of Ronald Reagan; Richard L. Armitage, 50, a four-tour veteran
of Vietnam and former Assistant Secretary of Defense, and Marybel Batjer, 40,
who served as General Powell's executive assistant when he was national security
adviser in 1987 and 1988 and now works in state government in Sacramento, Calif.

In his book, "My American Journey," General Powell praises Mr. Duberstein for
having developed "the smoothest, most congenial operation I had seen."
Brooklyn-born, a protege of the late Senator Jacob K. Javits of New York, who
was a moderate, Mr. Duberstein also has links to his party's right wing, notably
Speaker Newt Gingrich. His office is the headquarters of the nas scent Powell
campaign; he makes and receives dozens of calls a day from politicians and
reporters, speaking only off the record to the latter.

Mr. Armitage is General Powell's closest friend. A barrel-chested Naval Academy
graduate, he is considered a consummate bureaucratic operator. General Powell
has described him variously as "big, bald, brassy, built like an anvil," as a
man he would trust with everything he has and as his favorite sounding board.

Ms. Batjer, who now enforces state civil rights laws for the California housing
agency, has expressed worries about the "dehumanizing" effect Presidential
campaigns have on candidates, and General Powell has often said he values her
sharp political instincts.

If General Powell says "go," the rudiments of a campaign organization and
support system will quickly fall into place. He has talked to many big
Republican names, and many have told him that they will do what they can to help
him. At the head of the list is former President Bush, who has told friends in
Texas and Washington that he thinks General Powell would make a fine President
and ought to run.

Because both James A. Baker 3d, Mr. Bush's Secretary of State, and Dick Cheney,
his Defense Secretary, decided after some exploratory moves not to run for
President next year, General Powell is looked upon by many Bush associates as
the former President's rightful heir. Among those who have told the general in
telephone conversations that they hope he will run, people close to him said,
are Mr. Baker, Mr. Cheney and two other members of the Bush Cabinet, Jack F.
Kemp and William J. Bennett, who have spoken out for him publicly and could
serve as bridges to the right.

The Bush connection brings other benefits. One of the former President's sons,
George W., is Governor of Texas, the second-most-populous state, and another,
Jeb, is chairman of the Florida straw poll.

Jeb Bush said, "I think he's running." And Charles Kelly Jr., a retired
investment banker who has helped to put together the draft-Powell movement,
added pointedly, "Jeb is a good friend of ours."

General Powell's name is expected to appear on the ballot for the straw poll,
which is likely to attract widespread attention.

Among other important Republicans to whom General Powell has talked, friends
said, are Caspar W. Weinberger, Mr. Reagan's Defense Secretary, who first
spotted General Powell as an officer with promise in the Nixon White House and
helped him advance; Frank C. Carlucci, one of Mr. Reagan's national security
advisers, who brought him home from Germany to act as his deputy; Kenneth L.
Adelman, an arms control expert turned journalist, and Gov. William F. Weld of
Massachusetts, a moderate who backed Gov. Pete Wilson of California for
President until Mr. Wilson pulled out.

Mr. Carlucci, now associated with the Carlyle Group, a Washington
venture-capital firm, said he would support a Powell candidacy if the general
ran. He denied that he was involved in any effort to persuade the general to do
so, but conceded that he had asked friends, like former Gov. Thomas H. Kean of
New Jersey, whom he sat next to at a recent dinner, whether they would help out
if General Powell ran.

Several prominent Democrats, including people who occupied important positions
on the White House staffs of Lyndon B. Johnson and Jimmy Carter, have sent word
as discreetly as possible to General Powell that they would be available to help
in any Powell effort. A Powell aide said, "We are inundated by people,
successful, recognized people, ready to give up their jobs and come aboard."

But first there has to be a train, and there is none yet.

Working the phones from his basement office at home, the general has talked to
Wall Street figures who might help him put together a fund-raising network for a
race.

Primary among them is one of the nation's wealthiest black investors, J. Bruce
Llewellyn, 68, who also happens to be his cousin. Mr. Llewellyn and a group of
associates own the Coca-Cola Bottlers of Philadelphia and until recently owned a
television station in Buffalo and a cable television network in New Jersey.

General Powell talks to him frequently (and speaks as well from time to time
with other members of the sprawling Powell clan, which includes a Federal judge,
a retired Ambassador, a State Department official and several successful
businessmen).

So far, Mr. Llewellyn has been unenthusiastic about a Presidential race.
According to The Los Angeles Times, he told the general to "stay the hell away"
from elective politics and find other ways to serve his country.

But Ronald S. Lauder, an heir to the Estee Lauder cosmetics fortune who served
in the Pentagon and as Ambassador to Austria in the Reagan years, then ran
unsuccessfully for mayor of New York in 1989, is described as much more
enthusiastic about a Presidential race. After conversations between Mr. Lauder
and the general, a friend of Mr. Lauder said Mr. Lauder had pressed for an early
decision and expected to be a major money-raiser if the answer was yes.

Another important Powell booster is Theodore J. Forstmann, a leveraged-buyout
specialist who controls, among other concerns, the company that makes Gulfstream
jets. Mr. Forstmann, who is worth several hundred million dollars, runs an
annual conference at Aspen, Colo., at which General Powell has made major
speeches. When General Powell was in Europe on his book tour, Mr. Forstmann flew
there to meet with him and urge him to make a Presidential announcement soon.

Bill Cosby, the actor, is also a potential money man.

Mr. Kelly said he and his draft-Powell friends had almost completed an important
chore: raising enough money to qualify for Federal matching funds. The
requirement is $5,000 from each of 20 states in contributions of no more than
$250 each by Dec. 1.

"We are now in frequent touch with the candidate and his aides," Mr. Kelly said.
"The restrictions that he had placed on us -- no direct contact, an absolute
noncandidacy -- have evaporated. We have lined up key supporters, some of them
locally well known, in almost every state. But there is no organization per se,
and there won't be until he makes it known that he is going to run."

Nor has General Powell assembled a cadre of technical experts of the kind needed
to mount a modern Presidential campaign. But his chief political operative, Mr.
Duberstein, has talked with several who have sought him out to volunteer their
services, including Ed Goeas, a pollster. Mary Matalin, a prominent campaign
consultant who also has a television talk show, has recently described herself
as a Powell enthusiast.

Several members of the Bush circle, including Robert A. Mosbacher, an
accomplished fund-raiser; Marlin Fitzwater, the former White House press
secretary, and Robert M. Teeter, the pollster, might be available at some point,
although Mr. Teeter denied he had talked with General Powell or prepared a
campaign plan.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 4, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION REVIEW;
The Gay Search for Equality

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 52;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 754 words


"The Question of Equality," deeply felt firsthand accounts of the origins of the
campaign for what has come to be known as gay rights, reaches PBS on Sunday at
10. The opening installment of the four-part series begins in the mid-1960's
with the first national conference, in Washington, of what was then
unfelicitously called the homophile movement. Organized by the Mattachine
Society, it was a reaction to the police harassment, random beatings and general
insults that homosexuals were commonly subject to at the time. The goals of the
new movement were simply safety and respectability.

The first program's title, "Out Rage '69," of course refers to the celebrated
Stonewall riot, when a police raid on a Greenwich Village bar brought five
nights of demonstrations. The pictures, although familiar by now, are still
strong and sometimes funny. One participant tells of New York City's tactical
police being confronted by a high-kicking line of demonstrators: "We are the
Stonewall girls. We wear our hair in curls." And there they are.

The producer, Arthur Dong (last represented on PBS by "Coming Out Under Fire,"
an affecting documentary about homosexuals in the military), punctuates the
recollections with flashing images and jarring sounds, which are sometimes
merely distracting.

The memories are the thing here. Veterans of the early days of the movement note
the influence of the anti-Vietnam War spirit. (The Gay Liberation Front borrowed
its name from the National Liberation Front of Vietnam.) At first the
demonstrations were spontaneous, with little in the way of structure or
leadership; one participant calls them creative madness.

As the movement grew and became more visible, internal tensions showed up. In
particularly interesting passages, the program draws attention to how the
nation's divisions, between radicals and conservatives, whites and blacks,
street people and establishment types, men and women, also divided homosexuals.
In a break from radical elements, who were making common cause with the Black
Panthers and other fringe groups, the Gay Activist Alliance, mostly middle-class
white men, banded together to press officials to do away with repressive laws
against homosexuals.

Tonight's hour ends with the protests in the 1970's against the anti-homosexual
campaign by Anita Bryant, Jerry Falwell and others. "People began coming out of
the closet in droves," says one witnesses.

"Culture Wars," on Nov. 12, reports on the the 1990 murder of a homosexual in
Queens; the commotion caused by Marlon Riggs's PBS documentary, "Tongues
Untied," and the fight over an amendment to the Oregon Constitution that would
have declared homosexuality to be "unnatural and perverse." A week later, the
third program, "Hollow Liberty," returns to the issue of homosexuals in the
armed forces. The series, presented by the Independent Television Service,
concludes on Nov. 26 with "Generation Q," about the part now being played in the
movement by teen-agers.

'Forbidden City'

'The Great Within'

DSC, tomorrow night at 9

This sumptuously photographed dramatization of goings on in the Imperial Palace
in Beijing in the 17th and 18th centuries begins what the Discovery Channel
promises will be a season's worth of programs in cooperation with Chinese
Central Television. The arrangement promises more in the way of colorful history
than of contemporary issues.

Using their access to palaces and to archives, the producers have staged
elaborate re-creations of the highly ceremonial operations of government under
Emperor Kangxi, who reigned from 1662 to 1722. That means fancily got-up actors
and extras bowing and bustling, while Rod Steiger delivers the narration. There
is quite a bit here about the eunuchs and concubines who served the Son of
Heaven. The information is further spiced with details of disarray in the royal
family and even a pleasant glimpse of a concubine in the buff. At moments you
may think you're watching a marriage of "National Geographic" and "Entertainment
Tonight."

THE QUESTION OF EQUALITY
Out Rage '69
PBS, tomorrow night at 10
(Channel 13 in New York)

Arthur Dong, producer, director and writer; Alan Berube, story consultant; Susan
Levene, associate producer. Produced by Testing the Limits for the Independent
Television Service.

WITH: Joan Nestle, Randy Wicker, Sylvia Rivera, Candice Boyce, Martha Shelly,
Kiyoshi Kuromiya, Jim Fouratt, Bob Kohler, Karla Jay, Michela Griffo, Ronald
Ballard, Marc Rubin and Rich Wandel.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THIS WEEK;
Indochine Again

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 26;  Column 2;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Saskia Reeves, front, and Jacqueline McKenzie star in "Traps,"
which was filmed on location in Vietnam. It opens on Friday. (Filmopolis
Pictures)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS IN BRIEF: FICTION

BYLINE: By SUSANNAH HUNNEWELL

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 23;  Column 4;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 243 words



GOODNIGHT SILKY SULLIVAN
By Laurie Alberts.
University of Missouri,
paper, $16.95.

In her first collection of short stories, Laurie Alberts writes with impressive
ease about American drifters in New England, New Mexico and even the former
Soviet Union, where two of her six stories are set. Her protagonists include a
traveling student, the girlfriend of a Vietnam veteran, a small-time cocaine
dealer and a stockbroker who goes to work at a sawmill. The trait that links
them is their inability to imagine the future, blinded by their punishing pasts.
In the title story, for instance, an aimless young woman recalls her abusive
father; the only sign of tenderness he showed her as a child was the peculiar
nickname he gave her, Silky Sullivan: "It's the name of a race horse," he
stiffly explains. Ms. Alberts writes about intimate tragedies in a light style
that is engaging, although it occasionally veers toward the trite. And be warned
that the first story, "Between Revolutions: Holiday, 1982," about a
disillusioned Russian who has an overly romanticized picture of a visiting
American, sounds inexplicably as if it were translated from the Russian; this
story does little to prepare readers for the breezy narratives that follow.
Nonetheless, it does include this worthy line: In the Soviet Union, says a
Russian character, "sausage is of such importance, we prefer to think of
phalluses as sausage symbols."   SUSANNAH HUNNEWELL

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

V.A. Moves To Upgrade Services For Women

BYLINE: By ROBERTA HERSHENSON

SECTION: Section 13WC;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 983 words

DATELINE: MONTROSE


VERONICA REILLY expected a long career in the military before a routine dental
visit three years ago disrupted her plans. A former marine, she was stationed in
Japan, when she was told her four wisdom teeth and another tooth needed to be
pulled. The procedure, performed by a military oral surgeon, led to problems
that have left the 27-year-old Ms. Reilly in constant pain. Plagued by
migraines, blackouts and depression, she was finally referred last spring to the
Franklin Delano Roosevelt Veterans Affairs Hospital here.

Although Castle Point Veterans Affairs Hospital in Beacon in Putnam County is
closer to home for Ms. Reilly, who lives in Florida, N.Y., the hospital here,
with extensive mental-health services, is better equipped to care for her.She
has also benefited from the hospital's recently begun initiative to become more
amenable to female veterans.

Ms. Reilly's medical needs can be attended to in a new clinic for women that is
staffed by women in a newly refurbished and private part of the hospital. She
not only meets regularly with Dr. Yael Margolin-Rice, a psychologist in the
outpatient mental health clinic, but also takes part in a women's therapy group
for depression and other service-related ailments. Less easy to see but of
central importance is the hospital's changing attitude: any problems women in
the military have had as a result of their sex are now given serious attention
here.

The changes are meant to soften the 45-year-old hospital, which was built in the
aftermath of World War II. "A lot of women veterans are out there who perceive
the veterans hospital as not a place to get health care," said Gerry Culliton, a
spokesman for the hospital. "The perception is that the V.A. is Government, that
it is like the military -- all male. As a result, there are a lot of women
veterans who are unidentified people and are suffering in silence."

A census conducted by the Department of Veterans Affairs in 1990 found that 1.2
million of 27.2 million veterans in the country -- or 4.3 percent -- were women.
In 1992, however, only 2 percent of the patients treated at Veterans Affairs
hospitals were women. That year, Congress passed the Women Veterans Health
Programs Act, appropriating $7.5 million in 1993 for services like sexual trauma
counseling and an expanded preventive gynecological program.

Mr. Culliton said that the hospital's recent efforts on behalf of women were
being paid for with other funds and would not be affected by any cutbacks in the
current Federal budget. The changes range from amenities like cosmetics in the
hospital canteen and a button recognizing the contribution of female veterans to
an effort to recognize and treat sexual trauma resulting from rape, harassment
or domestic violence.

Dr. Loreta R. Ordona, the director of medical clinics here, is among staff
members who are now expected to ask questions about sexual trauma when taking a
woman's medical history. Dr. Ordona sees female patients in a softly painted
examination room hung with watercolors of flowers and supplied with a variety of
posters and pamphlets relating to women's health.

Dr. Margolin-Rice, who serves as the hospital's sexual trauma counselor, said
that like male veterans, many women suffered from post traumatic stress disorder
or P.T.S.D. "I've yet to meet a nurse who'd served in Vietnam who doesn't have
symptoms of P.T.S.D.," she said. "These were women in their 20's who spent
several years holding men's hands while they died, and nobody said, 'Hey, you
did a great job.' They don't come in -- they feel the hospital belongs to men.
But it belongs to them, too. That's why we painted the clinic pink."

Nancy Cornell, a hospital chaplain, repaired teletypewriters in the Army for
three years before becoming ordained as a Methodist minister and re-enlisting.
"I saw so much struggle and pain that I wanted to give three more years," she
said. "But I had to deal with being a woman in the military. It was such a male
environment. We are more nurturing, more on the heart level."

She said that even as a clergywoman, she was expected to bark at men to get them
back to their duties. "I didn't want to become what I saw these people
becoming," she said, explaining why she left active duty. "I wore a captain's
bars and a bar with a cross. I couldn't do this and that at the same time."

Women suffered not only from isolation in the military but also from
misunderstanding, she said. "If they were too macho, they were called lesbians
and if they were too soft -- 'Oh, you poor thing,' " she said.

Dr. Margolin-Rice, who serves on the hospital's Women Veterans Committee with
Ms. Cornell, added: "Nurses in Vietnam would work excruciatingly hard. Then they
were expected to party, and if they didn't, they were called lesbians."

The committee is sponsoring a performance of "A Piece of My Heart," a play by
Shirley Lauro about women who served in Vietnam, on Friday at 8 P.M. at the
Paramount Center for the Arts in Peekskill. Proceeds from the play will benefit
the hospital's Womens Veterans Fund. Tickets are $12 and can be reserved by
calling 739-2333.

Patients at the hospital loaned their uniforms and other items for the play and
also helped Dr. Margolin-Rice, who was serving as production manager, choose
music of the era. The hospital print shop designed the fliers and programs, and
the play's director, Martha Goche, is in charge of the supply department at the
hospital.

Dr. Margolin-Rice said she hoped the play, which had a successful run in
Manhattan several years ago, would reach people "who don't usually think about
veterans."

She continued: "When you hear these stories day in and day out, you feel you
want to bear witness and let the world know. I can't bear the fact that there
are so many women out there who are so traumatized after 25 years and haven't
gotten help."

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Items for women in the canteen at Franklin Delano Roosevelt
Veterans Affairs Hospital. (Roberta Hershenson for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Parties Wage Crucial Battle In Erie County

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 41; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Second Front

LENGTH: 1195 words

DATELINE: BUFFALO, Nov. 4


Last November, cold and blue-collar Erie County joined the upstate stampede that
crushed then-Gov. Mario M. Cuomo and, so the logic went, the hopes for Democrats
outside of New York City.

Now, if the polls are to be trusted, a most unlikely Democrat in these political
times -- an eight-year incumbent who raised local taxes 67 percent and who was
abandoned by his own party this fall -- looks like he will run away with a third
term as Erie County Executive this Tuesday.

The candidate, Dennis T. Gorski, is far ahead despite having a persona one
person described as "like wallpaper drying" and the best efforts of the same
political strategists who won for Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and Gov. George E.
Pataki with a proven Democrat-killing formula: Paint them all as too liberal.

The race for control of this important swing county, a beachhead for Democrats
in statewide races for more than two decades, has been watched closely by
Republicans and Democrats across the state. Both parties, particularly the
Republicans, have worked doggedly to win. Mr. Pataki has stumped here for the
Republican challenger, Lucian J. Greco, as has the party's Presidential
frontrunner, Senator Bob Dole, who posed for pictures at a fundraiser last month
in downtown Buffalo as Senator D'Amato signed copies of his book as party
favors.

So the questions are: If Mr. Gorski does indeed win, does it mean the Democrats
are not dead and that the Republican revolution here was only skin-deep? Or is
it simply a quirk of a county that is mostly Democratic, but conservative enough
to vote for Republicans like former Representative Jack Kemp, and his successor,
Bill Paxon?

"If it says anything statewide," Mr. Gorski said a bit tentatively this week,
"it says that Democrats can win, and win with conviction, in the face of
Republican state and national interests."

Some local Democrats are willing to push things further -- maybe too far, given
that this campaign, which was nasty on both sides, focused largely on local
politics and personalities.

"Very simple, even you from New York can understand it," Stanley Stachowski, a
79-year-old fixture in the city's Democratic politics, attempted to explain.
"All you have to do is look at Washington. Newt Gingrich and Dole are winning
the election for the Democrats. They are hurting every person in America."

Local Republicans, who say they have not yet conceded the race, are naturally
seeking to play down the election's significance, despite their hard-fought
efforts in a contest where the candidates have spent a combined total of more
than $1 million, high by local standards.

"It is what it is," said Michael P. Brady, a spokesman for the Erie County
Republican Party. "It's not a referendum on anything. It's a race for County
Executive."

There is every indication that Mr. Greco, 45, the supervisor of the fast-growing
Buffalo suburb of Lancaster, has a nearly impossible job if he is to win on
Tuesday. A poll conducted for The Buffalo News, to be released on Sunday, shows
the race not even close: Mr. Gorski, 51, a career politician described by his
own people as a bland technocrat, is shown leading with 68.6 percent of the
vote, with Mr. Greco at 27.9 percent. The poll of 750 likely voters was
conducted earlier this week by Buffalo Survey and Research.

And whatever its ultimate meaning, the race has produced a pocketful of
tantalizing ambiguities that do not necessarily reflect well on either party.

After the rout of Democrats in Erie County, the state and across the nation, the
race began for Mr. Gorski without much optimism. Mr. Gorski, who lost a race for
Congress in 1992, was abandoned as unelectable by the county leadership, who
backed the Erie County Clerk, David J. Swarts during the primary this September.
Many observers have said that Mr. Gorski was able to rejuvenate his image only
because he ran during the primary as an anti-boss outsider, in effect, against
the Democratic Party.

Since then, Mr. Gorski and the little-known Mr. Greco have attacked each other
mercilessly in a television and radio campaign that has been wearing on even the
most patient people around Buffalo.

Hiring the Philadelphia media consultant Shorr & Associates, who have gained
notoriety for negative advertising, Mr. Gorski began hammering away at Mr. Greco
for his work in the budget office of the former County Executive Edward J.
Rutkowski, a Republican whose popularity plummeted after a $75 million deficit
opened right after his re-election.

"He is running his 1987 campaign against Ed Rutkowski through me," Mr. Greco
said. "It's all he has."

Mr. Greco, who has touted his record of cutting taxes and recruiting jobs during
his tenure as Lancaster Supervisor, fired back in a way that some here say may
have hurt him -- and may represent a setback for a vastly successful brand of
Republican warfare.

Giving the back seat to his local media advisors, Mr. Greco turned to one of
Senator D'Amato's political strategists, Kieran Mahoney, and the media
consultants Russo, Marsh & Associates of Sacramento, Calif. Russo Marsh was
responsible for the devastating, and often very funny, ads against both Mr.
Cuomo and former Attorney General Robert Abrams, who ran against Senator D'Amato
in 1992, that ended with the trademark "too liberal" tag.

But when they tried the line "Too liberal for Erie County" on Mr. Gorski, many
observers say it hit a false note. Mr. Gorski has the backing of the state's
Conservative Party, is a decorated Vietnam veteran and has made welfare reform
the centerpiece of his campaign (stealing a page, his oponents charge, from the
Republican playbook).

"When I saw that, I nearly fell out of my seat," said Dr. Gerald M. Goldhaber, a
pollster who has worked for candidates from both parties. "Gorski is one of the
most conservative politicians in Erie County."

Polls show that Mr. Gorski scored points by campaigning against Mr. D'Amato, who
is not popular here, calling the Senator and Mr. Greco "two peas in a pod." He
also won a major boost when he was endorsed by one of Erie County's most popular
and conservative politicians, Alfreda W. Slominski, the diminutive, white-haired
former County Comptroller, a Republican known locally simply as Alfreda.

While it is unclear whether Mr. Gorski's aparent re-election bodes well for
Democrats, it unquestionably breaks a remarkable string of successes engineered
by the county's Republican leader, Assemblyman Thomas M. Reynolds, who has been
instrumental in recent years in electing a congressman and a county comptroller,
and in swinging Erie County for the Republicans last year.

"I don't know if you can say Gorski is a conservative Democrat and therefore
Democrats around the country should nominate conservatives so they can be more
effective or successful," said Mr. Goldhaber, adding that Mr. Gorski was
ultimately able to make the case he had performed well in his eight years as
county executive.

"You've got an unknown Republican who to this day is unknown and you've got a
campaign team that was changed midstream," he said. "It's the wrong candidate
with the wrong team for the wrong time."

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

COVER STORY;
From the Man Behind 'Magnum, P.I.,' 'Top Gun' Meets 'A Few Good Men'

BYLINE: By NEAL KARLEN

SECTION: Section 12; Page 4; Column 1; Television

LENGTH: 1114 words


Sure, David James Elliott says he's mighty impressed by all the high-tech
gewgaws and military pyrotechnics that chew up much of the scenery of "JAG," the
new NBC Saturday night action-adventury series in which he stars as a hunky Navy
lawyer investigating nefarious doings around battleships, submarines, cockpits
and distant foreign embassies. "The hardware," he admits, "is kind of a co-star
in the show."

As Lieut. Harmon Rabb of JAG - the Judge Advocate General's office - it is Mr.
Elliott's job to sound knowing on screen about the destructive capabilities of
everything from Tomcat fighter planes to Shadow torpedoes. Yet Mr. Elliott, clad
in dress whites in his trailer on the universal Studios lot after finishing the
filming of another scene, says that what astounded him most as he prepared for
his role wasn't all the sate-of-the-art weaponry. Rather, he continues, it was
the intricacies of military protocol.

"I've been studying all these books on etiquette," the 35-year-old actor says,
rising to grab a volume. "Did you know that if you're invited to a superior
officer's house for dinner, you don't stay more than half an hour after coffee
is served?"

Explosions and attention to military detail are part of the reason that "JAG,"
after only a handful of episodes, already ranks as a prime hope at NBC for a
rating success. A hybrid of "Top Gun"-style technology and "A Few Good Men"
whodunitry, "JAG" also offers Mr. Elliott's matinee-idol looks and a healthy
dollop of sexual tension, largely in the form of Tracey Needham, who plays
Rabb's fellow JAG investigator.

Mix in some humor, unlikely guest cameos and topical references, and this just
might work. Faced off against CBS's well-established "Dr. Quinn: Medicine
Woman," "JAG" has already drawn even in share points and is winning the key
demographic of adults between the ages of 25 and 54. "It's performing very
well," says David Nevins, NBC's vice president for prime-time series. "The idea
was to do a smart adult action show that viewers could take seriously. We wanted
a show that would appeal to men, but which also had strong female stories to
people could watch this instead of the VCR on Saturday night."

To that end, Mr. Elliott vows he's not out to carve his lead character as
one-dimensional macho superhero. "Harmon is complicated, not a cartoonlike
Indiana Jones," he says. "He has a lot of levels, which means there will be a
lot to unravel down the road."

There was even a lot to unravel in the show's pilot episode, when Mr. Elliott
was introduced as the son of a hero, a pilot lost over Vietnam. Having blown his
own flying career because of a night-vision problem, Lieut. Rabb is sent to an
aircraft carrier in the Adratic to investigate the mysterious death of a female
fighter pilot who somehow fell overboard. The underlying topic was women in
combat, and as Rabb got to the bottom of the mystery, the show nudged the issues
from every direction.

The Navy did not cooperate with the producers in that pilot episode on a
controversial subject; since then they have been allowing "JAG" to use some
stock footage on a script-by-script basis. Meanwhile, later episodes have
included story lines revolving around such up -to-the-minute topics as computer
terrorism and the Shining Path guerrillas of Peru.

That said, the program is not "This Week With David Brinkley." Rather, "JAG" is
the latest creation of Donald P. Bellisario, the same man who came up with
"Magnum P.I." and "Quantum Leap." Those shows made the careers of Tom Selleck
and Scott Bakula, and Mr. Bellisario says he will be shocked if David Elliott
doesn't enjoy the same kind of success.

"For a leading man for 'JAG,' I was looking for someone in the Selleck mode," he
says. "I needed a man who was very strong yet very vulnerable, but who also had
a sense of humor. Strangely, both David and Tom are 6-foot-4-inches, and both
were 35 when they started these series. David has all the equipment to go on and
be great."

The junk factor aside, the show also benefits from being able to borrow footage
from the film library of Paramount, which originally pitched the show to NBC on
behalf of Mr. Bellisario. Thanks to the arrangement, the producers have been
able to take high-quality action footage from movies that include "The Hunt for
Red October," "Top Gun" and "Flight of the Intruder" and splice it into their
plots seamlessly.

Another novelty employed by the producers is the frequent use of celebrities and
look-alikes in the show's background. In the "Jag" pilot, Jay Leno appeared on a
television screen doing a "Tonight Show" monologue that included jokes about the
key fictional character of Rabb's investigation. In later shows, the real Oliver
North and a pseudo-President and Mrs. Clinton made appearances.

Now, 100 yards from Mr. Elliott's trailer, technician on a set meant to resemble
a South American village are preparing an ambush that in the final cut will
include action footage taken from the film "Clear and Present Danger." As a
tramful of vacationers on the Universal Studios tour watch from afar,
bullet-riddled limousines race around the town square for several takes.

Mr. Elliott explains: "In this show I'm investigating an accidental shooting by
a marine at a Peruvian embassy. In the last episode I looked into the death of a
friend aboard an F-14 aircraft. In that script my character was more personally
involved. I like that."

This is to be expected, perhaps, from a classically trained actor from Toronto
who studied for two years at the Stratford Shakespeare Festival on Ontario.
After moving to Los Angeles in 1990, Mr. Elliott made the guest-appearance
rounds on "Doogie Howser, M.D.," His big break was a starring role in the series
"The Untouchables," but still he fretted that he was wasting his training and
talent. "I almost went back to the theater," he says, "because out here
everything seemd to be about getting the job, not the work itself."

And then he pauses. "But with this show I've found my muse." In the guise of
superhunk star of a Saturday night serial?

Mr. Elliott laughs, and claims to have been working so hard on the show that
he's not even aware of his sudden celebrity credentials. "I had dinner recently
with Scott Bakula," he remembers, "and he told me how strange it is at first on
a new show. You'll be working and working, and then you'll finally take a day
off. Suddenly, you realize that everybody knows you. It's really weird, but I
don't even know that yet. I'm here 14 hours a day, 7 days a week, and I don't
really see humanity.

They've been seeing him, though, and so far most thumbs have been up.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: David James Elliott as Lieut. Harmon Rabb, a Navy lawyer, in
"JAG." (NBC) (pg. 4); "JAG" has used action film from "Top Gun," top and center,
and "The Hunt for Red October." (pg. 5) (Photographs by George Hatch/Paramound);
Tracey Needham in NBC's "JAG." (pg. 19) (NBC)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ASSASSINATION IN ISRAEL;
Yitzhak Rabin, 73, an Israeli Soldier Turned Prime Minister and Peacemaker

BYLINE: By MARILYN BERGER

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2885 words


Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, who was shot dead yesterday at age 73,
was a soldier turned statesman who led his country into uncharted territory to
make peace with the Palestinians and put an end to the wars, bloodshed and
terrorism that had plagued his country since its founding.

It was General Rabin, the Commander in Chief of Israel's armed forces in 1967,
who had led the lightning strike that captured broad swaths of Arab territories.
Twenty-six years later, on Sept. 13, 1993, it was Prime Minister Rabin who
reluctantly extended his hand to Yasir Arafat, leader of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization, to put a symbolic seal of approval on an accord that
would lead to the return of much of that territory and to Palestinian self-rule
on the Israeli-occupied West Bank and the Gaza Strip.

In an extraordinary ceremony on the South Lawn of the White House, one that few
had ever expected to see, Mr. Rabin came face-to-face with Mr. Arafat -- the man
who had been reviled for decades by Israelis as the mastermind behind one attack
after another on their people, the man with whom the following year he and his
Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, would share the Nobel Peace Prize.

"The time for peace has come," Mr. Rabin declared. "We, the soldiers who have
returned from battles stained with blood, we who have seen our relatives and
friends killed before our eyes, . . . we who have come from a land where parents
bury their children, we who have fought against you, the Palestinians -- we say
today in a loud and clear voice: Enough of blood and tears. Enough."

Speaking as much to his own people as to the astonished world that was watching,
Mr. Rabin explained in mournful tones how painful and how necessary it was for
Israel to take this step.

"It's not so easy -- either for myself as a soldier in Israel's war nor for the
people of Israel. . . . It is certainly not easy for the families of the victims
of the war's violence, terror, whose pain will never heal, for the many
thousands who defended our lives and their own and have even sacrificed their
lives for our own. For them this ceremony has come too late."

But he said Israel was not seeking revenge. It was seeking peace.

The tragedy was that some of Mr. Rabin's own people were seeking revenge. As Mr.
Rabin came closer to achieving his goal of peace, a wide schism opened within
the Israeli populace. Much of the bitterness of those opposed to making peace
with Israel's historic enemies was directed at Mr. Rabin, and he became the
soldier who paid the ultimate price to make peace.

He had been unrelenting in his drive to institutionalize that peace. Only a
month ago, Mr. Rabin took part in another White House ceremony to mark the
beginning of another withdrawal from the West Bank. This time the handshakes
with Mr. Arafat were less reluctant and the peace process was well established.

A New Generation Brings a New Vision

Mr. Rabin was the only one of Israel's eight Prime Ministers to have been born
in the land of Palestine, a Sabra who had not experienced the long history of
attacks on European Jewry and the horror of the Holocaust. With his election,
Israel turned over its leadership from the fathers to the sons and he appealed
for a new vision. On taking office in 1992 for his second term as Prime
Minister, Mr. Rabin said it was time for Israel to jettison its siege mentality.

"No longer is it true that the whole world is against us," he said. He accepted
his election as a mandate to make peace. One of his first steps was to put a
freeze on all new construction in the occupied territories.

For their part, the Palestinians were ready to deal. With the end of the cold
war and the collapse of the Soviet Union, the P.L.O. was deprived of diplomatic,
financial and military support. At the same time, the P.L.O. was reeling from
the loss of contributions from wealthy Arab states angered by Mr. Arafat's
support of Iraq during the 1991 Persian Gulf war.

To achieve agreement with the Palestinians, Mr. Rabin followed the lead of
Foreign Minister Peres, a Labor Party colleague and longtime political rival.
They had fought for decades over the leadership of the party and the country,
but they joined forces in the search for peace. To the opposition that branded
Mr. Rabin a "traitor," the Prime Minister replied that peace must be made with
enemies, not with friends.

Mr. Rabin had been at the center of the major events in his nation's history for
five decades. In 1948, he fought in the siege of Jerusalem during Israel's war
of independence. In 1967, as Chief of Staff of the Israeli Army for the three
years before the June war, he brought to fighting strength the formidable force
that rolled over three Arab armies in six days. Later, as Ambassador to the
United States he helped assure Israel a steady supply of sophisticated weapons.
In his first term as Prime Minister he negotiated the crucial and lasting
disengagement of Israeli and Egyptian forces in the Sinai, which paved the way
for the Camp David accords. And as Defense Minister, in 1986, he presided over
the withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanon although he continued to respond
with force to terrorist attacks.

Never Charismatic, But a Man to Be Trusted

As a boy growing up in Palestine, Mr. Rabin wanted to be an agronomist, and
attended the Kadoorie Agricultural School in Galilee where he won the High
Commissioner's Gold Medal as the best student in Palestine. But like many
patriotic young people of his time he gave up his childhood ambition and joined
the Palmach, the elite strike force of the Haganah underground Jewish army, saw
action in World War II, and developed into a brilliant military tactician.

He also developed into a politician. Israelis trusted him for his single-minded
devotion to the good of the country and he was repeatedly asked to accept high
government positions. But he was the antithesis of the convivial party man.
Taciturn, introspective, controlled, intensely private, he had almost no close
advisers and reached decisions independently, often announcing them in an
authoritarian manner that alienated the party leadership. He spoke in a deep
monotone that made his public personality seem colorless, and even in private he
was almost devoid of humor.

Mr. Rabin was born in Jerusalem on March 1, 1922. His father, Nehemiah, who came
from a poor family in Ukraine, had escaped from Czarist Russia and gone to
Palestine by way of Chicago and St. Louis.In Palestine, he became a trade union
organizer in the labor movement of David Ben-Gurion. His mother, Rosa Cohen,
born to a well-to-do family in Gomel, Russia, was active in politics and became
the dominant influence on the young Rabin. Theirs was a home where young Yitzhak
was taught that public service was a duty and where, he remembered, "It was a
disgrace to speak about money."

He was 7 years old when Arabs began attacking Jewish settlements. Later, during
the 1936 Arab riots and general strike, he was at the Khadouri school where he
was trained in the use of arms by Yigal Allon, who was later to become his
commander and his mentor. Five years later, during World War II, Moshe Dayan,
then a young commander in the Haganah, invited Mr. Rabin to join the Palmach. As
part of the British invasion of Greater Syria, which was in the hands of the
Axis powers, Mr. Rabin was sent across the border. The youngest in his unit, it
was his job to climb up telephone poles to cut the wires so the collaborationist
Vichy French forces could not call up reinforcements.

In June 1945, just after the end of the war in Europe, Mr. Rabin commanded a
daring raid to liberate about 200 illegal Jewish immigrants held by the British
in a camp at Athlit, on the Mediterranean just south of Haifa. The exploit was
said to be the prototype for a similar raid in the novel "Exodus," and Mr. Rabin
the prototype for Ari Ben Canaan, the hero, played in the movie version by Paul
Newman. But the shy Mr. Rabin always insisted that he was not the fictional Ari
Ben Canaan.

Mr. Rabin was arrested by the British and imprisoned for six months in a camp in
Gaza. Soon after he was released the British turned the problem of Palestine
over to the United Nations, which, in 1947, voted for partition into a Jewish
and an Arab state.

The Arabs attacked, and as hostilities intensified between the Jews and the
Arabs, Mr. Allon, then the commander of the Palmach, appointed Mr. Rabin his
deputy. During the 1948 Israeli war of independence, Mr. Rabin commanded the
Har-El Brigade, a makeshift unit that failed to take Jerusalem for Israel but
kept open the vital supply lines between Jerusalem and the sea. Later, with the
rank of colonel, Mr. Rabin served on the southern front against Egyptian forces.

When Mr. Rabin disclosed in his 1979 memoir his role in forcing 50,000 Arab
civilians to leave their homes at gunpoint during the war of independence, there
was a furor in Israel, where officials had long denied that Arab civilians were
pushed out of their lands.

In the middle of the war, on Aug. 23, 1948, Mr. Rabin married Leah Schlossberg,
who had joined the Palmach and served in his battalion. They had two children, a
son, Yuval and a daughter, Dalia, and three grandchildren. They all survive him.

Mr. Rabin's first venture into diplomacy came when he was sent to the island of
Rhodes as part of the delegation to the Israeli-Egyptian armistice talks in
1949.

In 1953, having finally committed himself to a career in the army, Mr. Rabin
went to England to study at the British Staff College at Camberley. Back home he
went on to hold a series of high posts in the Israeli Army, mainly involving
manpower training, and was named chief of staff in 1964.

He became Israel's top expert on military matters. Even as he rose through the
ranks, he became known as the man who who knew more than the generals.
Eventually, he became a general himself, a lieutenant-general.

The Army that fought the six-day war in 1967 was essentially Mr. Rabin's army.
Shab'tai Teveth, professor of history at Tel Aviv University, said, "It was the
army he trained, planned, built and armed in his three years as chief of staff."
But, he added, "There his glory ends."

His "glory" ended when, on the eve of the fighting, Mr. Rabin suffered a nervous
collapse.

The Terrible Burden Of Leadership in War

In his memoir, Mr. Rabin wrote of going to see Mr. Ben-Gurion, then in
retirement.  He went in search of encouragement but instead got a dressing-down.
Mr. Ben-Gurion, he wrote, scolded him for mobilizing the reserves after
President Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt closed the Straits of Tiran.  "You have
led the state into a grave situation," Mr. Ben-Gurion told him. "We must not go
to war. We are isolated. You bear the responsibility."

Mr. Ben-Gurion's words reverberated in his ears as he worked himself into a
state of physical and mental exhaustion. He recovered in time to carry out his
duties during the war, but some observers thought he was not functioning
normally and was only being "propped up" so that the troops and the people would
not lose confidence in their leader.

Whatever the source of Mr. Rabin's difficulties, the results achieved by his
army were astonishingly clear. At the end of the war Hebrew University conferred
on him an honorary doctorate. In a modest, occasionally poetic speech, Mr. Rabin
said he accepted the honor not for himself but as the representative of an army
of civilians who had never been trained for conquest, of battle-hardened
paratroopers who had leaned on the stones of the Wailing Wall and wept at the
capture of the Old City of Jerusalem. He spoke about his army, but perhaps even
more about himself.

"Our Sabra youth, and most certainly our soldiers," he said, "do not tend to be
sentimental and they shrink from any public show of feeling. But the strain of
battle, the anxiety which preceded it, and the sense of salvation and of direct
confrontation with Jewish history itself cracked the shell of hardness and
shyness and released wellsprings of emotion and stirrings of the spirit."

In 1968, Mr. Rabin was appointed Ambassador to the United States, where he
became known as an effective advocate for Israel and a master at procuring
sophisticated American weapons. In his five years as Ambassador he developed a
close relationship with Henry A. Kissinger, President Richard M. Nixon's
national security adviser and later his Secretary of State. Mr. Kissinger called
on him for intelligence about troop movements in the Middle East and even
consulted him on Vietnam.

Shortly after he returned to Israel in 1973, Mr. Rabin entered national politics
for the first time. Then, on Yom Kippur, while the country was in the middle of
an election campaign, Syria and Egypt launched a surprise attack. The country's
leaders -- Prime Minister Golda Meir and her Minister of Defense, Mr. Dayan --
were held responsible for the country's lack of preparedness in that October
war, but the Labor Party won enough votes to form a new Government. Mr. Rabin
won in his first attempt at election and was given the post of Minister of
Labor.

But within a month of forming her Cabinet, Mrs. Meir resigned and the party
turned to Mr. Rabin, who had been out of power at the time of the war and was
therefore untainted by the heavy casualties.

Diplomatic Departures, And a Final Legacy

In 1974, Mr. Rabin became Israel's fifth Prime Minister and, at 52, its
youngest.  "The time has come," he said, "for the sons of the founders of the
state to take over their role."

Mr. Rabin became the first Israeli Prime Minister to make an official visit to
West Germany. He also said he met secretly with King Hussein of Jordan six times
in an unsuccessful effort to open peace negotiations with him. His Government
weathered the Arab oil embargo and the skyrocketing prices of oil, and
negotiated a second Sinai disengagement with the Egyptians, but only after
incurring the wrath of Mr. Kissinger when it turned down one of his early
proposals. The Secretary of State returned to Washington in March 1975 and
persuaded President Ford to undertake a "reassessment" of American policy toward
Israel, a move seen as a threat to withhold arms shipments. Mr. Rabin had been
ready to negotiate what he called "a piece of land for a piece of peace," but he
believed the plan Mr. Kissinger brought back during his shuttle trips between
Cairo and Jerusalem demanded maximum Israeli territorial concessions in exchange
for minimal Egyptian political concessions.

Mr. Schiff, of the newspaper Haaretz, said that Mr. Rabin had been "absolutely
right to say 'no' to the Americans," and in doing so to win in the long run. "It
caused a rift between the Egyptians and the Syrians. This was as important a
cornerstone on the road to Camp David as the Yom Kippur War."

Five months later he accepted what he called a "risk for peace" and signed an
Egyptian-Israeli disengagement agreement.

During his term as Prime Minister, Mr. Rabin faced down terrorists who hijacked
an Air France plane en route from Tel Aviv to Paris. At first, he was seen as
weak because he waited several days before dispatching an assault group to
Entebbe, Uganda, where the plane and almost 100 Israeli citizens were being held
hostage. When he finally approved a military operation and, when the daring raid
succeeded, he was hailed as a hero.

But in 1977, his image was damaged when an Israeli newspaper disclosed that he
and his wife had violated currency laws by maintaining bank accounts in the
United States after he had returned home. At first he lied about how much money
was in the accounts and, finally, he was forced to step down, opening the way
for the victory of Menachem Begin and the Likud party. Mr. Rabin accepted
responsibility for the bank accounts, which had been used mainly by his wife.

The Rabins paid a fine imposed by an Israeli court, but six months after Mr.
Rabin resigned, the currency regulations were rescinded.

Mr. Rabin bounced back from the scandal not because he was a skilled politician,
but because he was not a politician at all. He returned to government as
Minister of Defense in a Labor-Likud national unity coalition that presided over
the Israeli pullout from Lebanon. His was the policy of the "iron fist,"
promising swift retaliation for guerrilla raids against Israelis withdrawing
from southern Lebanon.

Sitting in his office at the Defense Ministry one evening in 1987, he looked
back at his life with satisfaction tinged with disappointment. His
disappointment, he said, was in what he saw as a loss of national spirit, the
failure of the creators of the state to pass on their sense of commitment. Of
his most satisfying moment he had no doubt -- the liberation and unification of
Jerusalem in 1967.

But there was more, a legacy delivered that day in 1993 when he led the country
to come to terms with the Palestinians, "to live together on the same soil in
the same land."

He acknowledged the risk. But in going to Washington to endorse the agreement,
he said, "We have come to try to put an end to the hostilities so that our
children, our children's children, will no longer experience the painful cost of
war."

NAME: Yitzhak Rabin

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Yitzhak Rabin, 1922--1995 (Camera Press); 1948 -- Rabin, then a
lieutenant colonel in the Israeli Army, with his wife, Leah, during the first
Arab-Israeli war.; 1967 -- As Chief of Staff of the Israeli Army during the
Six-Day War, Rabin was welcomed after his troops captured East Jerusalem.; 1974
-- Rabin took his seat as Prime Minister after succeeding Golda Meir.; 193 --
Rabin and Yasir Arafat shok hands on the White House lawn after signing their
historic peace agreement. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 843 words



International A3-13

ISRAEL IN MOURNING

Stunned Israelis by the hundreds of thousands paid final respects to their
fallen leader, Yitzhak Rabin, lighting candles where he was slain, praying at
the Western Wall and filing past his coffin. A1

A SOMBER NEW DAY

After a long night of television bulletins and fitful sleep, Israelis said they
were only now awakening to what seemed unthinkable. A1

EVOLUTION OF YITZHAK RABIN

Before he became Prime Minister in 1992, many around the world knew Mr. Rabin
mainly as a gruff old soldier. But in the last few years, his ideas about peace
with the Palestinians underwent a remarkable transformation. A1

Yasir Arafat will be conspicuously absent from the funeral. A10

Acquaintances call the suspected killer a man with two faces. A11

Acting Prime Minister Shimon Peres faces a difficult task. A11

Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza express mixed feelings. A11

Tangible consequences of the peace accords were just being felt. A13

Mr. Rabin was the Israeli leader U.S. officials trusted most. A12

New York Jews ponder murder of Israeli leader by another Jew. A13

Reaction followed political fault lines across the Mideast. A13

POLISH PRESIDENT'S COMEBACK

Fighting for a second term as President, Lech Walesa staged a remarkable
comeback in the first round of the election, gaining enough votes to face a
former Communist in a runoff, voter surveys showed. A3

ITALIAN POLITICIAN TIED TO MURDER

Former Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti of Italy, already on trial for collusion
with the Mafia, has now been ordered to face a second trial on charges of
complicity in the 1979 slaying of an Italian journalist.  A3

DIFFICULTY FOR BOSNIAN SERB

A draft Bosnian constitution would bar the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan
Karadzic, from elective office and apparently open the way for his arrest for
war crimes. A6

American journalist captured by Bosnian Serbs is well. A7

FAMILIES BACK G.I.'S HELD IN JAPAN

For three young Americans, joining the military was a way out of their
small-town lives. Now that they face charges in a rape case in Japan, their
families insist that they must be innocent. A8

VIETNAMESE WIDOW'S TALE

Robert S. McNamara's trip to Vietnam conjures up painful memories for a
Vietnamese woman whose husband was executed for trying to assassinate him in
1964. A8

Zanzibar Journal: Will this island become the next Hong Kong? A4

National A14, A18, B7-9

THE BUDGETARY DETAILS

The budget debate in Congress has focused on big-ticket items like Medicare, but
smaller provisions that benefit ski resorts, football coaches and others are
also being urgently debated.  A1

REMEMBERING KUNSTLER

Friends and admirers of the lawyer William Kunstler, who died in September,
threw him a farewell party in Chicago, and the memories of his legal battles and
triumphs flowed freely.  A14

WARNINGS ON ABORTION BILL

Public-health officials and doctors who perform abortions are worried that a
bill passed by the House last week that would ban a type of late-term abortion
is too broadly written.  B7

THE SPEAKER IS THE ISSUE

People eavesdropping on the legislative and gubernatorial races being decided
around the country this week might think Newt Gingrich was running in all of
them.  A14

CLINTON AND THE POWELL FACTOR

The White House is not sure whether to view the prospect of a Presidential
candidacy by Gen. Colin L. Powell as a blessing or a curse for President
Clinton.  B9

SLOW-MOVING INVESTIGATION

Publication of the manuscript in the Unabom case has resulted in thousands of
tips but no breakthrough in the baffling case.  B8

A VICTORY FOR GRAMM

Senator Phil Gramm of Texas finished first in a Republican Presidential straw
poll in Maine.  B8

Metro Digest B1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C11-18

The Post Office auctions off 12,000 fake Dali artworks.  C11

The late-night battle between Jay Leno and David Letterman.  C11

Theater: "Master Class." C11

Music: Anderson and Pavarotti in "La Fille du Regiment." C13

The Pretenders.  C13

Books: William Prochnau's "Once Upon a Distant War." C18

Television: "Chicago Hope." C16

"High Society." C16

Sports C1-9

Basketball: Defense still the word for Knicks.  C5

Boxing: On the morning after, Holyfield feels fine.  C3

Columns: Anderson on Foley.  C4

Rhoden on Meggett.  C4

Football: Giants fall to Seahawks.  C1

Jets lose game, and another quarterback.  C1

Obituaries B10

Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17

Editorials

Newt Gingrich, copycat.

A winning bargain on U.N. dues.

Two yeas, two nays in N.J.

Letters Anthony Lewis: "On God's orders."

Bob Herbert: Asleep at the revolution.

William Safire: Memories of Yitzhak Rabin.

Amos Oz: An unsentimental dove.

Chronicle B6

Bridge C18

Crossword C18

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Chicago Journal;
Closing Arguments for a Legal Showman

BYLINE: By DON TERRY

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 810 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Nov. 5


Some of the protesters and poets who sailed on William Kunstler's ark of
left-wing causes over the years, threw their old comrade and friend a farewell
party here today, a few miles from the legal battle that helped transform him
from a liberal lawyer into a radical advocate.

The gravel-voiced legal showman died at age 76 in Manhattan on Sept. 4, but
today his spirit lived as big and as bold as ever in the stories and hearts of
the people he touched directly and indirectly, including James Gills, a black
schoolteacher in suburban Chicago, who never met Mr. Kunstler.

"But I've followed him since the 60's," Mr. Gills said today before the start of
the "celebration" of Mr. Kunstler's life. "I admire him for being a white man,
willing to take on the challenge and the risks of helping blacks defend
themselves against the system. He stood up and stayed up until the day he died."

More than 200 people attended the event at the University of Illinois at
Chicago, drawn to the man and to a chapter in the city's past.

It was in a Federal courtroom in 1969, 23 floors above this hard-nosed city,
that Mr. Kunstler helped represent a group of anti-war protesters charged with
conspiracy to riot during the Democratic Convention the summer before. The
defendants became known as the Chicago 7.

The trial forever changed Mr. Kunstler's life and convinced him that the
criminal justice system was stacked against the outspoken, said David Dellinger,
the oldest of the seven, who traveled here from his home in New England for the
celebration.

"If Bill was able to be here physically instead of spiritually and politically,"
said the 80-year-old Mr. Dellinger, "he'd say: 'don't mourn, organize.' "

It was a day of tears and laughter and the kind of gathering of Americans that
Mr. Kunstler fought so hard to make the rule rather than the exception. There
were blacks and whites and American Indians, grandparents and
great-grandchildren. There were women in dreadlocks and men with pony tails and
bald spots.

There was Bobby Rush, a former Black Panther turned Congressman, and Jamil
Abdullah Al-Amin, another former Panther once known as H. Rap Brown who is now a
Muslim imam. There were Jews and Catholics. There were people who traveled
across the country and people who came from across town like Martha Baker
Levine, a Chicago law student.

"He is a role model for students who want to make a difference in the world,"
Ms. Levine said. "He was living proof that the law doesn't have to be a bad
joke. It can be used for creative, constructive and inspiring goals."

During his career, Mr. Kunstler represented Martin Luther King Jr., and a legion
of unknown civil rights workers. He worked with Lenny Bruce, Abbie Hoffman,
Leonard Peltier, Malcolm X and last January, Malcolm's daughter, Qubilah Bahiyah
Shabazz, who was accused of trying to hire a hit man to kill Louis Farrakhan,
the leader of the Nation of Islam.

The charges against Ms. Shabazz churned up some of the passions of the 1960's
and the case was one of Mr. Kunstler's last high-profile battles. At 76, he flew
back and forth from New York to Minneapolis, where the case was tried, several
times before Ms. Shabazz was given two years probation.

Adam Bourgeois, a Chicago lawyer, who worked with Mr. Kunstler to reinstate
three dozen Ohio State University students expelled for protesting the Vietnam
War in 1970, said his old friend was a "thread running through all the
generations of the protest movement."

"He didn't fade away like so many people did," Mr. Bourgeois said.

The celebration began with a brunch at a Greek restaurant in the shadow of
downtown Chicago. Over lamb and mousaka, old friends, who had not seen each
other in years, hugged and remembered Mr. Kunstler and his causes, including the
Freedom Riders, Wounded Knee and Attica. A similar celebration is planned later
this month in New York to honor his contributions.

But at today's gathering, the talk was also of the present: police corruption
cases Mr. Kunstler's friends are working on and the campaign to win a new trial
for a black journalist and death row inmate, Mumia Abu-Jamal. Mr. Kunstler was
an advocate for the cause in letters to newspapers just before he died.

Edward T. Stein, a Chicago lawyer who helped organize today's celebration,
watched Mr. Kunstler's first wife, Lotte Kunstler, his two oldest daughters,
Jane Drazek and Karin Goldman, as well as his "extended family" and said, "It's
an outpouring of love and affection for a fallen comrade."

"Bill Kunstler," he said, "is one of the true American heroes."

Later, Mr. Stein walked to the center of the room and raised his glass of wine
to the ceiling and asked the gathering to remember Mr. Kunstler by "rededicating
ourselves to the struggle for liberty and equality, not only here but around the
world."


NAME: William Kunstler

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Why Powell Puzzles White House

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section B;  Page 9;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1101 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 5


For the Clinton White House, where it is as red hot a topic as everywhere else
in Washington, the prospect of Gen. Colin L. Powell as a Republican Presidential
candidate is both a dream and a nightmare.

The retired Army general could be the Democrats' best friend if he divided the
Republican field and yet was denied the nomination after a bitter internecine
fight, allowing Mr. Clinton to paint the Republicans as extremists unworthy of
leadership. Or General Powell might win the nomination but prompt a right-wing,
third-party candidacy by someone like Patrick J. Buchanan that would split the
vote in Mr. Clinton's favor.

But if General Powell, the former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, managed
to win the Republican nomination with his party's full backing, most Democrats
strategists assume he would be all but impossible to attack, tricky to defend
against and terribly hard to beat. Most Clinton advisers sum up the President's
prospects in such a race in terse, simple Anglo-Saxon verbs.

"If he gets in and cruises, it's going to be very bleak for us," said Carter
Eskew, a Democratic consultant with close ties to the White House.

A big part of this nightmare for the President would be General Powell's
potential to draw black voters away from the Democratic Party, undermining it as
well as hurting Mr. Clinton. A recent New York Times/CBS News Poll found that in
a two-way race, the General would draw the support of nearly 1 in 3 black voters
and Mr. Clinton would get just over half of the blacks' votes. The other blacks
polled were undecided. The poll showed that General Powell would defeat Mr.
Clinton by 50 percent to 38 percent over all.

Hoping against the worst case for the President, Mr. Eskew said of General
Powell's potential candidacy, "I think the much more likely scenario is that it
exposes the fissures in the Republican Party."

Bob Shrum, another Democratic consultant who occasionally advises the
Administration, put it a bit differently.

"I think that Colin Powell is probably too moderate, sensible and rational for
the Republican Party to nominate," Mr. Shrum said. "And the act of denying him
the nomination because he's moderate and sensible would be good for Bill Clinton
because it would make clear the real character of the Republican Party."

For the moment, Democrats are pleased that General Powell's possible candidacy
has frozen the Republican field, tied up money and helped force the withdrawal
of Gov. Pete Wilson of California -- all largely to Mr. Clinton's advantage.

One Clinton aide said of General Powell: "He's making these other guys shrink in
stature every day. Dole just gets shorter and shorter and Gramm gets more and
more irritating, and Buchanan is getting more and more threatening about a
third-party candidacy."

No one yet knows whether the General will even be a candidate, of course, much
less whether he could become the Republicans' agreed-on choice. Yet, over
late-night drinks and early-morning coffee, some Clinton advisers think about
the worst case and tremble.

How would a President whose avoidance of military service in Vietnam looms as a
liability attack one of the most popular generals in American history? How could
this President, with his lifelong commitment to civil rights and social progress
for blacks, attack a black man who would be the first member of his race to be
nominated for President by a major political party?

And how could Mr. Clinton distinguish himself from General Powell, since both
seem to hold similar moderate views on social issues like abortion and
affirmative action?

The answers vary, but none are particularly confident.

"I think we hug him," one White House aide said last week, speaking, like his
colleagues, on the condition of anonymity. "We point out how close he is to the
President's point of view on many major issues, that he is effectively a
moderate Democrat. And then we point out that the President's been in office,
working for all these same things that Colin Powell is untested on, and argue
that voters should stick with the real thing."

Another line of attack is that General Powell has worn too many brass buttons,
for too long. Only once in the 20th century has the United States elected a
general as President and then only after the largest war in history: Dwight D.
Eisenhower after World War II.

But these arguments are beanbag softies by the standards of modern American
politics, and the fact that White House aides would not speculate about harsher
ones even in this pre-campaign campaign is a testament to General Powell's
popularity and to the wariness that his potential candidacy has inspired.

White House aides are generally more willing to ruminate about all the ways in
which a Powell candidacy could help the President and about all the impediments
to General Powell's ever winning the nomination.

The argument that no one in the White House likes to talk about but that
nonetheless is possible, is that the general's color might shake the
Republicans' prevailing stranglehold on the South in Presidential elections.
Under this theory, Southern Democrats who since the days of Richard M. Nixon
have otherwise split their tickets between local Democratic candidates and
Republican Presidential nominees might be prompted to make do with Mr. Clinton,
despite the venerable Southern respect for military heroes.

At the same time, these Democrats say, General Powell will have to decide
whether to enter the race by mid-December, the deadline for the New Hampshire
primary. And that could well force him to weigh in with his opinions on the huge
fight over Federal spending priorities that is likely to then still be unfolding
in the budget battle between Mr. Clinton and Congress.

If General Powell tips too far to the right on questions like slowing the growth
of Medicare spending, this argument goes, he alienates mainstream voters. But if
he tilts too far to the left, he loses the potential support of party leaders
like Speaker Newt Gingrich, whose acquiescence, if not active support, would be
vital to his winning the Republican nomination.

Whatever happens, Mr. Shrum said, the Democrats' worst mistake would be to
underestimate Mr. Powell because he is a novice at electoral politics.

"He will not face a blizzard of questions he's unprepared for," Mr. Shrum said.
"This guy ran the most successful major war of the last 30 years. Whatever he
does, he will be prepared. His strategy may or may not work, but he will have
one. His answers may or may not persuade people, but he will give them."


LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Early Second-Guessers on Vietnam

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 979 words



ONCE UPON A DISTANT WAR
Young War Correspondents and the Early Vietnam Battles
 By William Prochnau
 Illustrated. 546 pages. Times Books/Random House. $27.50.

South Vietnam in the early 1960's may seem remote in the context of the long and
tragic American involvement in that country that was just beginning. Yet by
focusing on one particular aspect of those years in his new book, "Once Upon a
Distant War," William Prochnau has brought the story of that involvement to
vividly dramatic life as few previous books have done.

What he concentrates on are foreign correspondents who covered those first few
years, specifically Malcolm Browne, Peter Arnett and Horst Faas for The
Associated Press, Neil Sheehan for United Press International, Charley Mohr for
Time magazine and David Halberstam for The New York Times.

These and a few others, in Mr. Prochnau's view, represented a new breed of
journalist that was smart, skeptical, ambitious and, most significantly, a
generation removed from what he calls the "old guard": the veterans of World War
II and Korea who were able to identify with the American cause and therefore
serve almost as another branch of the military.

Not that the new breed wasn't as patriotic as the old guard, Mr. Prochnau, a
former correspondent for The Washington Post, is quick to point out. Contrary to
the later myth that they were early 1960's radicals opposed to the war, the
members of the new breed were believers in the cause of saving South Vietnam.
They were "cold warriors all," Mr. Prochnau states.

The problem, as he tells their story, was that the closer they looked at what
was going on in 1962, the more they doubted that the war could be won the way it
was being fought. For one thing, the Army of the Republic of Vietnam was more
interested in preserving itself and President Ngo Dinh Diem than in meeting and
engaging the enemy.  And so the Viet Cong was winning the war, as far as the
journalists could see, which seems to have been a good deal farther than anyone
in charge.

For another thing, Mr. Prochnau writes, Americans were involved in the fighting
when by law they were only supposed to be acting as advisers. So the
journalists, being independent-minded as well as patriotic, wrote about what
they saw and described it as they saw it, a disaster for American policy.

This infuriated everyone, writes Mr. Prochnau, from President Kennedy and his
advisers on down to the military command in South Vietnam.  It enraged old-guard
journalists like the Washington columnist Joseph Alsop, the war correspondent
Richard Tregaskis (who wrote "Guadalcanal Diary" and "Vietnam Diary") and
Marguerite Higgins of The New York Herald Tribune, all of whom implied that the
upstarts were traitors. In a few cases, what the young journalists were writing
even annoyed their editors, says Mr. Prochnau, particularly at Time and The New
York Times.

The anger and irritation were understandable, as he tells the story, because the
young Turks were abrasive, confrontational and less than polite, to say the very
least. They went where they weren't wanted and spoke out when they were supposed
to be quiet. And because they were so self-righteous and outspoken they ran the
risk of becoming part of the story, a journalistic sin in many a professional
view.

But when all was said and done, in Mr. Prochnau's view, blaming the journalists
was simply a case of shooting the messenger. The Kennedy Administration "had a
severe press problem," he writes. "But governments suffer from an often fatal
inability to recognize that severe press problems usually come from severe
policy problems." He bluntly concludes, "Kennedy didn't see it either."

But whoever was right or wrong, the story makes for a wonderfully compelling
drama in three acts. The first-act climax is the battle of Ap Bac, in January
1963, which the author calls a turning point in the early stages of the war. The
second act builds to the Buddhist revolt and its repression, in August of the
same year, which to Mr. Halberstam represented, in the author's words, "the
crumbling of American foreign policy."

And the third act culminates in the assassination of President Diem and his
brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, on Nov. 2, 1963, which, as Mr. Prochnau sees it,
effectively committed the United States to remaining in Vietnam for the
duration.

Mr. Prochnau manages to convey with fresh authority what it was like to be a
reporter in Vietnam in those early years, the excitement the experience offered,
the danger that it threatened and the ingenuity that was required to get the
story out. And he spins some good yarns, from the tales of how the various
reporters came to be in South Vietnam, to the anecdote about how President
Kennedy's request that The Times recall David Halberstam from Saigon had the
reverse effect, keeping Mr. Halberstam on the assignment.

Granted, Mr. Prochnau's prose occasionally turns murky with a slightly purple
tinge, and a couple of tiny details are off: the character in Joyce's "Ulysses"
who is modeled on the poet Oliver St. John Gogarty is Buck Mulligan, the medical
student; the Army Reserve commitment after six months' active duty was for six
years, not eight; Mr. Halberstam's first novel was titled "One Very Hot Day,"
not "One Hot Day."

Still, "Once Upon a Distant War" is an important book, a good story that
illustrates powerfully the interplay of strong individual characters and
faceless historical forces. It captures the final golden age of print
journalism, just before television came along to take over the cave of the
winds. More somberly, the book offers a devastating picture of the Kennedy
Administration's self-delusional hubris. And it leaves you seriously doubting
that President Kennedy, had he lived out his term, would have had the wisdom or
the will to get this country out of Vietnam.


LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of William Prochnau. (Laura Parker/Times Books)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 7, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

A U.S. Role In Bosnia May Hinder Recruiters

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1161 words

DATELINE: OTTUMWA, Iowa


Sgt. Charlie Pomykaj, burly in his khaki shirt and blue trousers with a red
stripe down the legs, looks every ounce the Marine Corps recruiter as he works a
crowd of high school students on lunch break outside class here, offering
college tuition, technical skills and exotic foreign adventures to anyone who
enlists.

But one adventure Sergeant Pomykaj is not mentioning is Bosnia.

Most people here are opposed to President Clinton's proposal to send 20,000
American troops to help keep peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and recruiters say
they fear that their sales pitches may fall on deaf ears if teen-agers or their
parents think a recruit will end up in the middle of ethnic bloodshed that seems
to go on forever.

"If it's seen as senseless, like Somalia, and if it's not supported in the
community, then, of course, it'll trickle down to the kids," said Sergeant
Pomykaj, 28, who was a weather technician in the Persian Gulf war.

The prospect of American troops in Bosnia has not hurt recruiting so far,
military officials say. But recruiting is a volatile business in the best of
times. Success depends on elusive perceptions about the vitality of the armed
forces as well as their missions.

In the gulf war, young men and women flocked to recruiting centers. But the
debacle in Somalia, where 18 American soldiers were killed while fighting in
Mogadishu, the Somali capital, on Oct. 3, 1993, had the opposite effect. And of
late, recruiters have had a hard enough time persuading the public that the
shrinking Pentagon budget does not translate into fewer new openings or
opportunities for advancement in the armed forces.

It is not just Marine Corps recruiters who express concern over a potential
mission in Bosnia.

"If we go over there and there are casualties, we'll be hurting in recruiting,"
said Capt. Harry Meyer, who heads the Army's recruiting efforts in south-central
Iowa. "We'll have to overcome objections from parents who will ask, 'Will my son
or daughter have to go to Bosnia?' "

Residents of this city of 25,000 people 75 miles southeast of Des Moines, once
one of the biggest meat-packing centers in Iowa, say they favor the military and
are very patriotic.

The military has not had a visible presence here since 1947, when the Navy
closed an air station on the edge of town where a young lieutenant named Richard
M. Nixon served briefly in World War II. But memories of yellow ribbons and
prayers for sons and daughters in the gulf war remain vivid.

Bosnia, though, is different.

"The calls are 95 percent against our going into Bosnia," said Dave Michaels,
the program director of radio station KLEE-AM. "Lots of people are comparing it
to Vietnam."

To be sure, many people here have not focused on Bosnia. In the malls, high
schools and community colleges where Sergeant Pomykaj scours every day for
potential marines, other matters are more important.

"Right now, the fact that the girls' volleyball team is in the state tournament
is a greater news item than Bosnia," said Cliff Vande Wall, a guidance counselor
at Oskaloosa High School, just up the road from Ottumwa.

But recruiters fear that Bosnia lies just beneath the surface.

The last few years have been hard for military recruiters. Military surveys show
that the percentage of 16- to 21-year-old men who are inclined to enlist is
steadily dropping. The Air Force barely made its recruiting requirement this
year, reaching the mark only on Sept. 30, the last day of the 1995 fiscal year.
About 96 percent of the new recruits are high school graduates, but that is down
from 99 percent in 1992.

And the armed forces are still fighting the perception that they are no longer
hiring. While the Defense Department thins its middle and higher ranks, it still
needs to sign up tens of thousands of new troops each year to maintain the
proper proportion. This is even more important as the military's drawdown nears
an end. The Army alone has to recruit 68,000 people for its enlisted ranks this
year.

To help remedy these problems, the Pentagon has increased its advertising budget
for recruiting this year to $207 million from $112.5 million in 1993, and is
assigning more people to recruiting duty.

"A lot of people don't know that the drawdown is over," said Staff Sgt. Jim
Bonynge, Sergeant Pomykaj's supervisor who oversees Marine recruiting in 20
counties in south-central Iowa from his office in Des Moines.

Even without Bosnia, the Midwest is a tough sell for the Marines. The 11-state
Marine Corps district, based in Kansas City, ranked last out of six Marine
recruiting districts nationwide, signing up only 74 percent of its goal in the
fiscal year that ended Sept. 30.

Marine officials say the district's location, landlocked and 850 miles from the
nearest Marine base, at Quantico, Va., does not help. Low unemployment and the
tendency for many high school graduates to sign up for college instead of the
military also pose challenges.

Another hurdle lies in the rolling fields of corn and soybeans. Most farms have
been in families for generations, and many fathers are not about to let their
strapping young sons join what the Marines call "America's 911 force" when the
annual harvest is at stake.

New American military missions in places like Haiti, Somalia and Rwanda also
give pause to parents whose consent is required for recruits under 18 years of
age.

"Parents ask, 'Will Johnny or Suzy go to war?' " said Sergeant Bonynge, who
served in Beirut and was a helicopter mechanic in the gulf war. "They think the
Marine Corps and the first to fight, but we have jobs in administration and
accounting, too."

One angry parent or a hostile high school guidance counselor can ruin Sergeant
Pomykaj's yearly goal to sign up at least 24 new marines.

At Indian Hills Community College, Sergeant Pomykaj strikes up a conversation
with anyone who meets his recruiting standard: physically fit, decent grades and
no problems with drugs or the law. And at Ottumwa High School, he sets his
sights on the school's 180 male seniors. But he will talk to any of the school's
1,410 students -- by phone, at home or in his office at a nearby shopping mall.

Potential recruits have mixed feelings about Bosnia. "A lot of us think we
should go in and help stop the killing," said David Gordy, 16, a member of
Ottumwa High's Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps, "but others are opposed to
it altogether because Americans will die."

Older recruiters remember other unpopular missions -- like Beirut, where 241
marines, members of a multinational peacekeeping force in Lebanon, were killed
when their barracks were destroyed by a terrorist's bomb on Oct. 23, 1983.

"As Beirut dragged on, the parents just said, 'No,' " said Col. Pat Donahue,
executive officer of the Midwest recruiting district that includes Iowa. "Those
kind of political things started showing up on the evening news and pulled the
parents away. That's what Bosnia would do."

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Looking for a few good men, Sgt. Charlie Pomykaj, a Marine Corps
recruiter, strolled outside Ottumwa High School in Iowa last month as he tried
to fill his annual goal of signing up at least 24 new marines. But the prospect
of the recruits' serving as peacekeepers in Bosnia may make his job more
difficult. (Todd Buchanan for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 7, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Out of N.Y.P.D., Into 'N.Y.P.D. Blue'

BYLINE: By ANDY MEISLER

SECTION: Section C;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1087 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Nov. 6


If life were a mediocre movie script, Bill Clark would be miserable.

Imagine this scenario: a former New York City police detective, brought out to
Hollywood to put the seal of authenticity on a television cop show, finds
himself butting heads with shallow filmland "creative" types. He tries in vain
to shield himself from oceans of sunshine and insincere small talk. He pines for
the real excitement, the real sense of purpose, the real pursuit of justice he
left behind on the streets.

Heard that one before?

Fortunately, life is not a mediocre movie script, so Bill Clark is a happy man.
Late last year he retired from his police job at the rank of detective first
grade. He now holds the title of co-producer on ABC's "N.Y.P.D. Blue," which
presents the third episode of its third season tonight.

After 25 years of chasing murderers, grappling with other assorted miscreants
and fending off police bureaucrats, he has found a personal and professional
rebirth while participating in the day-to-day creation of one of the most
acclaimed dramas on television.

"Life is good," Mr. Clark said over lunch recently at Primi, a pricey Italian
restaurant near his office on the 20th Century Fox lot. "I work in a television
studio. I work with really nice people. I'm working on a show where realism is
the name of the game, and everything we do is to try to stay as realistic as
possible."

Whatever sense of realism the series does achieve is due in large part to Mr.
Clark. From the beginning of its run, "N.Y.P.D. Blue" has drawn heavily on both
his personal experiences and his expertise in police and criminal matters. Many
of the cases that Detective Clark solved have been lifted whole, or nearly so,
and written into the program. And in voice and body shape, Mr. Clark strongly
suggests Detective Andy Sipowicz, the lead character played by the actor Dennis
Franz.

David Milch, "N.Y.P.D. Blue's" creator and executive producer, said, "The show
wouldn't even vaguely resemble what it is today without Billy."

Just how closely the show and Mr. Clark are intertwined is one of the main
themes of "True Blue: The Real Stories Behind N.Y.P.D. Blue," just published by
William Morrow.  At the heart of the book are first-person accounts of Mr.
Clark's police exploits, many of which will ring a bell, loudly, with fans of
the series.

The book also includes an account of the stormy production history of "N.Y.P.D.
Blue" and glimpses of Mr. Milch's own checkered past, from which Andy Sipowicz's
past problems with substance abuse are drawn. It bears the joint bylines of Mr.
Milch and Mr. Clark.

"David wrote it," said Mr. Clark.  "I have tremendous respect for his writing. I
consider it a privilege that a guy of his ability would allow me to work with
him."

As Mr. Clark talks he keeps the restaurant under surveillance, his eyes darting
constantly around the room. "Most of my work on the book was done up front," he
said. "I did research on the cases and things like that. I read it as it was
being written, to check the contents for accuracy."

His function on "N.Y.P.D. Blue" is similar, working with the writers on future
scripts. "If the story isn't making sense, I normally give the writer the
outline of what it should be," he explained. "They'll give it back to me once
and I'll make notes on it and give it back to them.

"Usually, the second time it comes back David will take a look at it and he'll
write his notes. That's when the dramatic changes can be made.  We'll talk about
how we can do something in particular to make it better."

The show's directors and writers query him constantly, on matters like the
number of detectives who should be present at an interrogation, or the length of
an assistant district attorney's maternity leave.

Every six weeks Mr. Clark recruits a group of former New York police colleagues
to fly to Los Angeles and recount their experiences to the writers. He helps
with location scouting and logistics before and during the series' twice-yearly
filming trips to New York City.

Mr. Clark was born in a working-class neighborhood of South Brooklyn that has
since been gentrified as Park Slope. After graduating from high school, he
enlisted in the Army and served as an infantry sergeant in Vietnam. He joined
the police force in 1969; his first assignment -- even before he attended the
Police Academy -- was to infiltrate the Young Patriots, an organization of white
radicals who, he soon discovered, were planning to bomb several New York
landmarks.

"They liked me," he said of his targets. "To them, I represented the
proletariat."

Several weapons arrests resulted from his undercover work, which earned him his
detective's shield.  For the rest of his police career he worked in Brooklyn and
Queens, tackling at least a thousand cases of murder, assault and rape. He also
participated in crackdowns against the Gambino crime family. By all accounts he
was an exceptional detective.

"He's absolutely one of the best," says Raymond Kelly, who came to know Mr.
Clark during his tenure as New York's Police Commissioner.

Mr. Clark also became well known -- as a friendly conduit to the world of true
crime -- to a number of prominent New York City journalists and columnists,
including Jimmy Breslin, Dick Schaap and Michael Daly.

"He was always a good storyteller," said Mr. Schaap, who used Mr. Clark as a
technical adviser for "Point .44," a book about the Son of Sam murders that he
wrote with Mr. Breslin in the 1970's.

It was Mr. Daly who introduced Mr. Clark to Mr. Milch when he was writing the
pilot of "N.Y.P.D. Blue." For the first two seasons he was listed as the show's
creative consultant. He commuted between New York and Los Angeles, working for
the show on his off-duty time.

Last year, as a sign of commitment to Mr. Clark, the show's executive producer,
Steven Bochco, rented him a house he owns in Los Angeles. Divorced, with two
grown daughters, Mr. Clark lives there now, not far from his fiancee, Karen
Krizan, also a retired New York detective.

Mr. Milch has stated publicly on several occasions that as long as he is in the
television business he will be associated with Mr. Clark. "At the beginning I
was afraid that they might just strip me of my stories and then bring in the
next guy," says Mr. Clark. "I genuinely don't think that's the case here."

Mr. Clark's top salary as a detective was $65,000. "I make a lot more than that,
but probably not as much as some cops think," he said, laughing.

NAME: Bill Clark

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bill Clark of "N.Y.P.D. Blue" giving advice to the actors Gordon
Clapp and Nicholas Turturro. (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 9, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 860 words



International   A3-15

ISRAELI RIGHTIST IS ARRESTED
The Israeli police arrested the leader of a far-right group and searched for his
deputy in connection with the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin as the Government
met to find ways to prevent political killings.. A1

Various groups debated responsibility for the assassination. A10

Young Israelis have stirred their country's conscience. A10

Hosni Mubarak's tribute to Rabin angered some in Egypt. A10

CUBA EASES CURRENCY POLICY
Cuba is allowing citizens to buy and sell foreign currencies in an attempt to
counter the black market for American dollars. A3

RUSSIA TO JOIN U.S. IN BOSNIA
A thousand Russian combat troops are to serve with an American division as part
of a NATO peacekeeping force in Bosnia. A14

The Bosnian Serbs released an American journalist. A15

NIGERIA BACKS DEATH SENTENCES
Nigeria's rulers confirmed the death sentences of nine activists who were
convicted of murder in a trial widely seen as flawed. A9

The United Nations Security Council extended sanctions on Iraq. A3

Robert S. McNamara proposed a forum on the Vietnam War. A4

Helmut Kohl is going to China to promote German products. A7

A popular soft drink for Czechs is named after an explosive. A12

Bangkok Journal: Thailand's King reprimanded the Government. A4

National   A16-26, B11-16

POWELL WILL NOT RUN
Gen. Colin L. Powell ended months of speculation by announcing that he would not
be a candidate for President or any other office. A1

THE FUTURE STILL BECKONS
The general's decision does not mean he will be out of the spotlight, and his
plans for four years hence remain an open question. A1

The decision left many Powell supporters disappointed. B12

HURDLE FOR ABORTION MEASURE
Abortion rights supporters in the Senate forced a House-approved bill to ban a
method of late-pregnancy abortion back to the Judiciary Committee for
consideration and a public hearing. A1

READING THE ELECTIONS
Election results from around the country on Tuesday shattered any notion that
Republicans had become invincible. A1

DERAILING AN INTERVIEW
In a sign of heightened tension on the subject of the tobacco industry, CBS
lawyers ordered the news program "60 Minutes" not to broadcast an interview with
a former industry executive who was harshly critical of the industry. A1

F.D.A. PICKS UP THE PACE
The Food and Drug Administration approves new drugs twice as fast as six years
ago, the General Accounting Office found after a study undertaken because of
complaints that the agency was too slow. A23

EDUCATIONAL GOALS DISTANT
Midway through the nation's ambitious 10-year program for setting and achieving
educational goals, there is not nearly enough progress to indicate whether any
goals will be met by 2000, a report said. B11

BUDGET AGREEMENT ELUSIVE
Disputes over a stopgap spending measure pushed Congress and President Clinton
closer to a showdown on the budget. B16

San Francisco's mayoral race will be decided by a runoff. A16

Metro Digest   B1

COURT BLOCKS FARE INCREASE
A Federal judge blocked a 25-cent increase in subway and bus fares scheduled to
take effect on Sunday in New York City, ruling that it appeared to discriminate
against minority riders. A1

Obituaries   B17-18

John Patrick, playwright. B17
Slappy White, comedian. B17
Dr. R. Tucker Abbott, marine biologist who studied mollusks. B18

Home Section   C1-14

42,000 miles a year on the antiques track. C1
Clutter counseling. C1
New Bonds: Para-Dads, Para-Moms. C1
Hardware for home theater. C2
Faucet makers to cut lead to settle suit. C2
Currents. C3
Air bag can kill a child in a safety seat. C5
Pet owners claim piece of Internet turf. C6
At home with Stephen Humphrey Bogart. C8
Garden Q.&A. C12
Calendar. C13

Arts/Entertainment   C17-22

Opening up the Morgan Library. C17
Is New York ballet-deprived?. C17
Art prices soar at auction. C17
Theater: "Danny Gans on Broadway." C17
Music: The Pop Life. C21
Dance: Toronto Dance Theater. C18
Books: "Not Entitled." C21
Television: "Talk Soup." C22

Sports   B19-25

Baseball: Cordova is A.L. Rookie of the Year. B23
Basketball: Orlando beats the Nets in three overtimes. B19
Will Mourning and Riley find success in Miami?. B19
Anthony Mason's temper. B21
Boxing: Closing arguments in the Don King trial. B25
Column: Anderson on replacement referees. B19   Football: Amherst and Williams:
small schools, big game. B19
Hostetler's return. B22
Hockey: Flames beat Devils. B23
Rangers, Lightning tie. B23
Running: The British marathoner Paul Evans. B21

Business Digest   D1

Editorials/Op-Ed   A28-29

Editorials

The general checks out.
Higher standards for graduation.
A death sentence in Nigeria.
Medical help for sexual assault.

Letters

William Safire: This year's Cuomo.
Maureen Dowd: The general's retreat.
Susan Mayer, Christopher Jencks: War on poverty -- no apologies.

Bridge   C15

Chronicle   D24

Crossword   C18

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 9, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

The Pop Life

BYLINE: By Neil Strauss

SECTION: Section C;  Page 21;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1042 words





Babyface's Soundtrack

"Waiting to Exhale" (Arista), which will be released on Tuesday, is not like
other pop-filled film soundtrack. Instead of throwing together a grab bag of
songs by well-known names whose careers need a boost, the producers of the
movie, which is coming out this month, put the music in the lap of somebody with
a musical winning streak: Kenny Edmonds, also known as Babyface.

Though he is among pop's top songwriters and producers, having written hit love
songs for Michael Jackson, Mariah Carey, Madonna, Boyz II Men and dozens of
others, Mr. Edmonds had never worked on a project like "Waiting to Exhale."

"Not only is this the only soundtrack I've ever done," he said in an interview,
"but other than my own two albums, this is the first album I've ever produced
myself." Initially, he and Whitney Houston, who stars in the film, wanted to try
to find producers each singer was used to working with. "But as I was seeing
different scenes of the movie," he said, "I just started writing songs until I
had written everything. Then I had to produce it all."

The album seems likely to jump to the top of the pop charts. It features the
first new singles by Ms. Houston since the success of her songs from the 1992
film "The Bodyguard" as well as numbers by top divas new (Toni Braxton, Mary J.
Blige, Brandy) and old (Aretha Franklin, Patti LaBelle, Chaka Khan). The female
trios TLC and SWV also appear on the album. Mr. Edmonds, who also worked on the
the movie score, happens to be the only man featured on the soundtrack.

"It was partly Whitney's idea doing all the women," he said. "She feels like
'Waiting to Exhale' isn't her movie, but an ensemble movie about the friendship
of four women. So the soundtrack has a lot to do with the film. I don't think
you'll ever see another project that includes all these women at the same time.
That's a lot of egos to deal with."

Faith Evans, one of the newer voices on the pop charts, said she had never
worked on a film soundtrack before. "Babyface made a tape of the song he wanted
me to sing for my manager, and I learned it and shot over to L.A.," she said. "I
went into the studio and knocked it out in 15 minutes at the most. Babyface was
really cool and really quiet. I had no idea whether he liked my version of the
song or not."

Mr. Edmonds, who finished working on Ms. Houston's third and final song for the
album last week, plans to take some time off in Rome before completing an album
by Ms. Braxton. "It will be a long time before I do a whole soundtrack again,"
he said. "This one is special, but it was a lot of work."



World-Music Women

Quite a different group of female musicians from the divas of "Waiting to
Exhale" will come together this week in Manhattan. They are from South Africa,
Hawaii, Vietnam, Iran and elsewhere. The occasion is the World Music Institute's
weekend of panel discussions and performances, "Resounding: Women in World
Music," taking place from Friday to Sunday at Lang Recital Hall, at Hunter
College on 69th Street between Park and Lexington Avenues.

"As far as I know, there has never been an entire symposium that concentrates on
women and world music," said Isabel Soffer, a director of the conference. "So
there's a lot to discuss. If you speak to Muriel Mwamba, she'll tell you that
women are forbidden from performing in Zambia, so that's why she moved to
America. There is going to be an ethnomusicologist, Marina Roseman, who's been
working with women in the Malaysian rain forest, and one thing she told me is
that the women are not only known as singers but they're also leading the
environmental movement there."

Another ethnomusicologist who plans to take part, Hiromi Lorraine Sakata, has
been studying a women's Sufi order in Pakistan, "which is rare because most of
the Sufi orders there are male," Ms. Soffer added.

Thuli Dumakude, an actress, choreographer and singer who is to perform South
African choral music on Saturday night with her group, Thokoza, said the seminar
was part of a growing trend. "One never knows what to make of the fact that
women are getting recognized now, because women have always sung," she said.
"When you think of lullabies, most of them are composed by women. And there are
African ceremonies where only women do the music and the percussion and come up
with the dance steps.

"But on the other hand, there are women who need approval to do anything,
especially in the third world. So it's good to find out there are women who are
as daring as you, even if you don't necessarily think of yourself as daring."

Except for a performance of sacred hula from Hawaii, to be given by Halau O
Kekuhi on Saturday night, and Ms. Dumakude's concert (which is to feature the
gospel group Sister Sadie and the Famous Biblettes), all the performances and
discussions are free. Information: (212) 545-7536.



Anger Turned Musical

Cornershop is an English band with a sound unto itself. It mixes indie-rock with
Indian rock, taking the deconstructed pop and cryptic wordplay of groups like
Pavement and adding dholki drums and sitar as well the occasional song in
Punjabi. The group has just released its second album, "Woman's Gotta Have It"
(Luaka Bop/Warner Brothers), and is on its first tour of the United States,
planning to make stops in Hoboken, N.J., at Maxwell's, on Saturday night, and in
Manhattan, at Irving Plaza on Tuesday and Mercury Lounge on Nov. 20.

Since its first single, "In the Days of Ford Cortina," released on what was
advertised as "curry-colored" vinyl, Cornershop has been turning its anger into
music. "On one side, that single had Asian flutes and guitars to show what the
West thought about the East," said Tjinder Singh, the band's singer and
songwriter.  "And then there was feedback and guitar to show how the East felt
about being in the West."

Feeling alienated from everything -- English culture, Indian culture, pop
culture -- is a recurrent theme in Cornershop's music, which ranges from jagged
rock melodies to Punjabi folk music to electronic dance experiments. "England is
the place where I was born," said Mr. Singh. "But I hate it. That's why some of
my songs are so sad. I feel let down."

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Babyface and Whitney Houston. (Nick Elgar/Arista Records)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 899 words



International A3-14

ISRAEL POINTS TO A CONSPIRACY

The Israeli police said two more suspects have been arrested in the
assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and that they strongly suspected a
conspiracy.  A1

Yasir Arafat visited Israel to pay condolences to Leah Rabin. A8

The finger-pointing begins over who spawned a climate of hatred. A8

Money is being raised in New York for the confessed assassin.  A8

U.N. TRIBUNAL INDICTS 3 SERBS

A United Nations tribunal indicted three senior Serbian Army officers, bringing
its investigations into war crimes closer than ever before to the Serbian
political leadership and President Slobodan Milosevic. A1

MCNAMARA AND THE TONKIN GULF

Robert S. McNamara, Defense Secretary from 1961 to 1968, was told in Hanoi that
North Vietnam did not carry out a second reported attack in the Gulf of Tonkin
in 1964. A3

U.S. SAYS CHINA IS AIDING IRAN

Chinese companies are helping Iran develop chemical weapons, and Washington is
having only mixed success in halting such cooperation, a Pentagon official said.
A14

Ashkhabad Journal: Turkmenistan reclaims a national symbol. A4

Islamic militants attacked trains in Egypt twice this week. A7

An Argentine Air Force plane crashed, killing all 53 aboard. A10

National A16-30

PRESSURE ON ENERGY SECRETARY

Hazel O'Leary, the Secretary of Energy, faced losing her job after disclosures
that she had spent Government money to analyze reporters covering her.  A1

ACHILLES' HEEL FOR H.I.V.?

Australian researchers have found a flaw in an H.I.V. gene that seems to keep
the virus from causing AIDS. It was found in seven H.I.V.-infected people who
never developed AIDS. A virus with such a flaw could possibly be exploited to
make a vaccine.  A1

TWINS SCORE PERFECT ON SAT'S

Two teen-agers became what are believed to be the first twins ever to score 1600
-- the highest possible -- at the same time on the Scholastic Assessment Test.
A16

TORTURE KILLING IN WISCONSIN

The torture killing of a 16-year-old Saudi Arabian by four relatives has shocked
Menomonie, Wis., and put its small Muslim community on the defensive.  A16

LATEST KEVORKIAN CONTROVERSY

Controversy over Dr. Jack Kevorkian's latest assisted suicide deepened, with a
medical examiner saying the woman was "definitely not terminally ill." A20

KEEPING RECORDS ON PILOTS

The National Transportation Safety Board recommended that the Government keep
employment records on pilots to prevent bad ones from jumping from job to job.
A22

MONEY TO RUN THE GOVERNMENT

The House approved a bill that would extend the Government's authority to borrow
money until mid-December, but the measure was cast in such a way that probably
would not pass the Senate or be acceptable to the President.  A24

NAVY TO HALT FOR A DAY

After a series of embarrassing disciplinary incidents, the Navy plans to suspend
all fleet operations for a day to address how to keep its people out of trouble.
A24

INCREASING MEDICARE PREMIUMS

Congress is moving to increase Medicare premiums in January without waiting for
an overall agreement on how to redesign the Medicare program.  A26

THE WELFARE OF CHILDREN

The Clinton Administration acknowledged in a new report to Congress that a
Senate bill to restructure the nation's welfare system could push as many as 1.2
million more children into poverty.  A27

Metro Digest B1

COURT ALLOWS FARE INCREASE

A day after a Federal judge blocked the 25-cent transit fare increase, an
appeals court said it would let the fare rise to $1.50 on Sunday and remain
there at least until it reconsiders the matter next week. A1

VACCO'S PARTISAN HIRING

Since becoming New York State's first Republican Attorney General, Dennis C.
Vacco has filled dozens of positions with lawyers who are related to or have
other close ties to prominent Republican leaders or campaign contributors. A1

RAID ON NEWARK OFFICIAL

Federal agents raided the home and City Hall office of a top aide to Mayor
Sharpe James of Newark, where officials said they found tens of thousands of
dollars in cash. A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-33

Allure of Litchfield County.  C1

Pop and jazz performers who persevere.  C1

For Children C17

Theater: On Stage, and Off C2

"The Monogamist." C3

Film: "Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls" C8

"The Journey of August King." C14

Music: Mitsuko Uchida.  C12

John Scofield and John Abercrombie.  C14

Art: Beats at the Whitney C1

Inside Art C26

2 Copley shows.  C32

Ansel Adams show.  C24

Books: "Mr. Wilson's Cabinet of Wonder." C33 Sports B8-16

Baseball: Hideo Nomo is the N.L. Rookie of the Year. B9

Detroit hires Buddy Bell, not Buck Showalter. B9

Jet Carlton Haselrig is arrested. B10

Marathon: Will Manuela Machado go the distance? B13

Obituaries B7 Editorials/Op-Ed A32-33

Editorials

Keep the fare out of court.

G.O.P.'s legislative blackmail.

Vestiges of dictatorship.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: The Powell point.

Bob Herbert: The wrong crowd.

Anthony Lewis: Why not the best?

Benjamin Netanyahu: McCarthyism in Tel Aviv.

Chronicle B4

Crossword C28



LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Veterans Day Parade Tries for a Comeback

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section B;   Page 3;   Column 5;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words


Herbert W. Young, who is 109 years old, last marched in a Veterans Day parade in
1924. Tomorrow, he will do it again, using a cane.

"I'm proud to be a part of this," said Mr. Young, a Harlem resident, who was in
the 807th Pioneer Infantry Corps.

In recent years, Veterans Day observations have become desultory at best, with
spectators often limited to passers-by walking their dogs or heading out for a
quart of milk. But Mr. Young, the lone World War I veteran volunteering to
march, is part of an attempt to revitalize New York's Veterans Day parade.

Organizers are hoping for more than a million viewers, an ambitious and perhaps
unattainable goal, considering that last year there were so few spectators that
the police did not even estimate the crowd. By comparison, 1.5 million attended
last year's St. Patrick's Day Parade, the city's biggest annual march.

But for tomorrow's 11:05 A.M. start, organizers have devised a more impressive
lineup than last year's: General Patton's World War II command car, a Persian
Gulf war tank 10 times heavier than a bull elephant, Walter Cronkite as the
review-stand announcer and a B-1 bomber that will buzz Fifth Avenue from 2,500
feet.

There will be 40 marching bands, 20 floats and 30,000 marchers from groups from
the Pearl Harbor Survivors to the Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Veterans. The guests
of honor, 3,000 World War II veterans, will lead the parade from 48th Street to
a reviewing stand at 59th Street.  There they will remain as the parade goes on
to 79th Street.

The Defense Department has designated the Fifth Avenue parade, called the
Nation's Parade, the official close of the 50th anniversary of World War II.

To marshal limited resources for Manhattan's parade, organizers persuaded
officials in each borough and the suburbs to forgo parades. In particular, Long
Island towns, which have many veterans, are putting money and marchers into
Manhattan's big one.

"This is a grand occasion to breathe life into what was once a very, very
important day," Tom Fox, the parade's executive director, said. "It is more than
a shopping day."

The fortunes of Veterans Day have risen and fallen since the remembrance began,
as Armistice Day, immediately after World War I.  But many veterans slipped into
poverty during the Depression, and the celebration receded accordingly, said
Bernard Wray, a retired Air Force colonel who is active in the United War
Veterans of New York, a coalition of 55 groups representing 750,000 veterans,
which is organizing Veterans Day events.

The holiday resurged again after World War II, only to fade as the veterans
died, retired or moved. By the 1980's, fewer than 2,000 veterans were marching
in the parades. Only in the last three years has participation grown again, as
Vietnam veterans have become more active.

Nonetheless, from the beginning, this year's organizers have skated on thin
financial ice, government approvals have been slow and lining up things like
Sherman tanks and marching bands has been difficult. "There has been a constant
awareness everything could fall apart at any time," Mr. Fox said.

Organizers received no contributions from the 200 corporations they asked, among
them military contractors to whom they presented documentation of profits made
on weapons used in World War II.

"Zippo, dada, zilch," Mr. Fox said. "Nothing from Northrup, United Technologies,
none of them. To me, it's a sin."

By mid-August, organizers had a bank account of exactly $1.21. A request to
airlines to donate blankets for aging veterans was turned down because logos
might not be visible on television. Then Donald Trump, a nonveteran, agreed to
throw in $200,000 as well as raise money from his friends, in exchange for being
named grand marshal.

Since then, money has come in, though not enough to meet the original budget,
which was reduced from $2.9 million to $2.4 million. Fireworks were just one of
many cuts.

"This is the most complex parade I've been involved in, by far," said Joseph M.
Haneman, the parade's director, who has organized more than 500 parades,
including the city's most popular ones: the St. Patrick's Day and Puerto Rican
Day Parades.

Organizers had to scurry this week to receive approval from the police for a
21-gun salute at Fifth Avenue and 60th Street; to prepare a Hudson River berth
for the Kearsarge, the aircraft carrier whose sailors helped rescue Capt. Scott
O'Grady from Bosnia and who will be marching and, most important, to find ways
to keep aging veterans comfortable.

Then they hunted down the trumpeter who played the original solo on "Stardust"
so he could join the Glenn Miller Alumni Players, which will play at several
events. They found him in San Diego. He will play his instrument sitting in the
wheelchair he now uses.

Another obstacle was getting Federal Aviation Administration approval to allow
the B-1 to zip above Fifth Avenue, and for the choreographing of aerial events.
Five World War II aircraft will fly over the parade. The F.A.A. is also
providing air-traffic controllers so Floyd Bennett Field, the World War II naval
air station in Brooklyn, can be used for the takeoff and landing of historic
aircraft.

In an unusual cooperation, officials of the Salute to Israel Parade, the Muslim
World Day Parade, the India Day Parade and the Pakistan Parade, among others,
will help keep floats and marchers moving smoothly.

Not all the battles have been won. A Sherman tank will not rumble up the avenue,
because city officials feared it would damage the roads and water mains. "It's
pure hogwash," said Frank Buck, a truck dealer from Bartonsville, Pa., who is
bringing 10 antique military vehicles he owns, in addition to the tank, which
will instead ride on a flatbed truck. He said that French officials let him
drive the tank on cobblestones during the D-Day observance in France last year.

Earlier this week, Mr. Haneman seemed to be juggling a problem a minute as
Veterans Day approached. When he received a fax of the design of the float that
will carry the Glenn Miller Alumni Players, Mr. Haneman, a former band director,
noticed a mistake.

"Looks good, except the musical notes are backward," he chortled to the float
maker in New Jersey. "Why don't you give everybody a mirror and tell them to
look at the float backward?"

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Memento Dealer Held In Sale of Fake Medals

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section B;   Page 6;   Column 1;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 583 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, Nov. 9


Consumers craving a little extra prestige used to be content with a faux Gucci
bag or Cartier watch. But today, the F.B.I. announced the first arrest in what
agents said was a growing phenomenon: the sale of fake Medals of Honor.

With medals fetching about $500 at military paraphernalia shows around the
country, the F.B.I. said its agents started an inquiry this year covering 13
companies or individuals believed to be trading in the medals in 10 states.

Those caught include a county judge in Illinois so intent on proving his own
valor after purchasing two medals that he had his name and the date 7/22/58
inscribed on the back. (No one is quite sure what battle that would refer to.)
Investigators said he then applied for special Medal of Honor license plates.
The F.B.I said the judge was forced to resign several weeks ago and may face
further charges.

"We are not talking about trading comic books or baseball cards," said special
agent R. Stanley Harris, second in command of the F.B.I.'s Newark office. "We
owe respect and dignity to the people who have made battlefield sacrifices for
this country. People are making profits off someone else's sacrifice."

Robert S. Nemser, a war memorabilia dealer from East Brunswick, N.J., was
arrested today and released on $25,000 bail after pleading not guilty to two
Federal misdemeanor charges.

Wearing, manufacturing or selling the Medal of Honor under false pretenses
carries a $100,000 fine and up to a year in prison. The prison sentence for
those convicted of the offense was doubled in 1994 to discourage the trade.

Mr. Nemser is believed to be the first person ever arrested for selling the
medal, said U.S. Attorney Faith S. Hochberg.

Agents said the trade mushroomed over the past two years, especially in small
towns where recipients of the nation's highest military award for valor garner
special attention. Since Congress issued the first medal 134 years ago, 3,400
men and one woman have received the award for outstanding valor and
self-sacrifice. Most were awarded posthumously -- there are only 185 living
Medal of Honor winners.

Mr. Nemser, a 57-year-old graphic designer, would not say anything to reporters
except that he was a Vietnam-era war veteran and that memorabilia sales were his
hobby. Mr. Nemser was openly selling the medals at a paraphernalia show in
Totowa, N.J. on April 8, 1995, said special agent Thomas A. Cottone Jr. He said
an undercover agent bought an Army medal for $510 and an Air Force medal for
$485.

Agents said some of the ribbons appear to be counterfeits, with the white stars
on the pale blue silk background larger than on the authentic version, for
example. But some appear so authentic, missing only the traditional inscription
of the winner's name on the back, that the inquiry includes investigating
whether the medals are being sold by the companies that manufacture them for
Congress. The F.B.I. would not identify the companies.

The gold-colored medal dangles from a blue octagonal field bearing 13 white
stars representing the original 13 colonies. The field is in the center of a
long blue silk neck ribbon. The Army, Navy and Air Force each have slightly
different clasps connecting the medals to the octagon. Those from the Army and
the Air Force both say "Valor" in large type, for example, while the Navy medal
includes an anchor.

Agents said they have no records of veterans awarded the medal or of families of
the actual recipients selling them.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A counterfeit of a Medal of Honor from the Air Force that the
F.B.I. said an undercover agent bought for $485 from Robert S. Nemser of East
Brunswick, N.J., a military memorabilia dealer.


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Coming to Midtown: The Nation's Parade

SECTION: Section B;   Page 1;   Column 2;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 107 words


More than 30,000 veterans will march in a special Veterans Day parade tomorrow
to mark the 50th anniversary of World War II's end. Beginning at 11:05 A.M.,
some 3,000 World War II soldiers will join the parade at 48th Street and march
to the reviewing stand at 59th Street. Going the whole route will be veterans
form the Korean, Vietnam and Persian Gulf wars, with 40 bands, 20 floats and 73
antique military vehicles. At 7 A.M. tomorrow, the vehicles will leave Floyd
Bennett Field, head up Flatbush Avenue, and go across the Manhattan Bridge to
Fifth Avenue. The parade is part of an attempt to revitalize Veterans Day.
Article, page B3.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Ex-Bad Boy as Sensitive Director

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1825 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


A JAGGED SLASH RUNS perilously close to Sean Penn's left eye. Another cut slices
deep into his nose. The nose itself is swollen, the bone prominent through the
skin.

"I was in London about five days ago, and a friend said he wanted to show me the
town," Mr. Penn said, a bit vague and almost apologetic. "We were in a bar, and
I was just on my way out and the next thing I know this . . . happened. I was on
the floor, and my back got kicked a lot, and my legs got kicked a lot, and the
side of my head got kicked." He points to his face. "I didn't know this happened
until I got to a mirror."

Sean Penn, seated in the lounge of a Santa Monica Hotel one recent afternoon,
shrugs and sips a soda. He is polite and a little wary. He removes a cigarette
pack from his pocket and asks if it's all right to light up. Responding to
questions, his sentences seem to meander in and out of long pauses.

With his leather jacket, Elvis pompadour and smashed face, the 35-year-old actor
hardly seems the portrait of a writer and director whose latest work, "The
Crossing Guard," explores the soul-destroying impact that violence and guilt can
have on three people. The film opens on Wednesday, after almost a year of delays
involving editing and audience testing.

Given Mr. Penn's past excesses -- his fistfights with paparazzi, his 34 days in
the Los Angeles County Jail in 1987 for hitting a movie extra who tried to take
his photo on the set of "Colors," his bad-boy drinking and chaotic personal life
-- how can he be taken seriously? Especially since to many moviegoers he is
known primarily as a misfit and carouser, based on roles in such films as "Bad
Boys" and "Fast Times at Ridgemont High."

To begin with, movie companies don't seem the least bit reluctant to underwrite
his films. And perhaps surprising, a substantial number of people in Hollywood,
including Jack Nicholson and Anjelica Huston, insist that Mr. Penn's inner core
of discipline, balance and sensitivity far offset his adolescent tantrums.

"I've hung out with Sean," said Mr. Nicholson, who plays a father seeking
vengeance for his daughter's death in "The Crossing Guard." "Our esthetic is
similar. I like his instincts, his intelligence, his poetry."

And Ms. Huston, who portrays Mr. Nicholson's ex-wife in the film, said: "Look,
Sean is a poet and not a simple person. There's a certain male mythology about
him, a mixture of tenderness and pugnaciousnesss that's prevalent in the Irish
and causes them to stay up late drinking whisky, writing poetry, getting into
fights and falling in love with cool, blond women who'll drive them crazy." (Mr.
Penn has made it clear in interviews that his recent split-up with the cool,
blond Robin Wright, who played Tom Hanks's girlfriend in "Forrest Gump," left
him depressed and vulnerable during the filming and editing of "The Crossing
Guard." Ms. Wright, who is the mother of his two small children, has a
supporting role in the film.)

"The Crossing Guard" is Mr. Penn's second go at directing and writing, after his
raw, intense 1991 drama, "The Indian Runner," the story of a highway patrolman
and his younger brother, a volatile Vietnam veteran. Though critics had
reservations about the film, they considered it an auspicious directorial debut.
Caryn James, writing in The New York Times, described it as "ambitious and
accomplished enough to make you eager for his second."

"The Crossing Guard" is about a Los Angeles jeweler (Mr. Nicholson) whose life
collapses when a drunk driver kills his young daughter. The driver (David Morse)
has served six years in prison for the crime. Upon his release, the jeweler vows
to kill him. Ms. Huston, as Mr. Nicholson's ex-wife, is bent on healing and
getting on with her life. The film, released by Miramax, has received mixed
reviews at festivals. In Hollywood, though, Mr. Penn is considered a potentially
formidable film maker, with a powerful visual talent, regardless of what critics
say.

The new film came to be, said Mr. Penn, because after "Indian Runner," he
decided he would write and direct only a movie that was intensely personal. "I
became self-conscious about what I was going to sit down and do next," he said.
"I knew it was going to occupy a chunk of my life, and I wanted to do something
harmonious to whatever was occupying my personal concerns, my life conflicts at
the time."

The father of two children -- Dylan, 4, and Hopper, 2 -- Mr. Penn recalls being
shaken a few years ago when Eric Clapton's 4-year-old child, Conor, died after
falling out of a 53d-floor window in a New York condominium. "I was going
through the initial shock-joy of having a child," Mr. Penn said. "It was so
pure, and then Clapton's kid died, and I suddenly realized what was keeping me
up nights was my feeling, 'My God, I've got to keep this person alive.' "

It is, of course, every parent's nightmare.

ALL THIS STUFF WAS going through my head," he said. "I thought, 'I've got to
work this through in conscious time.' That's when I started to write." He said
the movie was like "taking an adventure into unanswerable pain, and seeing what
adjustments one makes."

In both the writing and the direction, what concerned him most, he said, was the
risk of falling back on cliches and cheap emotion. "I had to avoid emotional
manipulation that's at your fingertips all the time in a movie like this."

Adding resonance to the film was the on-screen reunion of Mr. Nicholson and Ms.
Huston. The pair were lovers for years but broke up acrimoniously four years ago
and have barely spoken since. She is married to Robert Graham, a sculptor, and
Mr. Nicholson has started a new family. In the film, the two have some furious
scenes together. Curses are spat out that seem to reach beyond the script.

"Jack is a powerhouse presence, and I needed somebody who was not going to get
buried by him and would act her butt off," said Mr. Penn. "That's a short list,
and Anjelica is on it. O.K. So we had this dilemma, which is that there's a
history between the two. And the audience is aware of it. But who cares? Fifty
years from now, people won't be aware of that history."

The actors eventually agreed.

"Obviously, Sean and I talked about it," Mr. Nicholson said. "He didn't want it
to be precious or anything. I hadn't seen her for quite a while. It was good to
see her, and we had a good time. It was always about the work, and the work was
good."

Ms. Huston was more blunt. "I can't speak for Jack," she said, "but I brought my
experience with me to the table. It's one of those backlogs you can't rid
yourself of easily."

Signing on Mr. Nicholson placed the project -- hardly a commercial one -- on the
fast track. It got the backing of Miramax, and filming began in spring 1994.

"I was in a mood to do something like this," Mr. Nicholson said. In recent years
his roles have allowed for plenty of hamming it up; he played the Joker in
"Batman," for example, and a man who turns feral in "Wolf." "I wanted to do
something without any augmentation," the actor added. "So many of my films have
been melodramatic. To be honest, I wanted to do the kind of acting I don't do
that often."

Mr. Penn, though a neophyte director, was not awed by his stars. "If Jack is
better at anything than acting, it's at supporting the director," Mr. Penn said.
"I mean, he will take away any chance of you being intimidated, and not in an
overly deferential way, not in a condescending way. He's there to serve you in a
way that's emotionally effective."

While Mr. Penn has yet to make his mark as a director, his acting ability has
been apparent from the start, when he appeared in "Taps" in 1981 with Tom Cruise
and Timothy Hutton. In the last decade, he has won critical acclaim and a place
for himself among a small group of actors whose work gets serious attention, and
his performances over the years have dazzled critics.

He played the stoned surfer in "Fast Times at Ridgemont High," a cocaine
smuggler in "The Falcon and the Snowman," a gangster's son in "At Close Range"
and an Army sergeant in Vietnam in "Casualties of War," all in the 1980's. In
"Carlito's Way," his last acting role, in 1993, he won praise for his part as a
cocaine-snorting lawyer. "Mr. Penn's strange, jarringly intense performances are
infrequent these days, but this one was worth waiting for," Janet Maslin said in
her review.

The advance word on his next acting role, in "Dead Man Walking," which opens
next month, is that he gives a powerful performance. In the film, directed by
Tim Robbins, Mr. Penn plays a condemned man who develops a bond with a nun,
played by Susan Sarandon.

Despite the gravity of his work, Mr. Penn seems to function in a slightly
different universe from the rest of us. He's accompanied at the outset of this
particular interview by a middle-aged man named Dr. Katz who is dressed in
clerical garb and whom Mr. Penn calls "kind of like a business partner." (Dr.
Katz quickly disappears and then reappears an hour later.)

NOT UNEXPECTEDLY FOR a man who has had so many brushes with the news media, Mr.
Penn said he despises the tabloid press. "If you cross-index my bad press with
Hitler's and Qaddafi's, I'm sure I'd win," he said. As for his early fights with
aggressive photographers, he blames the fact that he was drunk much of the time.
Of course, for three and a half years during the 1980's Mr. Penn was married to
Madonna, a woman scrutinized by the tabloids.  ("Well, love is love," he said.
"But she hadn't even done her first tour yet when I met her, and there wasn't
anything at that point to make me think of what was coming.")

Even today some of his comments to the press make him sound like a bully. In the
November issue of Details magazine, when asked if spousal abuse was the reason
for his split with Ms. Wright, he responded: "No. Fear of abuse, yeah. I'll tell
you something, I've never hit a woman in my life. I've grabbed a wrist or two.
Tightly. Wanted to shake people out of a belief. But fear, yeah."

Asked to elaborate, Mr. Penn shrugged. "Shaking somebody out of a belief doesn't
work," he said. "But that hand that's connected to that wrist is less likely to
slap your face.  So on that level I would justify it." (Ms. Wright, through a
spokesman, declined to comment.)

These days, Mr. Penn lives mostly in a 27-foot trailer in Malibu, on the site of
the mountaintop home he once shared with Madonna, which burned two years ago in
the fires that engulfed the region.

In the future, he said, he will act only sporadically and devote himself to
writing and directing. His next project is a fairy tale called "Bull Boy,"
starring Marlon Brando. He has begun writing a script about suicide. Asked what
intrigued him about that subject, he replied, "The ridiculousness of that
choice."

He lighted a cigarette, inhaled deeply and waited. Then he grinned.

"I'm convincing myself that suicide does not hold too much glamour," he said.

NAME: Sean Penn

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sean Penn, left, and Vilmos Zsigmond, director of photography
for "The Crosing Guard"--Increasingly, Hollywood is taking Mr. Penn seriously as
a director. (Miramax Films)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hollywood Finds a Presidential Role Model

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES;   Michael Wines covers Congress for The Times.

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1629 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


FORGET THE RUMORS: "The American President," Rob Reiner's new film about the
pratfalls of an Oval Office courtship, is a comedy, a romantic comedy -- a
comedy with a political tinge, to be sure, but just a comedy. If it bears
passing resemblance to the Clinton White House, it is only passing. "The
American President," which opens on Friday, is as much about the current
American President as "Gone With the Wind" was about meteorology.

We have Hollywood's word on it.

And who could dispute it? Mr. Reiner's film is mostly a happy variation on "The
King and I," a wry look at what happens when the widower President Andrew
Shepherd (Michael Douglas), smitten with a spunky environmental lobbyist
(Annette Bening), tries to make romance in front of the world, political rivals
and news media included.

Maybe it contains a few cinematic allusions to Mr. Clinton's political
tribulations. And perhaps a character or two -- O.K., O.K., five -- seem at
times to be drawn from the Democratic White House's inner circle. Sure, both
White Houses push a crime bill with a weapons ban and get heckled for supposedly
weak-kneed environmental stands; both run big legislative campaigns from "war
rooms"; both prove Democrats are no wimps by bombing a dictator's intelligence
headquarters; both have short, bright, high-energy domestic advisers; both
defend flag burning as an example of democracy's resilience.

Both object to rooting into someone's behavior 20 years ago as mindless
scandal-mongering. Both like hamburger (President Shepherd is a meatloaf man).

All of this is true. But people used to draw the same kind of parallels between
Jack Kennedy and Abe Lincoln, and that didn't make them the same, did it?

"Naturally, there are characteristics of the Clinton Administration that would
carry over into this film," Mr. Reiner said in a telephone interview last month.
"This was the one administration we were allowed access to."

Ask the film's prize-winning screenwriter, Aaron Sorkin, whether the film
borrows from the current American President. "Not at all," he says.

Anyway, the whole idea for "The American President" predated Bill Clinton's
arrival in the White House, even though he was campaigning for the office at the
time. Mr. Reiner said that he and Mr. Sorkin came upon the concept after they
completed the film adaptation of Mr. Sorkin's play "A Few Good Men" in 1992.

"Basically, we'd wanted to do a political film set in Washington for quite a
while," the director said. "I remembered a project Robert Redford had approached
me with in '89 -- he'd been developing it for a long time -- called 'The
President Elopes.' It was more or less a pure 30's-40's screwball comedy set in
the White House."

(William Richert, who wrote the screenplay for "The President Elopes," is
questioning Mr. Sorkin's sole screenwriting credit on "The American President,"
but Mr. Reiner said that he and Mr. Sorkin had purposely never looked at earlier
scripts. "We purchased the rights from Universal," he said. "We basically bought
the idea of a single President having to date, and we took it from there.")

In the hands of Mr. Reiner and Mr. Sorkin, the idea has become less screwballish
and more Presidential, not to say Clintonian. Get past the tete-a-tete in the
Presidential residence and the tongue hockey in the China Room. "The American
President" is a yarn about a popular President whose re-elect ratings plunge
when his love life becomes fodder for political enemies and a gossip-mongering
press.

President Andrew Shepherd is a brainy Democrat, a one-time college professor who
skipped Vietnam for greater glory on the field of political battle. He has an
unexplained "character problem" that his Republican foes were not smarmy enough
to raise against a widower but that they gleefully trundle out when his romance
with a lobbyist becomes public. The widower part aside, much of this may sound
vaguely familiar to political buffs. Mr. Clinton, a brainy one-time college
teacher who skipped Vietnam, was a pretty popular Democrat whose re-elect
numbers went into the sewer when his personal life hit the tabloids in 1993
(after first hitting the tabloids the year before, during the campaign).

Well, sure, Mr. Reiner said; when a film crew spends as much time in the White
House as this one did, a little osmosis is bound to occur. Mr. Reiner visited
the White House five times in 1993 to research the script, including a two-day
trek with Mr. Clinton through the Presidential schedule. Mr. Sorkin was there;
Mr. Douglas and others also dropped by.

"At the time we were researching the film, Whitewater was raging, the Paula
Jones thing had broken, and we thought, 'My God, how do you do that job?' " Mr.
Reiner recalled. "It's scary to think that some of our more qualified people
would shy away from these jobs because, well, who wants the scrutiny?"

Still, Mr. Sorkin said, the osmosis mostly ends there. "I looked at Presidential
diaries going back to Johnson" -- Lyndon, that is -- "and saw that the White
House as a work place was reinvented with every administration, so I had a lot
of latitude," he said. "I'm sure people will say Michael J. Fox is George
Stephanopoulos, and all that. It really isn't that."

All right, maybe a little. Mr. Fox, a longtime acquaintance of Mr.
Stephanopoulos's, appears in the film as President Shepherd's chief domestic
adviser and prepared for the part by watching his friend on television and at a
New York speech. The result is a hyperkinetic character, a lot shorter than the
others and slightly mop-headed, who strategizes White House legislative
campaigns and nags his boss to follow his more liberal Democratic instincts.

SOME IN THE CLINTON White House call that a good description of Mr.
Stephanopoulos. Asked about that, Mr. Stephanopoulos, one of the few in the
White House who had seen an early screening of the film at this writing (Mr.
Clinton may take it in one of these days), deftly non-answered, "I like his
haircut."

Just as Michael J. Fox is not precisely George Stephanopoulos, neither could
Martin Sheen be much more than a cheap Hong Kong knockoff of Thomas F. (Mac)
McLarty, President Clinton's lifelong friend, political mentor and first chief
of staff. Mr. Sheen plays President Shepherd's lifelong friend, political mentor
and chief of staff.

Nor does Shawna Waldron, who plays President Shepherd's 13-year-old daughter,
the apple of his eye, seem much more than a coincidental Chelsea Clinton,
16-year-old daughter and apple, etc., etc.

Ditto for President Shepherd's press secretary (Anna Deavere Smith), who
becomes, after Dee Dee Myers, the second real or fictional spokeswoman in White
House history. And op. cit. for the film's Presidential pollster, played by
David Paymer, who said in publicity handouts that he based his portrayal on the
work of Stanley Greenberg, Mr. Clinton's chief pollster.

(A note: Mr. Greenberg will have none of this. In an interview, he said he had
rebuffed requests to sit down with Mr. Paymer because movies always seem to
depict pollsters as snake-oil salesmen. He needn't have fretted; Mr. Paymer's
pollster, like all President Shepherd's aides, is inordinately decent and
thoughtful.)

If there is any lingering thought that the principal characters and underlying
theme of "The American President" spring from the principal characters and the
underlying theme of the Clinton Administration, Richard Dreyfuss puts the lie to
it. Mr. Dreyfuss plays Senator Bob Rumson, a Snidely Whiplash of a Republican
with a Presidential bloodthirstiness beyond even the long-advertised aspirations
of Senator Phil Gramm. The Senator is the sort of pol who greets a damning
photograph of President Shepherd's love interest with a rendition of "It's
Beginning to Look a Lot Like Christmas," and suggests on national television
that the lobbyist once slept her way through an entire state legislature.

In the end, the President is faced with a terrible choice: embrace the shining
idealism of his political millstone of a girlfriend or shun her and stick to his
old legislative agenda, a feel-good but toothless crime package concocted mostly
to get him re-elected. It would be wrong, as Richard Nixon once said, to reveal
the outcome. Suffice it to say that Andy Shepherd is the sort of President who
urges his daughter to read the Constitution for entertainment.

Mr. Reiner said he intended "The American President" to be a paean to the
Presidency, which has taken its share of hits in national politics of late. That
Mr. Clinton happens to be the President is incidental but not unwelcome. "We've
had such distrust of our public leaders and officials in recent years, something
that started with Watergate and certainly wasn't helped by Iran-contra," he
said. "This was a way of starting to restore public confidence in public
officials. And partly, it had to do with this President, who I happen to think
is getting a lot of bad raps because he's on the tail end of the media feeding
frenzy."

Mr. Clinton has been becalmed in the horse latitudes of public opinion for close
to a year, with an underwhelming 45 percent of the public approving of his
performance in office. Mr. Reiner believes a little restoration of public
confidence will be all the President needs to win another term. "When he was
back at 39 in the polls," the director said (that is, 39 percent of the public
approved of Mr. Clinton's performance), "I was the only guy -- everybody thought
I was crazy -- who said he'd be re-elected."

And that may be proof all by itself that "The American President" isn't a
takeoff on the incumbent. Because as Mr. Sorkin puts it, President Andrew
Shepherd ends the film, one year before an election, "in deep political
trouble."

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Michael Douglas, right, plays President Andrew Shepherd in the
new film "The American President"--Clintonian echoes? (John Ficara/Sygma
(Clinton); Francois Duhamel/Castle Rock Entertainment (Douglas)) (pg. 1);
Michael Douglas and Annette Bening in Rob Reiner's "American President"--Dating
tips for a Chief Executive. (Castle Rock Entertainment) (pg. 40)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN PERSON;
Mrs. Whitman's First Lady

BYLINE: By BARBARA STEWART

SECTION: Section 13NJ;  Page 4;  Column 1;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1446 words

DATELINE: PRINCETON


CHRISTABEL VARTANIAN says she has one of the best jobs in the Whitman
administration: She is in charge of graciousness. For Ms. Vartanian, the job
seems as tailor-made as the pink fitted jacket she wore one recent morning on a
tour of the official mansion, Drumthwacket.

The job, head of protocol, pays $55,385 and is a new one -- for a very good
reason. While Mrs. Whitman entered office equipped with a First Gentleman --
John Whitman, an investment banker -- he was not willing to take over
traditional First Lady jobs: planning dinners, rescuing guests stranded
awkwardly at official cocktail parties, presiding over household staff meetings,
charming visiting legislators and business leaders.

So this Governor, the first woman to serve as New Jersey's head of state, needed
her own First Lady -- someone unquestioningly loyal and discreet, with an
ambassador's sense of propriety. Fittingly, she turned to her old friend,
supporter and neighbor, Ms. Vartanian.

True to form, Ms. Vartanian rose to the challenge, and with characteristic
graciousness. "I'm fortunate she asked me," she said.

But what does this new department actually do? For starters, Ms. Vartanian and
her two assistants deal in details. They dig up new addresses for the holiday
cards, approve the gilt state seal on the dinner invitations, coordinate the
napkin colors with the tablecloths, procure fresh orange juice for the Saudi
Ambassador while making sure the skirts of all women within his sight cover
their knees. Through all of this, she eschews the limelight, letting credit fall
on the Governor or the staff.

She is more than a social secretary, though. With the Governor's scheduler, she
plots out Mrs. Whitman's days. Her charge is those social events that are really
business, as opposed to the Governor's few social events that are actually for
fun. Typical of a year's hundreds of occasions are a high tea for the Ambassador
of Mongolia, a cocktail party for the Coalition for Lower Taxes, a luncheon for
the Heavy Construction Coalition.

This particular morning, the occasion is a children's tour of the six formal
downstairs rooms of Drumthwacket, the Governor's official mansion in Princeton.
The upstairs rooms, like those in the White House, are private, for family
living. The children are from Far Hills Country Day School, which the two
Vartanian children -- Nishan, now 19 and at Rollins College, and Annabel, now 17
and at Blair Academy -- attended, along with the Whitman children.

Ms. Vartanian looks impeccable in her pink jacket with black trim over a black
dress and black pumps -- an outfit reminiscent of those Jacqueline Kennedy wore
as First Lady. There is, in fact, a vague resemblance, in the swinging dark hair
and oval face with blusher-flushed cheeks.

"The Governor was really excited to hear you were coming," she tells a foyer
filled with children, "and she was so sorry she couldn't be here."

If the Governor, in fact, had more pressing engagements than greeting a
schoolchildren's tour, Ms. Vartanian gives no hint. She seems to be of a rapidly
evaporating school of women who learned to soothe, to defer, to charm, to tip
things into the most favorable light. And to be savvy while doing it. Of the
gate-enclosed, antique-filled mansion surrounded by rolling lawns and gardens,
attended by servants, she says, "Really, this is the people's house."

Only two statements approached anything like criticism: "The transition was not
the smoothest thing," said said of the hand-off from the previous
administration, and: "We don't want to criticize Giuliani's staff. I do believe
he has someone in protocol." She was referring to the diplomatic uproar that
ensued when Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani forced Yasir Arafat to leave a concert
during United Nations festivities in Manhattan.

Ms. Vartanian grew up in Clewiston, in South Florida, daughter of one of the
town's most important men. Her father, Loyd Kelly, owned the Caterpillar tractor
franchise in the country's biggest sugar-growing area.

SHE was valedictorian of Clewiston High School, and majored in theater and
English at Rollins College in Winter Park, Fla. She prefers to keep her age
private, explaining, "I'm from the South." At Rollins, she met her husband,
Paul, who now sells antique jewelry wholesale from an office in Manhattan. They
moved to Long Island and then Bedminster. Through Governor Whitman's parents --
"such gracious people, so welcoming" -- she met John and Christie Whitman. That
was around 1974. When Ms. Whitman ran for Governor, the Vartanians offered
"moral support" and helped organize fund-raising events.

Accepting the new Governor's request to help out, Ms. Vartanian found herself
immediately facing a weeklong series of parties for the World Cup soccer
championships. She needed to identify, find addresses for, invite and prepare
for 3,000 guests

"I had no lists," she said. Lists, and lists of lists, are her basic tools.

She and Rachel Donington, an assistant, began by drawing up alphabetical
categories: Assembly members, senators, cabinet members, celebrities and members
of the clergy, the press and sports figures. They asked friends and
acquaintances. They looked up Italian and German corporate divisions in the
state -- for the countries playing -- and invited the chief operating officers.
They came up with 22 computer-printed pages of names and addresses of prominent
people to invite to the parties.

Ms. Vartanian shopped until she found the perfect fabric for tablecloths -- a
soccer-ball print -- and had soccer-ball invitations printed. She located New
Jersey singers and musicians.

Her philosophy of party-giving is to "get the big picture." Menus, caterers,
decorations and entertainment -- all revolve around that.

If the World Cup parties were "lighthearted," sporty, the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial fund-raising event was "patriotic." There, she arranged for life-sized
bronze statues of a wounded soldier, his buddy and a nurse to be placed in the
center of the big tent on the lawn. The state troopers' bagpipe and drum corps
played.

"It was wonderful they had that opportunity," said Ms. Vartanian, apparently
referring to both the musicians and the guests.

"It was fabulous," said Ms. Donington, who is 26, and postponed law school for
this "only happens once" job. "They loved it."

Ms. Vartanian: "We try to make people comfortable."

Ms. Donington: "People are so enthusiastic. It's so rewarding."

Referring to the Governor, Ms. Vartanian said: "Of course our parties are only
as good as she is." In setting the tone of events, she added, "we want to
reflect how the Governor would like things to be; we think of that first."

Ms Donington: "We make the style. Style is just as important as strong
policies."

The heart of the style and the protocol is Drumthwacket, 150 years old, with its
busts and portraits of George Washington and its thick curtains and archways,
three chiming grandfather clocks and brilliantly shined oval desk for signing
bills into law. The mansion is grand and lovely, like a period museum, and so
formal that both the footsteps and voices of the staff members, volunteers and
docents seem muffled, hushed. Even the iced tea is striking, made by a
Drumthwacket recipe that includes fresh mint grown in the garden.

Drumthwacket, Ms. Donington said, "is perfect." And she went on: "It's karma.
Good things happen at a place where good people are doing the good things."

Those things, by necessity, include feeding and amusing some 10,000 guests a
year. Inexorably, the parties continue -- tea for 100 from the Federation of
Jewish Women, a reception for the 80 members of the Garden Club of New Jersey,
dinner for the Mexican Economic Trade Summit, a group of 20.

In addition Ms. Vartanian and Ms. Donington are planning Mr. Whitman's project
for governor's spouses. This year the theme is "children and violence," and Mr.
Whitman and Ms. Vartanian are trying to get a "Just say no to violence" campaign
going. They're starting with a poster contest for juvenile offenders.

MEANWHILE, there are everyday crises. Making sure, for instance, that extra
place settings are removed from banquet tables, something the White House staff
neglected, Ms. Vartanian once noted when she was there. Or if, as she has done,
Governor Whitman makes a last-minute appearance somewhere. It happened recently
when Pope John Paul II arrived at Newark International Airport. To make sure the
Governor had a chair, somebody hastily handed one over the fence to somebody
else, who put it on the tarmac minutes before the Governor walked over. "Too
last-minute for me," Ms. Vartanian said.

NAME: CHRISTABEL VARTANIAN

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Christabel Vartanian, the Governor's protocol director, at
Drumthwacket, where politics and socializing intersect. (Laura Pedrick for The
New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Berkeley Makes Peace With Its Veterans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 32;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 764 words

DATELINE: BERKELEY, Calif., Nov. 11


A quarter-century ago, this city was a hotbed of opposition to the Vietnam War,
so much so that City Council members stopped reciting the Pledge of Allegiance
at their meetings. On Veterans Day 1995, though, the city was ready for
reconciliation, honoring 22 local men lost in the conflict.

"It is historic, there's just no question about it," Mayor Shirley Dean said.

In keeping with Berkeley's penchant for the unexpected, the commemoration was
the brainchild of a singer whose "Feel-Like-I'm-Fixin'-to-Die Rag" was an anthem
of the anti-war movement. "I thought, let's symbolically put it to rest now,"
said the singer, Country Joe McDonald.

Mayor Dean said: "This is an unlikely place for this to be happening. Country
Joe is an unlikely person to be the catalyst. I really think it's a piece of
history and it's going to be remembered that way."

Bill Hodges, president of Chapter 400 of the Vietnam Veterans of America, helped
organize the event. "I've talked to a lot of people across the country, and they
all think it's the greatest thing," he said.

During the war, some veterans returned to a chilly or downright unpleasant
welcome here, and those who did not return were mourned in private.

But times have changed.

In recent years, leftists lost control of the City Council, toning down the
nature of debate considerably. Meanwhile, Mr. McDonald, a Navy veteran who did
not serve in Vietnam, became involved in veterans issues as his old ideas of
"good guys or bad guys" changed to "just a lot of victims."

The fruits of Mr. McDonald's efforts were to be recognized this evening when a
memorial was unveiled to the war dead, complete with a color guard, songs,
speeches and a meditation by a Buddhist priest.

Speakers included Jan Scruggs, president and founder of the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial in Washington, D.C., and John Nyugen, who fought with the South
Vietnamese armed forces.

Earlier today, Mr. McDonald signed on to a new interactive computer memorial
that carries the names, photographs and some background information on the
veterans.

"The healing is still going on," Mr. McDonald said as he contemplated the day's
events. "It may take the rest of our lives."

Family members of veterans seemed pleased by the attention -- even if it was 20
years after the war ended.

"I think it's a great thing for Berkeley to do this after all these years," said
Charles Darden of New York City, whose brother, Otis Lee Darden, died in Vietnam
on March 2, 1969 -- his 21st birthday.

Several members of the Darden family clustered around a glass display case
holding a yellowing collection that summed up the fallen soldier's life -- a
photograph, medals and a clipping headlined, "Berkeley G.I. Dies in Combat the
Day He Became a Man."

"I am very proud," said another brother, Linnie Darden. "It's sort of unexpected
for me, at least in Berkeley. He's finally getting his recognition."

The computer sign-in took place in a room filled with mementoes of the fallen, a
poignant collection that brought some to tears as they looked at the military
caps, bravery citations and stiffly posed photographs that bespoke youth and
loss.

Among the onlookers was veteran Bob Hansen of Santa Barbara, Calif. Mr. Hansen,
who was sent to Alaska instead of Vietnam, did not know anyone on the list, but
he had traveled the 300 or so miles to Berkeley anyway.

He hoped Berkeley's efforts to make peace with its veterans would succeed. "This
here's just opening up and saying, 'Hey, let's talk,' " he said.

The plans also included the unveiling of a framed scroll honoring Berkeley's
Vietnam War dead, men like Mr. Darden and Daryl Lee Ligons, who was killed on
his way to a Bob Hope Christmas show.

Color guards from Chapter 400 of the Vietnam Veterans of America, based in
neighboring Oakland, and from a Girl Scout troop were among those expected to
join the commemoration, Mr. Hodges said.

In 1971, Berkeley's City Council members stopped saying the Pledge of Allegiance
at meetings, and residents marched and rallied to show their sympathies. In
1984, nine years after the fall of Saigon, the Council voted to say the pledge
once a year, at its first meeting.

Councilwoman Dona Spring, who helped organize today's commemoration, said the
event was not an apology for the anti-war activity but an effort to honor an
overlooked group, the veterans.

Despite the historically significant aspect of the celebration, Mr. McDonald
said organizers had tried to keep a hometown feel to the event.

"Berkeley has a big reputation, but it's a small town," he said.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Japanese-American Veterans, a War at Home

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 32;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 757 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Nov. 11


Richard M. Sakakida, a young intelligence officer in the United States Army
during World War II, was captured by the Japanese in the Philippines and endured
months of torture. But Mr. Sakakida, a Japanese-American, now says the most
difficult test was proving to his country that he was a loyal citizen.

"I wasn't seeking medals and honors," Mr. Sakakida, 74, recalled this week. "I
wanted to fulfill my duty to my country. When my mother said goodbye to me, she
told me, 'Don't you dare bring disgrace to your country or your family.' That
really stuck with me."

Mr. Sakakida, who was born and reared in Hawaii and now lives in Fremont,
Calif., was one of more than 33,000 Japanese-Americans who served in the United
States military during World War II in behalf of a country that treated them
with something less than respect. At the time, Japanese-Americans like Mr.
Sakakida were prohibited from purchasing property in certain areas. And Japanese
immigrants, like Mr. Sakakida's mother, who had come several decades earlier,
were barred by Federal law from obtaining citizenship.

Federal and California officials paid tribute to Japanese-American veterans at a
ceremony here on Wednesday, one of several planned commemorations leading up to
Veterans Day. Among the other events was the opening on Friday of an exhibit at
the city's Japanese-American National Museum detailing the role of
Japanese-American soldiers from the Spanish-American War to Vietnam.

During World War II, the military placed Japanese-Americans in segregated units,
and they were involved in some of the bloodiest battles in Europe.
Japanese-American units suffered high casualty rates, sometimes more than three
times the rates of other units. Japanese-Americans earned more than 18,000
individual decorations, including one Medal of Honor and 52 Distinguished
Service Crosses and nearly 9,500 Purple Hearts.

The Army's 442d Regimental Combat Team, a segregated Japanese-American unit
whose motto was "Go for Broke," earned seven Presidential citations for its
battle campaigns throughout Europe. Another Japanese-American unit was among the
United States Army units that liberated prisoners from the Nazi concentration
camp at Dachau in 1945.

At the ceremony, Jesse Brown, the Secretary of Veteran Affairs, praised the
nearly 3,000 veterans from across the country who attended, some of whom wore
their military regalia. He made special note of those who served in World War II
while their families and friends -- nearly 120,000 Japanese-Americans,
two-thirds of them citizens -- were held in American internment camps.

"Despite being treated as second-class citizens, they were first-class
Americans," Mr. Brown said.

These were bittersweet words for many veterans like Kazuo F. Yamaguchi, 70, who
said the ceremony was long overdue. While proud of his military service, he
continues to bear grievances over the discrimination and prejudice dealt to him
by his government.

Mr. Yamaguchi, whose Brooklyn roots show in his accent, said he felt this
prejudice when he tried to enlist in the armed forces. He was classified as an
"enemy alien" and was rejected twice. "I realized I got the wrong eyes and the
wrong surname," he said.

As the war intensified, however, the military, which had rejected most
Japanese-Americans who had sought to enlist, began to reverse its policy. And
Mr. Yamaguchi, still infused with the desire to show his loyalty and commitment
to his country, volunteered again.

This time he was accepted, and was eventually assigned to an intelligence unit
in the Pacific, where he interrogated Japanese prisoners, translated messages
and broke codes intercepted from the Japanese.

Lieut. Gen. Allen Ono told the veterans that they were role models for a whole
generation of Japanese-Americans. General Ono, who is retired, said segregated
units no longer existed when he joined the Army in 1955. The reason, he said,
was that Japanese-American soldiers proved that they "could be trusted."

"They proved that a judgment of people should be based on potential and ability,
not on the shape of one's eyes," he added.

Jun W. Yamamoto, 72, who served in the 442d Regimental Combat Team on the front
lines while his parents were in an internment camp in the California desert,
said he hoped the veterans' stories would inspire generations to come.

"We cracked open the door of opportunity," he said. "Now I hope that door is
still open for young people -- that their talent will move them where they want
to go."

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jun W. Yamamoto, 72, served in World War II while his parents
were in an internment camp in the California desert. He visited a new exhibit at
the Japanese-American National Museum in Los Angeles detailing the role of
Japanese-American soldiers from the Spanish-American War to Vietnam. (Jan
Sonnenmair for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On Parade To the Beat Of History

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1362 words


With 500,000 cheering, flag-waving spectators lining the way and thundering
drums and nostalgic Glenn Miller swing on the autumn air, tens of thousands of
proud American warriors marched out of the past and up Fifth Avenue yesterday in
New York's largest Veterans Day Parade since the end of World War II.

Planes roared overhead, tanks rumbled by, cannons boomed salutes and church
bells pealed across the city and the nation as huge Norman Rockwell crowds
turned out and more than 33,000 marchers -- led by Medal of Honor winners and
veterans of many conflicts -- joined the Nation's Parade, the official
culmination of four years of celebrations marking the Second World War's 50th
anniversary.

Around the country, there were wreath-layings, religious services, hometown
parades and other ceremonies to commemorate Veterans Day with solemnity and
jubilation. In Los Angeles, Federal and California officials paid special
tribute to Japanese-American veterans in several commemorations. [Page 32]

In New York, the parade -- with many older veterans, melodies from the 1940's as
well as traditional march music, and vintage tanks, jeeps and other ordnance
from World War II -- had an old-fashioned feel, harking back to a time when war
brought out the poignancy of ordinary lives and people remembered those who
served at Bataan and Corregidor, Inchon and Pleiku.

"The significance of this day is not here, but all over our country in the
cemeteries where the coffins are," said Thomas W. Gorman, an Army tank crewman
in World War II. "You never forget. They're the ones who paid for our freedom.
All the years pass and you never get over it." His blue eyes welled with tears
and he apologized: "You see good friends die, and you ask, 'why am I here?' "

The day was gray and blustery, but not a spoiler. An awning of clouds hung over
the city and winds that gusted up to 30 miles an hour snapped color-guard flags
and carried the Sousa marches, the bagpipe skirls and the mellower cadences of
"In the Mood" and "American Patrol" from the Glenn Miller Alumni Players and
other bands. In Central Park, adjacent to the line of march, autumn leaves
fluttered red and gold like tattered field banners.

At one point, a steady rain fell for half an hour, but the marching and the
music continued. Most of those in the crowds popped umbrellas and held their
ground, though a few sought refuge in doorways and under awnings.

Ray Janoff, 68, one of the youngest of two dozen veterans marching under the
banner of the 88th Infantry, stepped under an awning at the Pierre Hotel, across
from the reviewing stand at 59th Street and Fifth Avenue, for a brief rest and
reminiscence. His brown wool uniform from a half-century ago was wet and musty.

He joined the Army in 1943, when he was 16, he said. Before he was 17, he had
joined in the invasion of Italy and the liberation of Rome. He suffered a
shrapnel wound of the knee on Feb. 6, 1945. He had a few pictures, of himself
with a young Italian girl, of Red Cross women who brought coffee and doughnuts
to troops at the front. He said he would not have missed the parade for
anything.

"It's an honor," he said simply, proudly.

The organizers had expressed hopes for nearly a million spectators, but there
was no disappointment when the police put the crowd at more than 500,000 for a
parade that had not drawn substantial followings for decades and was always
overshadowed by the St. Patrick's Day Parade and other ethnic celebrations.

First staged after World War I as an Armistice Day affair, the parade had ups
and downs and reached a peak of popularity after World War II. But it had since
declined and was all but moribund in recent years, a casualty of public apathy
and aging marchers. But this year, riding interest surrounding the World War II
anniversary, it was revitalized by combining many parades from around the
region. A wave of publicity in recent days brought out huge crowds.

Cheering, applauding, waving American flags and signs that said "Thank you,"
calling out appreciation and encouragement, people stood seven or eight deep
along Fifth Avenue. Organizers said the largest Veterans Day crowd since 1945
had turned out to honor those who served in North Africa, Europe, the South
Pacific, Korea, Vietnam, the Persian Gulf, and in peacetime as well.

It was a glorious parade, with 50 Pearl Harbor survivors, many in Hawaiian
shirts; Airborne units in berets and camouflage fatigues; former prisoners of
war; submariners, Air Force pilots, members of the Women's Army Corps; a large
contingent of Filipino survivors of the Bataan Death March; floats remembering
field medics and the U.S.O., and everywhere soldiers, sailors and marines in
uniforms from long ago, with battle ribbons, medals, service bars and badges.

Zeke Zarchi, an 80-year-old trumpet player, was one of several members of the
original Glenn Miller Band, which served in Europe from 1942 to 1945, and was
with the band when Miller disappeared on a flight over the English Channel in
December 1944. "We have a lot to remember," he said as the band played a medley
that included "Moonlight Serenade" and "Pennsylvania 6-5000."

As the marchers stepped off shortly after 11 A.M., church bells across the city
and the nation began ringing, tolling 50 times to mark the years since the end
of World War II. At noon, cannons set up near the reviewing stand blazed a
21-gun salute. Later, five vintage fighter planes from World War II, four F-16
jets and a Stealth bomber swept low over the avenue, giving the crowds a glimpse
of terrifying power. Some car alarms went off.

The line of march included 3,000 who had participated in World War II and 23,000
other veterans, including members of groups as diverse as the American Legion
and Veterans of Foreign Wars and the Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Veterans.
Hundreds more were in marching bands or convoys of Sherman and Patton tanks,
artillery pieces, jeeps mounted with machine guns and other units, including
Gen. George S. Patton's World War II command car. The ammunition was hard candy
in red, white and blue wrappers, tossed by gunners in handfuls to children.

The parade's two oldest participants, both corporals in World War I, were
107-year-old Herbert W. Young, of Harlem, and 97-year-old James R. Jones, of New
Rochelle. While Mr. Young served mostly in the 807th Pioneer Infantry, both were
members of the 369th Infantry, the famed all-black unit assigned to the French
army because black Americans were not allowed to fight alongside their white
countrymen.

Mr. Young and Mr. Jones were unable to march, but they waved and saluted the
Stars and Stripes, and rode with soldierly bearing in an open 1923 Ford from
55th Street to 59th Street. There, they and the World War II veterans took
places in the reviewing stand with dignitaries that included Gov. George E.
Pataki, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Defense
Secretary William Perry. The politicians all spoke glowingly of the parade.

Also in the reviewing stand was the developer Donald Trump, who provided the
only note of controversy in an otherwise positive day. Many veterans were angry
that organizers had agreed to name Mr. Trump, who is not a veteran, as grand
marshal in exchange for his contribution of $200,000 and help in raising
additional funds.

But others said that Mr. Trump had provided crucial aid for a parade that
otherwise might not have come off. While $500,000 short of their $2.9 million
budget, organizers were able to persuade veterans groups across the region to
consolidate their parades and managed to acquire a small armada of antique and
vintage military vehicles: 73 tanks, jeeps and other rolling ordnance, as well
as 50 marching bands and 20 floats. They also secured the mellifluous voice of
James Earl Jones, who introduced many units as they passed the reviewing stand.
Would it all happen again, big, next year? George Derkas, 75, a World War II
Coast Guardsman, doubted it. "After this, it's going to be nothing," he said.
"After this, it's the younger generation that is going to have to do it. This
will probably be our last parade."

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Flags flourish overhead as marchers head up Fifth Avenue in the
official culmination of World War II anniversary celebrations. (Andrea Mohin/The
New York Times) (pg. 1); In New York's largest Veterans Day Parade since World
War II, with music providing a 1940's flavor, a veteran waved to some of the
500,000 cheering spectators yesterday (Edward Keating/The New York Times), a boy
temporarily lowered his flag for a piece of candy and a quartet of Pearl Harbor
survivors stepped lively. (Suzanne DeChillo/The New York Times) (pg. 50)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Tee Wee Tator and Flytrap Klinkenburg

BYLINE: By Alice McDermott;   Alice McDermott, who grew up in Elmont, L.I., is
the author of three novels.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 24;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 652 words



OUR HOUSE
The Stories of Levittown.
By Pam Conrad.
Illustrated by Brian Selznick.
65 pp. New York:
Scholastic. $14.95.
(Ages 8 to 12)

ANYONE who has grown up on Long Island, and, no doubt, anyone growing up there
now, will feel a pleasant shock of recognition reading Pam Conrad's description
of Long Island dirt. "This Long Island dust," she tells us, "can cover your
hands and arms, bury itself in your shoes, get in your hair and, still, you
never feel dirty. It's a dirt that smells clean and fresh, and sometimes forms
into little hard balls that burst into clouds if you pinch them between your
fingers."

A wholly accurate detail, as I recall, and one that clearly indicates the
author's intentions here. For in "Our House: The Stories of Levittown," Ms.
Conrad means to give her readers a child's-eye view, a
crouched-in-the-backyard-with-a-spade-or-a-spoon perspective on a place that has
come to seem merely an illustration of a social phenomenon, a place that is more
often shown, as on the book's endpapers, from the air.

She begins with the historical facts: a tract of farmland called Island Trees
was bought by a man named Levitt, who understood that the soldiers newly
returned from the war would need "a place to put their furniture and park their
cars, and a place to raise children who might like to play in dirt." She
describes how a "brigade" of trucks, a "battalion" of machines and "gangs" of
men built houses on the potato fields "like Fords on an assembly line,"
finishing one every 15 minutes, it seemed, and selling them to the waiting
veterans and their young families for $6,990, with a 4 percent G.I. loan.

With this essential background given, the narrator then steps back and lets the
children themselves speak. In six separate fictional vignettes, one for each
decade since the town began, children growing up in Levittown tell their
stories. TeeWee Tator remembers the summer of 1948, when he pressed his
footprints into the wet cement of his family's new patio. Patricia Marjorie
Allen tells of the night in the 50's when "Mr. Leo Choplin came to take the
'night photograph' of Levittown from the water tower and lit the streets with
flashes from 1,500 flashbulbs."

Tommy LaRocca and his pal Flytrap Klinkenburg discuss their recollections of the
day John F. Kennedy was shot and long for the return of Tommy's troubled
brother, Chick, who has been sent to Vietnam. A child of the 70's recalls a long
teachers' strike. A boy of the 80's shares his writer's notebook, which is full
of thoughts about pollution and race relations.

Katie Bachman, heir to TeeWee Tator's very house, describes a family tragedy. It
is an appropriate subject for the insular 90's, but one that also illustrates
the author's contention that neighborhood is all about change and growth, loss
and memory, that "underneath it all, there are invisible footprints pressed into
sidewalks and gardens and wet cement, footprints of all the kids who have ever
played there."

Surely as much can be said about any American suburb, but in "Our House,"
Levittown is in the details: in the Tators"'stairway to the stars" (meaning to
the as-yet-unfinished attic), in the sump surrounded by a breached chain-link
fence. Generations of children climbing through the holes have worn smooth paths
through the area.

Some of the later stories lose this specificity of locale, as the author seeks
to define the decade rather than the place. But Brian Selznick's pen-and-ink
illustrations of Levittown houses over the years help to make up for these
lapses. And Ms. Conrad's final exhortation to the young reader to "remember the
curve of the sun in your bedroom window late in the day, the way your little
brother's hair smelled after his bath, and the sound of your mother and father
talking in the kitchen" is reminder enough that Levittown, like the site of any
childhood, is endurably unique.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 13, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION REVIEW;
Ancient History For Today

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 6;  Column 4;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 548 words


It was one of television's early news spectaculars. Millions of Americans who
had tuned in to watch the Democratic Party name its 1968 Presidential nominee
found themselves watching police beat young demonstrators on the streets of
Chicago. It was a scene that may have won the Presidency for Richard M. Nixon
and prolonged the war in Vietnam.

The politics and passions of the time are vividly brought back by "Chicago
1968," tonight's offering of "The American Experience." The pictures of the
standoffs and confrontations have lost none of their drama; those who were in
the protest ranks, on the police lines or in the convention hall cannot forget
the emotions that seemed to be tearing America apart.

In the hall, antiwar delegates were waging their unavailing battle for Senator
Eugene McCarthy. This account touches on the sorry condition of Hubert H.
Humphrey, once the personification of liberalism, who owed his candidacy to
President Lyndon B. Johnson and could not or would not join the antiwar forces.
On television he was reduced to being the beneficiary of Mayor Richard J. Daley,
the tough Chicago boss, and of strong-arm security men seen pushing around even
network correspondents.

Tonight's history notes the differences of style and intent among the
protesters, especially between those led by David Dellinger, a steady proponent
of nonviolence, and those led by two impresarios of political theater, Abbie
Hoffman and Jerry Rubin, who as the narrator says, "became darlings of the
media."

Nor does "Chicago 1968" neglect the reactions of city officials faced night
after night with thousands of demonstrators in their parks and streets, whose
objective, as one saw it, was "to have a fight with policemen." One protester
says they were the police's worst nightmare: "We were their sons and daughters."
But the police, mostly from working-class families, saw them as a much more
privileged group than their own children. One officer calls the invaders
"intellectuals from the suburbs," and a United States attorney calls them
"spoiled brats."

The hour builds to the climactic battle. After days of provocation and overwork,
the police vented their feelings with their clubs. Their explosion of brutality,
particularly the beating of Rennie Davis, a Dellinger ally, further divided the
protesters: Mr. Dellinger held to his nonviolent precepts; Tom Hayden, another
ally, turned to guerrilla tactics. Mr. Hayden, who has moved into respectability
over the years, tells tonight's interviewer, "I was trying to keep my head while
I was going out of my mind."

The street clash, captured on television a few hours before the convention vote,
would resonate at the polls: a Humphrey aide says of the nomination, "There was
nothing to celebrate but wreckage." It all may seem like ancient history, but
the class and cultural divisions exposed in 1968 could be detected, too, in last
November's election results and may be in evidence again next November.

THE AMERICAN EXPERIENCE
Chicago 1968
PBS, tonight at 9.
(Channel 13 in New York)

Judy Crichton, executive producer; Margaret Drain, senior producer; produced by
Chana Gazit of David Grubin Productions for "The American Experience," a
production of WGBH/Boston. David McCullough, series host.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Army troops and antiwar protesters facing off at the Democratic
National Convention, recalled tonight in "Chicago 1968." (PBS)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Bomb Kills 4 Americans in Saudi Arabia

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section A;   Page 1;   Column 2;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1163 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 13


Two powerful explosions ripped through an American-run military training center
in the heart of the Saudi Arabian capital of Riyadh today, killing four
Americans and shocking a vast desert kingdom unaccustomed to the terrorism that
has plagued its neighbors.

The blasts, which the Pentagon said injured 35 to 40 people, were caused by at
least one bomb, probably set off in a van. Officials said that one soldier and
three civilians were killed.

There were conflicting reports with estimates of as many as 6 dead and 60
injured, but they could not be confirmed.

Officials said that they had not yet determined who was responsible or whether
the United States or Saudi Arabia was the principal target of the explosion,
which tore off the facade of the modern, three-story National Guard headquarters
near a busy shopping center in Riyadh at 11:40 A.M..

"This was a desperate act, a horrible act, the work of cowards," said Raymond E.
Mabus, Jr., the American Ambassador to Saudi Arabia, in a telephone interview
from Riyadh. "This is not something you think would ever happen here."

Not long after the explosion, King Fahd convened his Cabinet and "expressed its
condemnation of this criminal act, which is foreign to our society, beliefs and
religion," the Saudi Press Agency reported.

Two groups took responsibility for today's attack. One of them, the Tigers of
the Gulf, has not been heard of before, Administration officials said. The
second, a little-known group called The Islamic Movement for Change, sent faxes
last spring to several embassies in Riyadh, including the American Embassy, as
well as Western news organizations, criticizing the Saudi royal family and
threatening actions against Western interests in the kingdom.

One such statement set the end of June as the deadline for the "crusaders" to
leave Saudi Arabia or the movement would "exert all available means to evict
these forces from the island of Islam."

But Mr. Mabus and other American officials said that it is impossible to say at
this point whether the group was responsible.

"The group faxed us some threats," Mr. Mabus said. "The fact is, it's a bad
neighborhood we live in. We get threats here. We take them seriously, but we
don't let them paralyze us."

Mr. Mabus added, "What this won't do is have any effect on the relationship with
the United States and Saudi Arabia or on the things we are jointly interested
in."

In Washington, President Clinton pledged to "devote an enormous effort" to bring
those responsible to justice, calling the bombing "a hideous act" of terrorism.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation prepared to send more than a dozen agents to
Saudi Arabia. Some officials said they were concerned that the Saudi authorities
lacked the forensic ability to undertake their own inquiry, and that American
investigators were hoping to get to Riyadh before the crime scene is disturbed.

The explosion, which could be felt miles away, set off a fire that engulfed the
administrative headquarters for the American military's liaison with the Saudi
National Guard and sent black smoke billowing across the city.

About 200 people -- half of them Americans -- were nearby when the explosion
occurred, many of them eating lunch in the building's ground-level snack bar.

The Americans live in the same complex, behind the damaged building.

Clinton Administration officials said that preliminary reports suggested that
one large bomb was responsible for the blast -- probably assembled with about
200 pounds of explosives and detonated in a van by remote control from the
parking lot. They said a smaller secondary explosion probably occurred shortly
afterward.

The attack today focused the spotlight on the vulnerability of Saudi Arabia, the
world's biggest oil exporter and the keeper of Islam's holiest shrines.

The Government of Saudi Arabia, long considered one of the most stable in the
region, has remained a close ally of the United States for half a century,
although it has refused since the 1991 Persian Gulf war to allow the United
States to base tanks and other military equipment on its soil for American
troops to use in the event of a new emergency.

Just as worrisome for the United States, the attack represents the first
terrorist act against the American military in Saudi Arabia in the 50 years the
United States has cooperated militarily with the Kingdom, and the first attack
against the American military in Saudi Arabia since an Iraqi Scud missile hit a
barracks, killing more than 20 American soldiers in 1991.

It was also the worst terrorist attack against Americans since the bombing of
Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988, in which 189 Americans
died, and revived bitter memories of the bombs against American targets in
Lebanon in the early 1980's that led to extraordinary security measures and the
rebuilding of many embassies.

"From the standpoint of the terrorists, this was a twofer," said a senior
Pentagon official. "You could get the U.S. military and you could also get one
of the institutions of the kingdom."

The Pentagon identified one of the dead Americans as Wayne Wiley, 55, a retired
Army major who was working for the Army in a civilian capacity. No hometown was
given for him.

Last month, two bombs thrown into a mosque in Qubah, 310 miles southwest of
Riyadh, killed eight people. But the attack was a local affair, and the villager
suspected in the attack blew himself up seven days after the bombings following
a gunfight with security forces.

In a statement released in Washington, President Clinton condemned the blast as
"an outrage."

Saudi Arabia is an absolute monarchy that operates without a legislature and has
banned political parties and imprisoned opposition leaders. The kingdom is so
sensitive to criticism that its officials confiscated film by photographers
trying to capture the scene.

Crown Prince Abdullah bin Abdel-Aziz, the half-brother of King Fahd and the head
of the National Guard since the early 1960's, toured the site of the blast, but
made no public comments.

"It is fair to say he is as shocked and outraged as we," Mr. Mabus said. "There
is a sense among the Saudis of the absolute horror of the event."

For two decades, the United States Government has run a United States Army
Materiel Command program that teaches the 80,000-strong Saudi National Guard how
to operate and maintain United States-supplied military equipment. The program
is operated under a contract with the Virginia-based Vinnell Corp., which has
earned hundreds of millions of dollars from it.

Vinnell's trainers have included Vietnam veterans, including Special Forces
personnel, and retired C.I.A. officers, according to former Government
officials. It is not known whether the firm has any direct ties with American
intelligence agencies at the present time.

The United States Embassy today urged Americans in the kingdom to be "extremely
cautious and vigilant."


LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Explosions killed several people, including four Americans,
yesterday in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (Reuters) (pg. A1)

Map shows the location of Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

No Hope in 567 M.I.A. Cases, the Pentagon Says

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;   Page 4;   Column 4;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 358 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 13


In the first estimate of its kind, the Pentagon said today that the bodies of
more than 500 American servicemen killed in the Vietnam War will never be
recovered. It said recovery is still possible for about 1,500 others.

The conclusions are based on a yearlong review of individual cases of American
troops missing in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia -- all of whom the Pentagon says
were killed.

It is the first time the Pentagon has reviewed each case and concluded that, for
a specific number, it was hopeless to continue trying to recover the bodies. It
has long said that some cases would go unresolved.

The Defense P.O.W.-M.I.A. Office, which conducted the review, concluded that of
the 2,202 open cases as of July 21, there was information available to continue
pursuing 1,476 cases. It said action on 159 cases was being "deferred" until
additional information is found, and that for 567 cases, there was "virtually no
possibility" of ever finding the bodies. Most of the 567 cases declared hopeless
are men lost at sea.

Bev Baker, a Pentagon spokeswoman, said the 2,202 figure has since fallen to
2,170 because some remains have been returned since July 21. She said that means
the 1,476 cases that were active in July have now been reduced to 1,444.

Delores Alfond, head of the National Alliance of Families, an M.I.A. activist
group, said she had not seen the Pentagon report yet but was outraged that 567
cases were being dropped. "They are prematurely closing cases without allowing
the families to view the intelligence," she said in a telephone interview.

But Ann Mills Griffiths, executive director of another such group, the National
League of Families, said closing out the cases would not surprise most of the
affected families.  "Most of the families have recognized for years that their
relatives are already accounted for as fully as possible," she said.

Although the Pentagon said the 567 cases are hopeless, it recommended setting up
an independent review board and that the civilian head of each branch of the
military then make a final determination on whether to resume work on any of the
cases.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS;
Asia Guide Calls Local Partners Key to Success

BYLINE: By EDWARD A. GARGAN

SECTION: Section D;   Page 4;   Column 3;   Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 880 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Nov. 13


When Jim Rohwer was writing about Asia from the genteel surroundings of the
London offices of The Economist, he was convinced he knew what he was doing. It
turned out, he confesses now, that he did not.

"I realized within three or four months of arriving in Asia that I understood
nothing about it at all," he said recently. "The same is generally true about
Western business people who haven't set foot here."

After four years in Asia, three for The Economist, the weekly news magazine
owned by Economist Newspaper Ltd., and the last as the chief economist for the
CS First Boston Corporation, Mr. Rohwer now seeks to share his epiphany with
Western readers. (Asians already pretty much know what he has discovered.) In
short, he wants to explain why Asia has become, in his words, "the miracle" of
late-20th-century free markets and economic development.

In a new book, "Asia Rising: Why America Will Prosper as Asia's Economies Boom"
(Simon & Schuster), Mr. Rohwer explores the fundamental causes of Asia's
prodigious growth and suggests how America's economy, and companies, can benefit
from the jarring transformation of the global economy.

His analysis and suggestions might trouble Westerners, but that discomfort is
essential, he said, if they are to grapple with Asia's complexities.

Indeed, the successful companies here, the ones that are defining how business
is done and how economies are shaped, are not the multinationals of the United
States and Europe, but the great conglomerates of Asia, like the Charoen
Pokphand Group of Bangkok, Thailand, which have been built mostly by a vast
diaspora of Chinese-born business families. Moreover, his analysis largely
diminishes Japan's role in Asia, a view that runs counter to most judgments
about growth in the region.

Mr. Rohwer is emphatic that his work is not a prescription for American
companies, but he does believe there is one fundamental tenet that emerges from
his book. "The biggest single thing for companies to do is to figure out how
they can plug themselves into local conditions," he said. "Mostly that means
finding the right partner, someone to guide you through that maze in Asia."

Yet, he cautioned, "this is very much a book of strategy more than a book on how
to do it."

In an interview, Mr. Rohwer called Asia's success dependent on "being open,
especially in terms of trade, investment and technology transfer. Second, it's
linked to not providing protection -- social protection, protection from
competition, protection from change. And third, it is having a very small role
for government. The family is central and not government institutions in
absorbing the shock of change."

Across Asia, government spending accounts for a very small share of gross
domestic product, usually less than 20 percent, Mr. Rohwer said, compared with
Western economies in which it ranges from 30 percent to 50 percent.

"How did this develop? These countries were under threats to their survival," he
said. "Their backs were to the wall and they had choices of fighting or
collapsing. Secondly, America's role in the cold war of defending them gave them
a stable structure. There also was a tremendous amount of American generosity.
But far more important was the willingness to protect these countries and absorb
their exports. And this was grounded in very strong family-based societies,
where learning and hard work were highly valued.

"And last -- and this is the thing Americans have the hardest time understanding
-- most places are run by highly authoritarian governments that unlike
authoritarians in Africa or the Middle East were actually committed to the
national interest."

Economies that have thrived under the apparently paradoxical combination of
political and social authoritarianism and market freedoms are apparent: Taiwan,
South Korea, Singapore, Malaysia and China. In Mr. Rohwer's view, the countries
destined to follow these examples are Indonesia, which is well on the road to
sustained economic growth, and Vietnam.

The great Asian failure, Mr. Rohwer argues, is India, which has too long
practiced oppressive planning and a cloistered approach to economic development.
As a result, he said, India has been left behind.

Driving the growth, Mr. Rohwer said, have been the multitude of Chinese families
that turned small businesses into vibrant conglomerates across Asia. Together,
the World Bank estimates that this "greater China" had a gross domestic product
of $2.5 trillion in 1990, nearly half that of the G.D.P. of the United States in
1990.

"It's one of the most interesting business phenomena in the world," he said.
"Scattered across Southeast Asia are 50 to 60 million Chinese. They have as a
group created one of the most successful business empires in the world. It's the
business equivalent of a neural network and the Chinese have come to dominate
business, finance and commerce throughout Asia, outside Japan, even though they
are a minority."

For American companies, Mr. Rohwer contends, Asia is the future. But
protectionist impulses in the United States could damage the possibilities for
American companies. Indeed, he said, the emergence of a huge Asian middle class
augurs both great opportunity for American business -- and great competition.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jim Rohwer, in a new book, "Asia Rising," calls Asia "the
miracle" of late-20th-century free markets and economic development and suggests
strategies by which American companies can prosper in the region. (Amy Toensing
for The New York Times)


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Singer to Buy Back Furniture Operation

BYLINE: By Bloomberg Business News

SECTION: Section D;   Page 21;   Column 4;   Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 170 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Nov. 13


The Singer Company N.V. said today that it would buy back the Singer Furniture
Company, reversing a spinoff in the mid-1980's, as well as purchase the Italian
operation that makes Singer sewing machines and other home products from
Semi-Tech (Global) Ltd. of Hong Kong.

The Singer Company, which is incorporated in the Dutch Antilles and based here,
said it would pay $15 million to $25 million for the North Carolina furniture
maker and $11.1 million for the Italian operation.

Semi-Tech Global is a unit of International Semi-Tech Microelectronics.

Singer Furniture has annual sales of about $90 million, while the Italian
operation has about $40 million in sales.

The final price for Singer Furniture will be determined by an appraisal, under a
1991 agreement between Singer and Semi-Tech.

The Singer Company already makes furniture in Brazil, the Philippines, Turkey
and Sri Lanka and recently said that it would expand furniture production in
Mexico, China, Thailand, Vietnam, India and Bangladesh.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

On My Mind;
Two Enemies of the Press

BYLINE: By A. M. ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A;   Page 25;   Column 1;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 703 words


Colin Powell did make one slip during his elegant news conference declining to
run for the Presidency. He was too nice to the press.

That was generous, but it does not help the press, which has two increasing
problems. One comes from the tobacco business. The other comes from ourselves.
To meet them, news people have to be clear-minded about both. Let's begin with
ourselves.

Mr. Powell was asked about the publication of a story that his wife was taking
medication for depression. He said he had no complaints.

I do. Since in news judgment I am the former general, he the reluctant draftee,
that settles that.

The story -- first printed by The Philadelphia Inquirer and picked up by
Newsweek -- was not news, not pertinent and not our business.

Mrs. Powell was not considering running for office. Her medical history does not
belong to the public unless she chooses to announce it.

If the editors' rationalization was that his wife's problem might influence Mr.
Powell's decision, it would be a story only if she were refusing to take
medication that helps her give sensible advice to her husband.

The fact that the story was printed implies that what millions of Americans do
every day -- obey medical instruction on handling depression -- is somehow
pertinent when done by one person thrust into the news. It is no more pertinent
than medication that spouses of the editors take.

Finally -- for emphasis -- it is an invasion of privacy. The press has to do
that every day. But I cling to the belief that journals that regard their role
as responsible -- and The Inquirer and Newsweek do -- have the moral and
journalistic right to violate privacy only when necessary to make a significant
news point, not because it is titillating or, shoot me, even for a cockamamie
exclusive.

I am dealing with the respectable press. There are others whose existence
depends on peddling gossip and violating privacy. Who is forcing you to buy
their stock, advertise in them, or read or watch their garbage?

The mounting threat from business was shown on "60 minutes" -- more accurately,
not shown. But Mike Wallace put the issue on the air straight and sad.

CBS management ordered the cancellation of an interview with a former executive
of the Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation who is critical of the industry.
He signed a gag agreement when he joined the company. CBS lawyers feared the
network could be sued as accessory to breaking that agreement.

Perhaps there was risk, under legal interpretations in some states. But taking
risks for an important cause is part of being in the news business, a payback
for the First Amendment. If other news companies bow to having their mouths
zippered by business, without fighting to the Supreme Court, any worried
manufacturer, from chemicals to baby rattles, will demand that every employee
sign gag contracts. Farewell to vital consumer information that business prefers
to keep quiet.

On June 14, 1971, hours before The New York Times was to print the third
installment of the Pentagon Papers, Lord, Day & Lord, a law firm advising the
paper, warned the law would punish us severely. They walked out on the paper
when it turned down their nervous -- but as the Supreme Court later decided,
erroneous -- advice to desist at once.

The Times publishing management overrode those lawyers and stood with the news
staff. Management and news people recognized that the question was not how could
we publish that treasury of confidential documents on the conduct of the Vietnam
War, but how could we not.

It was a risk, but not as big as that taken by correspondents sent to battles,
then and now, by The Times, or by CBS.

The privacy and business issues have a link, not so much legal as moral. More
and more the press unnecessarily violates privacy, including of people like Mrs.
Powell who find themselves "public figures" with little recourse to law. These
invasions of privacy are constitutional. They are also disgusting.

So the press cannot be astonished if the public does not rush to its defense
when business also exercises the right to be disgusting, by trying to shut the
press's mouth about certain matters. For instance, lung cancer.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
So Captain Bligh Wasn't That Bad?

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C;   Page 17;   Column 1;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1176 words



PAST IMPERFECT
History According to the Movies
General editor: Mark C. Carnes
Edited by Ted Mico, John Miller-Monzon and David Rubel
Illustrated. 304 pages. Henry Holt & Company. $30.

Here is a thumbnail sketch of American history, according to the movies. In
1492, Gerard Depardieu discovers America, announcing his discovery in heavily
French-accented English: "Dee lund eez closh." Three centuries later, the
country's fate is insured when Blythe Danner has sex with Ken Howard, helping
him to overcome his writing block and pen the Declaration of Independence.
Another American woman plays a central role in the War of 1812 by attracting the
attention of a privateer, Fredric March, who wins her heart by joining the
Americans and helping to preserve New Orleans (and probably the entire
Mississippi Valley) from British conquest.

Sixteen Indians and hundreds of Filipinos wipe out Errol Flynn and his men at
the battle of Little Bighorn, but the Western frontier is nonetheless secured
with the help of Wyatt Earps like Randolph Scott, Burt Lancaster, James Garner,
Harris Yulin and Kurt Russell. A century or so later, Kevin Costner will look
for conspirators in the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, and Dustin
Hoffman and Robert Redford will help topple a President involved in a scandal
known as Watergate.

Alfred Hitchcock once remarked that "the cinema is not a slice of life, but a
piece of cake," and when it comes to history, movie makers have demonstrated
little compunction about sweetening the facts: getting rid of the dull bits,
simplifying the hard parts and colorizing the rest. In this spirited new
collection of essays, 60 prominent historians and writers compare the historical
record with History as Told by Hollywood. The resulting book -- featuring lucid
essays by such writers as Robert Darnton, Anthony Lewis, Sean Wilentz, Richard
Slotkin, Alan Brinkley, Nancy F. Cott and Peter Gay -- is an incisive, often
witty compendium that illuminates the movie-making process even as it debunks
celluloid history and tries to set the record straight.

For all their technical artistry, of course, some films are little more than
propaganda, freely distorting, inventing or orchestrating facts to serve a
particular end. Oliver Stone's "J. F. K." (1991) boldly presents speculation as
fact, suggesting that the Central Intelligence Agency, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and the so-called military industrial complex were all involved in
a vast conspiracy to assassinate President Kennedy.

As for D. W. Griffith's "Birth of a Nation" (1915), this film blatantly casts
the Ku Klux Klan in a heroic role in an attempt to make a case for white
supremacist thinking. "For much of the 20th century," the historian Leon F.
Litwack writes in one essay, the movie "molded and reinforced racial
stereotypes, distorting the physical appearance of black men and women, making a
mockery of their lives and aspirations, and fixing in the public mind the image
of a race of inferiors."

Certainly most mainstream Hollywood movies are more circumspect about their
agendas, but as the scholars in this volume observe, many of them still put a
distinct spin on events, erasing hard-to-film ambiguities and turning
complicated historical personages into simplistic heroes and villains.

Mark E. Neely Jr. points out that "Abe Lincoln in Illinois" (1940) turns the
ambitious, politically savvy Lincoln into a solemn idealist who is "pushed by
his wife and pulled by political bosses." Paul Fussell observes that Gen. George
F. Patton Jr.'s "anti-Jewish ravings and his outspoken opposition to
de-Nazification" have been neatly omitted from the movie starring George C.
Scott. And Geoffrey C. Ward writes that the movie "Gandhi" (1982) presents its
subject as "a saint so uniformly worthy -- save for one testy outburst at his
wife early on -- so brave and self-deprecating, good-humored and wise, that when
he is murdered the audience is left with only the fuzzy notion that Gandhi was
just too good for this wicked, wicked world."

Captain Bligh, in contrast, is depicted in "Mutiny on the Bounty" (1935) as an
out-and-out monster, as a means, the historian Greg Dening argues, of making the
"mutiny against him understandable, if not excusable." Others typecast as
one-dimensional villains include the supercilious English officials in "The Last
of the Mohicans" (1992) and the equally unpleasant Brits in "Gandhi."

While many historical films distort the big issues (like character and
chronology, consequences and causes), others even manage to get the smaller
things (like weather, furniture and antiques) completely wrong. Busts resembling
Hadrian and Nero -- who were born after Julius Caesar -- surface in the movie
version of "Julius Caesar" (1953), while the soundtrack to "The Scarlet Empress"
(1934) uses such latter-day composers as Tchaikovsky and Rimsky-Korsakov to
provide background music for the 18th-century reign of Catherine the Great. In
"Shanghai Express" (1932), Jonathan Spence points out, the direction of the
real-life train is reversed so that the film can be given a more memorable title
than "P'u-k'ou Express."

As Mark C. Carnes, the general editor of this volume, notes in his introduction,
"some explicitly 'historical' films are chiefly important for what they say
about the era in which they were made." In the script of "Spartacus," the
blacklisted screenwriter Dalton Trumbo gives the Roman senator Crassus words
that echo Senator Joseph McCarthy: "Lists of the disloyal have been compiled!"
Laurence Olivier's 1944 "Henry V" depicts the 15th-century King in heroic terms
meant to ratify the British war effort against the Nazis; Kenneth Branagh's 1989
"Henry V," in contrast, reflects a post-Vietnam mood of alienation, focusing on
the brutality of war and the ruthlessness of powerful rulers. Andrzej Wajda's
"Danton" (1983) employs allusions to contemporary political struggles in the
director's native Poland, and elicited equally topical outrage in France among
members of the left, who condemned the film's depiction of the Revolution as
"counterrevolutionary."

In one of the book's final essays, Frances FitzGerald argues that the flaws of
most Vietnam films reflect America's own problems in dealing with the war.
Movies like "The Deer Hunter" (1978), "Apocalypse Now" (1979), "Platoon" (1986),
"Full Metal Jacket" (1987) and "Casualties of War" (1989), she suggests, all
eventually retreat into myth-making and abstraction, becoming "morality plays or
parables decked out in special effects and extravagant Technicolor gore."

"Because these ambitious films all fail to take the reality of Vietnam into
account," she goes on, "they remind us of the war itself. To most Americans,
including those in positions of authority, Vietnam was an abstraction -- a
symbol, not a place -- and the American troops who went there suffered as a
result. Just like those who made the war, the film makers put extravagant
resources to work and got almost nothing right."


LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gerard Depardieu as Columbus in "1492: Conquest of Paradise."
(David Appleby/Paramount Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Q&A

BYLINE: By C. CLAIBORNE RAY

SECTION: Section C;   Page 6;   Column 5;   Science Desk

LENGTH: 480 words



Edible Nests

Q.  What kind of bird makes the nests for bird's nest soup?

A.  The edible nest swiftlet, Collacali fuciphaga, of Southeast Asia, takes its
name from the nests used in the soup. These birds make small nests almost
entirely of strands of hardened saliva, according to "Ornithology," by Frank B.
Gill (W.H. Freeman & Company). The nests are affixed to nearly inaccessible
spots on cave walls and ceilings.

The Chinese consider soup made from the nests to be a great delicacy and they
are harvested by the thousand, often, unfortunately, before the two or three
eggs have hatched and the nestlings have matured. The few feathers or droppings
are carefully cleaned from the nests and the strands are rinsed and soaked until
what remains resembles, by one account, small sponges rather than nests. The
soup, which often has bits of chicken or other meat in addition to the
translucent strands of nest, has a gelatinous consistency. The strands can also
be dried for year-round use.

The swiftlets are shades of dove gray and grow about five inches long. They live
on coasts and islands and feed over forest and scrub. They range from the Anaman
and Nicobar Islands through Southeast Asia to the Philippines, often forming
colonies of thousands of nests.

Edible nest swiftlets navigate deep inside dark caves to build their nests by
using the same echolocation techniques that bats use, bouncing high-frequency
sounds off the cave walls, according to The Macmillan Illustrated Animal
Encyclopedia.

Pollution and overharvesting have cut the population and made the nests an
expensive delicacy. In Hong Kong, the price passed $1,000 a pound for
top-quality nests in the late 1980's. A related bird makes "black" nests,
containing feathers and other wastes, that are difficult to clean. These are
sold to less exacting or more impecunious gourmets.

Most of the nests harvested today are taken from Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia,
Vietnam and China. In Sarawak, the nests from limestone caves in Niah in the
northern part of the country are harvested only under license from the Sarawak
Museum, which is charged with preserving both the birds and the prehistoric cave
paintings that decorate their homes.

The nesting season there runs from March until May; by August, the nests are
considered to be free of eggs and hatchlings and fair game for harvesters. By
the light of candles, they stand on spindly bamboo platforms in the caves and
use knives on the ends of bamboo poles to dislodge the nests.

Short-tailed and long-winged, all swift species have highly developed flying
abilities and eat, drink and even copulate while flying. They have tiny legs,
seldom walk and cannot perch, but cling to vertical surfaces. Other swifts also
use salivary fluids from special glands to glue nests together and attach them
to walls.   C. CLAIBORNE RAY

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 833 words



International   A3-15

4 AMERICANS DIE IN SAUDI ARABIA
Two powerful explosions ripped through an American-run military training center
in the Saudi Arabian capital, killing at least four Americans. A1

LAST-DITCH EFFORT IN PEACE TALKS
With Bosnian peace talks at a standoff, Administration officials said Secretary
of State Warren Christopher will begin a last-ditch attempt to reach a
settlement. A1

WAR TRIBUNAL CHARGES 6 CROATS
Six Bosnian Croat leaders were charged with war crimes and crimes against
humanity in connection with the deaths of scores of civilians in Bosnia. A3

PERES CLEARS LAST HURDLE
Acting Prime Minister Shimon Peres of Israel was confirmed by the governing
Labor Party as its new leader, clearing the last formality before President Ezer
Weizman can ask him to form a new Government. A1

JAPANESE OFFICIAL RESIGNS
A Japanese Cabinet member resigned after creating an uproar in South Korea by
saying "Japan did some good" during its occupation of Korea early in this
century. A14

GOVERNING PARTY SLIPS IN MEXICO
Results from elections showed that Mexico's governing party appears to have lost
in several major cities but to have won the governorship of the important state
of Michoacan. A15

NO HOPE FOR 500 M.I.A. CASES
The Pentagon said the bodies of more than 500 American servicemen killed in the
Vietnam War will never be recovered, but recovery is possible for about 1,500
others. A4

Stockholm Journal: Political death in scrupulous Sweden. A4

National   A16-22, B9-11

STOPGAP BUDGET VETOED
President Clinton vetoed two bills intended to keep the Government in business,
and a late-night meeting with Congressional leaders failed to produce an
agreement to avert a partial shutdown of Federal offices today. A1

NO SURPRISES HERE
News analysis: The crisis of having to shut down that the Government is facing
this week has become a way of life in Washington since the Presidency of Ronald
Reagan. A1

FARM SPENDING AGREEMENT
Republicans negotiating a budget compromise made a deal that would let farmers
continue to collect Federal subsidies. B9

RUBIN's SLEIGHT OF HAND
The tactic that Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin is using to keep the nation
afloat is at the heart of the Administration's strategy for battling Congress.
B9

THE DOORS CLANG SHUT
At the Statue of Liberty, Ellis Island, passport offices and even the Internal
Revenue Service, offices will be closed because of the budget dispute. B10

FASTER GAME OF FOOTBALL
As the prairie towns of Texas have been losing population, the schools have
turned to a brand of football with six-member teams that people now swear they
prefer. A1

CASE OF THE MISSING HUSBAND
A member of Congress from Utah said her husband had disappeared amid a Federal
investigation into their personal and campaign finances. A16

LEAVING HOSPITAL AFTER YEARS
A 12-year-old left a Fort Lauderdale hospital more than 11 years after he went
into a vegetative state when mistakes were made in his treatment for an asthma
attack. A16

REPUBLICANS SHARPEN ATTACKS
With an important Presidential straw poll coming up next week in Florida, both
Senators Bob Dole and Phil Gramm have embarked on a course of negative politics.
A16

DEBATE ABOUT PRIESTHOOD
About 1,000 women at a meeting of a group that has led the struggle to have
women ordained as Roman Catholic priests spent a weekend debating whether that
goal was worth pursuing. A17

COURT TO HEAR CABLE CASE
The Supreme Court agreed to hear a constitutional challenge to a Federal law
allowing localities to limit access to cable channels providing sexually
explicit programs. A20

Metro Digest   B1

TAKING STOLEN CARS FOR A RIDE
More than 100 stolen cars impounded in Jersey City have been kept by police
officers, sometimes for profit, instead of being returned to their owners, who
never learned what happened to their vehicles. A1

Business Digest   D1

Science Times   C1-10

Cuckoos enforce foster care like an avian mafia. C1
An on-off switch earthquakes at plate boundaries. C1
Clues to a treatment for dyslexia. C1

Fashion   B12

Sports   B14-19

Baseball: Maddux wins N.L. Cy Young Award. B15

Obituaries   B13

Arts/Entertainment   C13-18

New York City's beleaguered rock concert fans. C13
Czech Culture Minister. C13
Actor steps out of anonymity. C13
Theater: "Black Girl." C14
Books: "Past Imperfect: History According to the Movies." C17
Television: Critic's Notebook. C18

Editorials/Op-Ed   A24-25

Editorials

Mr. Clinton wields the veto.
Tremors in Saudi Arabia.
Less for more on the subway.
Billboard blight.

Letters

Russell Baker: Bang bang chop boom.
A. M. Rosenthal: Two enemies of the press.
Charles Murray: Welfare hysteria.
Steven D. Gold: Cuts that grow and grow.

Chronicle   B6

Chess   C7

Crossword   C17

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

China Battles a Spreading Scourge of Illicit Drugs

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1828 words

DATELINE: PINGYUAN, China


The tourists who come to southwestern China to see some of the most dramatic
landscapes in the world do not come to this bucolic town surrounded by lush,
humpback mountains mirrored in a pristine lake.

This is China's war zone.

Three years ago Communist Party authorities declared that this town was in the
grip of "representatives of evil forces," a description used for drug
traffickers. More than 2,000 troops of the People's Armed Police burst into
Pingyuan to break the spell.

On the night of Aug. 31, 1992, the electricity was cut, and armored personnel
carriers led the way with machine guns blazing. In one instance, troops used a
flame-thrower to dislodge a corrupt police official from his hideout. It was
impossible to confirm the number of casualties. Some said the assault was
bloodless; other reports said 24 people died.

"It all happened so suddenly it was like a nightmare," said Ma Hongying, an
accused drug trafficker whose husband, the vice mayor, was arrested and later
executed.

Today, armed troops remain as an occupation force encamped in each village
around the town, on the main road and near public buildings.

The broad swath of territory that borders Laos, Vietnam and Myanmar, formerly
Burma, has become an armed camp against a scourge that no one foresaw a decade
ago when China opened its borders and began decentralizing the power of the
totalitarian state that, during Mao Zedong's rule, had eradicated the country's
longstanding opium habit.

Today, the worldwide drug epidemic has turned the mountains and rain forests
along the Tropic of Cancer in Asia into a region of rampant drug trafficking,
gun running, crime, prostitution and the spread of the AIDS virus.

"Over the past several years, more heroin has been seized by China than by any
other country," the State Department's top official for international drug
control policy, Robert S. Gelbard, told Congress in July after touring the
region.

The Chinese authorities have seized more than four tons of heroin in each of the
last three years, more than double the seizures made in Thailand. Since 1989,
the total volume of seizures has increased tenfold. Almost all the heroin that
is being interdicted originates in the jungle laboratories of Myanmar, the
source of two-thirds of the world's heroin. More than half the heroin sold on
the streets of New York is believed to originate in Myanmar and pass through
China.

Officials Voice Alarm At Rise in Addiction

Although 80 percent of China's drug seizures and more than half its registered
drug addicts are in Yunnan province, the problem is far from confined.

[An inspection team sent to Yunnan from the National People's Congress, China's
Parliament, reported on Oct. 28 that it had found a "shocking" increase in
trafficking, addiction and ineffective law enforcement. "We have not fully
realized the seriousness of the drug problem in China," said Li Peiyao, vice
chairman of the congress's Standing Committee.]

In the nightclubs and discos of Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, Xian and other
cities, heroin is increasingly popular among young merchants and entrepreneurs,
and they can be found injecting it or snorting it or smoking cigarettes laced
with it.

"So many of my friends are taking heroin and when I tell them I don't like it,
they say I must be a melon head," said Liu Yu, a young mother in Kunming,
Yunnan's capital.

Some estimates of the number of heroin users run to the millions. The Government
says the number of addicts arrested or willing to register jumped from 250,000
to 380,000 in little more than a year, still fewer than the estimated 500,000
hard-core users in the United States.

But given the growth rate, China could have the world's highest number of heroin
addicts in a few years.

Yunnan province, a border area, has a population that includes 20 of China's
minority ethnic groups. The province, whose name means "south of the clouds,"
did not see the crisis coming, and now officials would like it to disappear.

"Narcotics control is a very sensitive issue in Yunnan," said a spokesman for
the provincial government, who declined all requests for interviews with
narcotics control and public health officials.

"Our province is getting a very bad image," he complained, adding that, as a
matter of policy, heroin trafficking is not discussed, in the interest of
promoting tourism.

"To tell you the truth, reporters who are interested in writing about the drug
issue are not welcome here," he said.

But on the streets of Kunming and across this vast province where 35 million
Chinese live, the drug crisis is proving irrepressible. Earlier this year, there
were frequent gunfights outside the capital's trade center, a favorite
rendezvous spot for drug dealers.

Even Governor He Zhiqiang, fearing retribution from the traffickers his troops
are attacking along the border, is said to have doubled his bodyguard force to
100 men.

Graft at all levels of government is also hampering law enforcement.

"Corruption is a problem because the police and military are paid very poorly
and they see the entrepreneurial sector moving ahead of them," said Richard
Dickins, a drug enforcement specialist for the United Nations Drug Control
Program regional office in Bangkok.

During a five-hour drive from Kunming to Pingyuan in October, a caravan of
dozens of brand-new cars without license plates could be seen driving north from
the Vietnam border, part of the car-smuggling overseen by military and
provincial officials, a former police official said.

In Pingyuan, "people said the villagers had enough weapons to arm a regiment,"
said Yang Wei, a prominent member of the restive Hui, or Muslim, community, that
was one target of the attack because some of its prominent members were involved
in the drug trade. "Of course, that was an exaggeration, but the evil forces
selling guns and drugs were very strong."

In all, five Communist Party officials were arrested, and two of them were later
executed. A number of drug barons remain at large.

Drugs Wars Become Increasingly Violent

In Pingyuan, it may have been an exaggeration -- but not much of one -- to say
the villagers had enough guns to arm a regiment. And Pingyuan is not the only
battleground.

Reports of drug wars, some of them difficult to confirm, abound here. Even
China's state-run television had to admit last summer that "drug traffickers
smashed several branches of the Public Security Bureau and beat to death two
cadres who belong to the local drug control inspection teams."

A few years ago, a police official for Wenshan, the prefecture that includes
Pingyuan, is said to have ordered the arrest of a notorious drug lord. The next
day, the trafficker's men seized the official, cut off his head and displayed it
on a stake.

On another occasion, a former police official said, a provincial official who
was sent to this area to investigate drug trafficking was found dead with 67
bullet wounds. So far this year, the police have seized more than 8,000 grenades
and land mines in drug-smuggling arrests.

Fifty miles northwest of here, at Yuxi, a drug trafficker demanded the release
of one of his men by threatening to plant explosives around the city and
detonate them.

"They had to let this guy go," the former police official said. "The provincial
government had no control over this area at all and now the only way they
control it is by stationing the armed police in all these villages."

Officially, China's law enforcement authorities admit to thousands of casualties
a year in gun battles with traffickers.

"It's a wide open area," a Western drug enforcement official said. "I'd rather
be a drug trafficker than a policeman. The odds are better."

The greatest danger for China may be the level of addiction among Chinese in
their 20's and 30's, many of whom are rootless and disenchanted with the
post-Communist system.

"Maybe for some people it is because they have nothing to believe in, or for
some it is just because they have more money," said Shen Qiongfen, 50, an office
worker in Kunming, who was visiting her brother in a detoxification center on a
recent morning. "If you have money, you can afford drugs," she said. "It's as
simple as that."

With China's population growing by 15 million a year, and the number of
unemployed and underemployed expected to pass 200 million by 2000, a future of
drugs, crime and instability is alarming to leaders in Beijing, who are obsessed
with stability.

"It is frightening to them," said Mr. Dickins of the drug control program in
Asia. "You have a growing number of unemployable people with terrible addictions
and with little or no skills and crime becomes the only solution."

"China looks at what has happened in the West and they see the same picture
happening here," he continued, "there is no doubt that they are concerned about
it and are doing what they can to stop it."

The largest number of heroin addicts is here in Yunnan province, where the law
enforcement solution tends toward the harshest measures.


A Discouraging Record On Rehabilitation

Provincial courts ordered 466 executions in drug cases last year and the police
made more than 6,000 arrests, seizing more than three tons of heroin. Addicts
are sent to military detoxification centers, where withdrawal from drugs is
"cold turkey," or assisted by herbal medicines and heavy labor.

About 95 percent of the addicts return to drugs after they are released,
officials said.

"Drug addiction is a social problem, not a police problem," Mr. Dickins said.
"Law enforcement should be the last thing, not the first thing. I'm a policeman,
so I can say that."

On June 26, 22 drug traffickers were shot in the back of the head in a public
execution in Mangshi. One was Xie Jingwu, 37, a farmer in Ruili county, which is
an appendage of China surrounded by Myanmar.

His widow now lives with her sister in a bamboo house with woven straw-mat walls
a half-mile from the Myanmar border crossing.

Mr. Xie became addicted the way most of the peasants in Ruili did, from easily
available pure heroin that could be smoked in cigarettes.  While he was in the
county detoxification center, he made a fatal acquaintance.

"Our family was always poor," Man Xiangyun, his widow, told a visiting reporter,
"and a guy from Fujian province said to my husband that he would give him a lot
of money if he would transport drugs.

"Our daughter was very sick and we needed money badly. He thought if we could
get some money, it could help cure our daughter's disease."

The court document pronouncing Mr. Xie's death sentence said he and three other
men were caught smuggling 80 pounds of pure heroin hidden in a tea shipment from
Yunnan to Fujian, on China's east coast.

His last words to his wife, sealed in a letter delivered to her outside the
crematory in Mangshi, were, "Take care of our daughter and try to avoid heavy
work in the fields."

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Man Xiangyun holds a photograph of her late husband, Xie Jingwu,
a farmer who was executed for smuggling heroin with three other men. (Patrick E.
Tyler/The New York Times)(pg. A6); The village of Pingyuan, the scene of drug
violence in 1992, is still occupied by armed troops as a result. (Patrick E.
Tyler/The New York Times)(pg. A1)

Map of China showing location of Pingyuan. (pg. A6)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Lincoln Center Plans An 'Intense' Festival

BYLINE: By ALLAN KOZINN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 15;  Column 5;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1062 words


Just over three years after the idea was first proposed, Lincoln Center
yesterday announced the program details of its new annual summer festival, an
ambitious series that will draw on its resident companies and artists from
around the world. To be called Lincoln Center Festival 96, it is to run three
weeks, from July 22 to Aug. 11.

All told, the festival is to offer 206 performances of 61 programs. Nathan
Leventhal, the president of Lincoln Center, said that the festival was the
largest artistic venture the center had ever undertaken at a single stroke. John
Rockwell, who as festival director is responsible for the programming, said that
the events were packed into only 21 days because he wanted the festival to be
"dense and intense."

Among its highlights are Virgil Thomson's "Four Saints in Three Acts" in a new
staging by Robert Wilson and several concert operas, including Beethoven's
"Leonore," an early version of "Fidelio" to be performed by John Eliot Gardiner
and the Orchestre Revolutionnaire et Romantique, and "Fidelio" itself, to be
played by Kurt Masur and the New York Philharmonic.

The Kirov Orchestra and its Opera Chorus are to perform separately and together.
The Merce Cunningham Dance Company is to give the New York premiere of "Ocean,"
the final collaboration between Mr. Cunningham and John Cage, who died in 1992.
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater and the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra are
to introduce a newly commissioned work with music by Wynton Marsalis. Works by
the composers Tod Machover and Lois V. Vierk were also commissioned for the
festival.

There are also several mini-festivals within the larger structure. The Gate
Theater of Dublin is to present all of Samuel Beckett's stage works. The Kronos
Quartet, the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, the soprano Joan La
Barbara and the pianist Aki Takahashi are to collaborate on a Morton Feldman
retrospective. An Asian concentration includes a Chamber Music Society program
of works by young, Western-trained Asian composers, as well as performances by
the Thang Long Water Puppets from North Vietnam and Reigakusha, a full-scale
gagaku ensemble (a traditional court orchestra, with dancers) from Japan. And
the Film Society of Lincoln Center will present 12 programs in the New York
Video Festival.

The budget for the festival is $8.5 million -- significantly less than the $14
million that had been reported earlier this year. That figure, which had been
authorized by the Lincoln Center board, caused consternation among the 11
resident arts organizations at Lincoln Center, who complained that the center,
with its Great Performers and other series, was already a formidable competitor
for corporate support and that an expensive festival would strain the resources
unduly.

The current budget is the result of a compromise between Lincoln Center and the
resident companies and is predicated on a three-year cycle of festivals, each
costing $8.5 million, for which about $5.5 million (or $16 million for the full
cycle) must be raised in contributions. Ticket sales are expected to cover the
rest.

"We have to sell this as a three-year package," said Beverly Sills, the
chairwoman of Lincoln Center, who has been in charge of the fund raising. "There
is no way to begin planning for 1997, as we are doing now, unless you are
already raising money. But this has not been a difficult sell. People are
looking for good, sexy, interdisciplinary projects, and that's what this is."

The principal sponsors of the festival are I.B.M., Philip Morris Companies,
Lexus and the American Express Company.

Miss Sills pointed out that in some ways the resident companies stand to benefit
from the festival. Besides performance fees they would earn for their
participation, they will receive rental income from the halls that would
otherwise be dark during the summer. And although they may still be grumbling
about the difficulty of raising money in the current climate, they have all come
around to support the festival. Six are participating in the 1996 festival, and
Mr. Leventhal said that he expected all 11 to be represented by 1998.

Mr. Leventhal began to think about presenting a festival in 1992, and the
project represents the joining of two currents that have been his principal
interests ever since he came to Lincoln Center in 1984. One is finding ways to
bring the center more fully to life during the summer. The other is fostering
collaborations between Lincoln Center's residents.

At first, the festival was the province of Jane S. Moss, who was hired in 1992
as vice president in charge of programming, and who signed on the New York
Philharmonic and the Kirov. But last summer, Mr. Leventhal decided to divide Ms.
Moss's job in half, leaving her to program Great Performers, Lincoln Center Out
of Doors, Mostly Mozart and Serious Fun (which ended its nine-year run this past
summer), and hiring Mr. Rockwell -- who had just returned to New York after two
years as the European cultural correspondent of The New York Times and who had
been a music critic at The Times since 1972 -- to run the festival.

"I think it was a daring choice, to bring in someone who has not actually put on
a production of any kind," Mr. Leventhal said, "but it was his creative mind and
his prodigious knowledge of the arts that we went for."

Mr. Rockwell said that the practicalities of running a festival, and even
keeping to a budget, have not been particularly daunting. Still, he had wanted
to present more staged opera: his original wish list included "Rosa" by Louis
Andriessen and Peter Greenaway and Julie Taymor's production of Stravinsky's
"Oedipus Rex." He said they might turn up in future festivals, but their
projected deficits of more than $1.5 million each weighed too heavily on this
year's budget.

"It was understood that this was going to be a bigger, grander festival than
Serious Fun," Mr. Rockwell said in an interview before the news conference, "but
that it would not abandon the innovative programming that Serious Fun
represented. And we had to think about what Lincoln Center is. We're not a place
of pilgrimage, or a place where people go to escape the cares of the everyday
world. We're an urban festival in the middle of New York City, and we hope to
reflect the energy, diversity and clashing spirit of New York."

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Merce Cunningham at Lincoln Center Festival 96 announcement.
(Stephanie Berger)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 803 words



International A3-17

CLINTON PITCHES BOSNIA FORCE
President Clinton made his strongest and most detailed case to Congress on why
20,000 American troops should help enforce a peace settlement in Bosnia. A1

CHANGING EQUATION IN BOSNIA
News Analysis: With the differences between Serbs and Croats apparently settled,
the potential for the Bosnian Government to fight on appears limited. A8

CHINA'S GROWING WAR ON DRUGS
The worldwide drug epidemic has turned China's border with Laos, Vietnam and
Myanmar into a region of rampant drug trafficking, gun running and crime. A1

U.S. INVESTIGATES SAUDI BOMB
American and Saudi investigators searched the rubble of an American-run military
center in Saudi Arabia, looking for clues to the bombing that killed six people.
A7

VOTE RETURNS IN GUATEMALA
A conservative has taken a commanding lead in Sunday's presidential election in
Guatemala, but has apparently fallen short of avoiding a runoff. A5

PERES TRIES TO REASSURE SETTLERS
Acting Prime Minister Shimon Peres toured West Bank areas from which Israeli
troops have withdrawn to demonstrate that he would not neglect security there.
A3

LOBBYING TO RESTRUCTURE U.N.
The most potentially significant debate in the General Assembly this year has
focused on how to restructure the Security Council, with as many as 70 countries
advancing their interests. A9

Election rigging was reported in Azerbaijan. A11

Buenos Aires Journal: American dream for South Koreans. A4

National A18-20, B8-10

PARTIAL GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN
With Congress and President Clinton in a deadlock over spending priorities,
about half the civilians functions of the Federal Government ground to a halt.
A1

FATES IN THE BALANCE
News Analysis: The spending impass in Washington is likely to have a major
effect not only on public policy but also on the political fates of President
Clinton and the Republican leaders in Congress. A1

FEW HOPES OF COMPROMISE
Analysts and economists see the White House and Congress as so entrenched that
there is little room for agreement on anything more than a continuing budget
resolution that would keep the Government going through the balance of the
current fiscal year. B8

With dining room personnel absent, senators sent out for pizza. B10

FOR SOME, DESPERATION
While many people could ignore the closing of Government offices, Sudjai
Puttuma, a native of Thailand trying to travel to Italy to visit a desperately
ill brother, was exasperated because no one was available help him. B9

REPUBLICANS AGREE ON WELFARE
House and Senate Republicans agreed on a welfare bill allowing states to replace
school lunches and food stamps with other food assistance programs designed and
run by the states. B10

A group of Catholic bishops argued against limits on welfare. A19

REPRESENTATIVE SEEKS DIVORCE
As Federal investigators tracked the husband of Representative Enid Waldholtz of
Utah to question him about financial irregularities in her 1994 campaign, her
office said she had filed to divorce him. A18

The space shuttle Atlantis linked up with a Russian craft. A20

Canton, Miss., Journal: A film shoot brings introspection. A18

Education Page B11 Weighing a parent's obligation to pay for college after a
divorce.

Metro Digest B1

CABBIES WITH A RECORD
The Taxi and Limousine Commissioner said that among the 35,404 licensed drivers
behind the wheels of New York City cabs are 1,582 whose state licenses have
expired or been revoked or suspended. A1

Business Digest D1

Health Page C14

MEDICAL RECORDS' PRIVACY
With voluminous data banks of pattients' most intimate medical records becoming
a commodity for interstate sale, the privacy of these records has less
protection than video rentals. A bill has been proposed to regulate and protect
privacy, but critics say it raises more questions than it answers. A1

Personal Health: Taking Type 2 diabetes seriously. C14

Arts/Entertainment C15-22

Lincoln Center announces 1996 summer festival plans. C15
Film: "The Crossing Guard." C15
"Rhythm Thief." C15
"The Babysitter." C16
Music: Green Day concert. C22
Books: Book Notes C20
"Younghusband: The Last Great Imperial Adventurer." C21

Living Section C1-13
A place where children can go to play. C1

Sports B12-18

Obituaries D20

Simon H. Rifkind, versatile lawyer.

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials
The Congressional land grab.
Endless recess.
Choose a new NATO leader.
Letters
Thomas L. Friedman: Keep it simple.
Frank Rich: Fear and Favor.
Yossi Klein Halevi: Soldiers of Zion.
Beverly Woodward: Patients' privacy at risk.

Chronicle B2
Crossword C22

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 843 words



International   A3-15

RUSSIA'S AMERICAN-STYLE POLITICS
The campaign has begun for Russia's parliamentary elections in December, and the
race is beginning to look like a Soviet caricature of American democracy. A1

2 KEY TOWNS SNAG BALKAN TALKS
Conflicts over territory continued to bog down U.S.-sponsored Balkan peace talks
as Bosnian Muslim and Serbian negotiators refused to compromise on two key
towns. A14

Serbs in Croatia see themselves as victims of peace talks. A14

ISRAELIS DETAIN ANOTHER SUSPECT
The Israeli police detained another person suspected of complicity in the
assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin but released the head of a
militant organization who had been accused of knowing about the assassination in
advance. A11

PERSIAN GULF UNCERTAINTY GROWS
The bomb that exploded on Monday in Saudi Arabia has set off wide reverberations
among neighbors in the Persian Gulf, where sheikdoms and emirates depend deeply
on the West for protection. A3

JAPAN CAUGHT IN TRADE CROSSFIRE
As the host of this year's Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting, Japan is
finding itself caught in the crossfire of rival camps. A6

President Clinton canceled his planned trip to Japan. A7

EARLIEST ASIAN HOMINID
Fragments of a 1.9 million-year-old-fossil jaw found in China suggest that human
ancestors migrated to China from Africa a million years earlier than had been
thought. A8

Violence flares against suspected opponents of Haiti's President. A5

Against a backdrop of violence, Algerians brace for elections. A8

Poland holds its answer to the Nixon-Kennedy debates. A10

Hanoi Journal: New bourgeoisie show taste for traditional fare. A4

National   A16-22, B11-15

DEFAULT IS AVERTED
Action by the Treasury Department to draw on two civil service retirement funds
allowed the nation to avoid default, but no progress was made on the underlying
dispute between the Republican-led Congress and the White House. A1

FRESHMEN STAND FIRM
Republican freshmen in Congress say they are willing to forgo popularity to
balance the budget. A1

CONSEQUENCES OF PRINCIPLE
News analysis: When the participants in the budget impasse cite matters of
principle, a compromise becomes more difficult. B14

Republicans disclose details of planned tax cuts. B12

In Georgia, many are siding with the Republicans. B13

But the President finds strong backing in Michigan. B13

CHOLESTEROL POINT IS PROVED
For the first time, researchers show that a cholesterol-lowering drug can
prevent deaths from heart attacks among apparently healthy men who have high
cholesterol levels. A1

AT&T SEEKS HUGE JOB CUTS
AT&T is offering 77,800 managers -- half its supervisory work force -- financial
incentives to leave by Jan. 13. The buyout plan points to a new goal in
corporate job cutbacks: trading current employees for new ones with different
skills. A1

A NEW LOOK AT AN AIR DISASTER
Investigators trying to find the cause of a Pennsylvania crash 14 months ago
moved in the direction of questioning whether the Boeing 737, the most popular
commercial jet, was properly certified. A16

MAYOR BARRY TELLS OF CANCER
Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. of Washington said he had prostate cancer and was
undergoing tests to determine the proper treatment. A19

DOLLARS FOR DINING
Though the military is unhappy that spending for new weapons is declining, the
Marine Corps is putting out $45,000 to build a new private dining room at the
Pentagon. A22

WARRANT FOR MISSING HUSBAND
Federal prosecutors issued a warrant for the arrest of the husband of
Representative Enid Greene Waldholtz of Utah in connection with check-kiting
schemes. B14

O.J. Simpson loses a bid to keep depositions in secret. A17

Metro Digest   B1

THE MAYOR GETS A RAISE
Mayor Giuliani moved to give himself and other city elected officials raises of
up to 28 percent, infuriating union leaders whose members are being told this
month to accept a two-year wage freeze. A1

SLOAN-KETTERING 'DEFICIENCES'
In a scathing report, the State Health Department said that "systemic
deficiencies" at one of the nation's leading cancer centers, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering in Manhattan, had contributed to a botched brain operation in
May. A1

Business Digest   D1

Home Section   C1-13

A living space for the 90's: a loft in the country. C1

Sports   B17-23

Arts/Entertainment   C15-24

Public Library receives anonymous gift of $15 million. C15
Theater: "Bring in da Noise, Bring in da Funk." C15
Film: Screwball festival. C15

Obituaries   B16

Editorials/Op-Ed   A24-25

Editorials

A bad budget bill gets worse.
An ethics test in the House.
Philip Taubman: Hong Kong.

Letters

William Safire: His third left turn.
Maureen Dowd: Dialing for liars.
Marc Reisner: Government by chainsaw.
Dan Quayle: Powell and the press.

Bridge   C14

Chronicle   D26

Crossword   C22

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 17, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Joints Chiefs Tap General As Top Aide

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 294 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 16


The Defense Department has selected Gen. Joseph W. Ralston of the Air Force to
be the next Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the military's
second-highest job, Pentagon officials said today.

General Ralston would succeed Adm. William A. Owens next February, when the
admiral retires to become vice chairman of the Science Applications
International Corporation, a high-technology company in San Diego.

Widely regarded as one of the most innovative officers in the armed forces,
Admiral Owens will earn a salary of about $500,000 in his new job.

General Ralston, 50, of Hopkinsville, Ky., is now head of the Air Combat
Command, which is responsible for training and equipping all Air Force troops in
the United States and for providing fighter and attack aircraft to other
American commands worldwide during wartime.

As the top aide to Gen. John M. Shalikashvili, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs,
General Ralston would be expected to advance Admiral Owens's efforts to lead a
broad technological revolution to equip and restructure the post-cold-war
military to fight the nation's wars. This includes enhancing the military's
combat surveillance and communications equipment, and making greater use of
commercial technology.

General Ralston has risen quickly through the ranks, as an F-105 fighter pilot
in Vietnam, a member of the original team overseeing development of the F-117
Stealth fighter, the head of American military forces in Alaska and the Air
Force's senior officer for planning and operations.

His selection requires the approval of President Clinton and the Senate, which
is expected. Many military officials expect General Ralston to succeed General
Shalikashvili in two years or to become Air Force Chief of Staff.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 20, 1995, Monday

CORRECTION:

An article on Friday about the Pentagon's selection of Gen. Joseph W. Ralston to
be Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff misstated his age. He is 52, not
50.


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

House Votes to Bar Funds For U.S. Troops in Bosnia

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 5;  Column 5;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 721 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 17


Ignoring warnings that it would sabotage peace talks, the House of
Representatives voted 243 to 171 tonight toprevent money from being spent to
send United States peacekeeping troops to Bosnia.

Approval by the Senate is far from certain. The bill failed by a margin well shy
of the two-thirds majority needed to override a certain White House veto.

But tonight's vote was a slap in the face for President Clinton and American
allies counting on the Pentagon to play a crucial role in a NATO peacekeeping
effort if an accord is reached.

Raising the specter of troops returning in body bags, the bill's supporters
fervently opposed the deployment, deplored the peacekeeping mission and argued
that no American blood should be shed in the Balkans because no American
interests lay there.

"Before our troops hit the ground, I want the answer -- for what?" said the
bill's sponsor, Representative Joel Hefley, a Colorado Republican.

The bill came at an excruciatingly awkward moment, as negotiations led by the
United States for a settlement of the war in the Balkans are coming to a head in
Dayton, Ohio. While the legal impact may ultimately be nil, the political effect
of such a bill may be considerable.

The often angry debate centered on a classic constitutional confrontation.
Congress has the power to declare war and controls the spending of money, but
Presidents have asserted their power to deploy troops in pursuit of foreign
policy. House Republicans contend that the Clinton Administration has not sought
Congressional advice or consent for the mission in the Balkans.

"The Administration has kept us in the dark about the negotiations in Dayton,"
Representative Benjamin A. Gilman, a New York Republican who is chairman of the
House International Relations Committee, said on the House floor tonight. "It
has been evasive about what the precise mission in Bosnia will be."

Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan, the Democratic whip, countered that
the bill was an irresponsible attempt to "intentionally disrupt the peace
process." Howard L. Berman, a California Democrat, said it was "designed to
scuttle the agreement in Dayton."

Since he took office, Mr. Clinton has said United States ground troops would
serve in Bosnia only if and when the warring parties reached a peace agreement.
Now, with the possibility of a settlement nearing fruition, the House has sought
to use the power of the purse to block that policy.

The bill prohibits the use of Pentagon funds to support sending United States
ground forces to Bosnia, or to support any peacekeeping force, unless the money
is specifically approved by Congress. Its passage follows by two weeks a
315-to-103 vote in the House for a nonbinding resolution supporting a
Congressional vote before troops are sent to Bosnia.

"Passage of such a bill now, while negotiations continue in Dayton, Ohio,
seriously undercuts the ability to work with the parties on obtaining a
settlement," the White House said in a statement opposing the bill. The vote
"sends the message that the United States does not take seriously its role as
leader of the peace process."

In a letter sent to Speaker Newt Gingrich today, Mr. Clinton sought to reassure
the House members that they would have a voice in the matter, though he might
choose to disregard it.

"I will submit a request for a Congressional expression of support for U.S.
participation in a NATO-led implementation force in Bosnia promptly," the
President wrote. He said support from Congress was "important and desirable,"
but added, "I must reserve my constitutional prerogatives in this area."

Republicans said the vote was a warning against the dangers of interposing
20,000 American ground troops between the warring parties in Bosnia, and and an
expression of anger at the Administration's contention that it can send those
troops without a vote of Congress.

They repeatedly invoked the memory of the 1964 Gulf of Tonkin resolution, which
gave President Johnson broad authority to take any actions necessary in
Southeast Asia and led to wider American military involvement in Vietnam. They
also cited the bitter experience of the American soldiers who were sent to
Somalia to provide relief and food in 1993 and found themselves in combat with
people they thought they were protecting.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Conrad J. Lynn, a Veteran Civil-Rights Lawyer, Is Dead at 87

BYLINE: By GARRY PIERRE-PIERRE

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 530 words


Conrad J. Lynn, a longtime civil rights lawyer whose clients included freedom
riders in the South, Vietnam War draft resisters and Puerto Rican nationalists,
died on Thursday at his home in Pomona, N.Y. He was 87.

During a six-decade law career, Mr. Lynn espoused scores of unpopular causes,
leading the State Department to seize his passport in 1968 after he traveled to
North Vietnam.

Mr. Lynn was born in Newport, R.I., the second son of a domestic worker and a
laborer who migrated from Georgia. His family moved to Rockville Centre, L.I.,
when he was a boy. In 1932 Mr. Lynn became the first black graduate of Syracuse
University Law School.

A member of the Communist Party in the late 1920's and 1930's, Mr. Lynn was
expelled from the party in 1939 for supporting striking Trinidadian oil workers
in their fight against Britain.

Mr. Lynn participated in some of the earliest freedom rides in the 1940's, when
interracial groups of civil rights advocates rode buses to the South to protest
Jim Crow laws.

In the early 1940's, Mr. Lynn defended his brother Winfred, who had refused to
be drafted into the United States Army in protest of its segregationist
policies. He took the case despite the concerns of mainstream civil rights
groups like the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People,
which felt that blacks would profit more by supporting the war effort.

Mr. Lynn also had a longstanding association with the Puerto Rican
"independentistas," who wanted their island to be free of United States rule. In
the early 1950's, Mr. Lynn was the lawyer for one of the five Puerto Rican
nationalists charged with shooting at members of Congress while they were in
session. They were convicted.

In what became known as the "Kissing Case," Mr. Lynn represented two young black
boys from North Carolina, age 7 and 9, who were charged with rape because they
had kissed a young white girl while they were playing house.

The boys, who were held for months without bail, were eventually released after
supporters, including Eleanor Roosevelt, led an international campaign on their
behalf.

In the 1960's, Mr. Lynn defended many draft resisters who refused to fight in
Vietnam. One of those cases reached the United States Supreme Court. Mr. Lynn
argued unsuccessfully that conscientious objector status should be given to
those who resist fighting in a particular war, but not necessarily all wars.

Mr. Lynn also defended many black activists of that era, including H. Rap Brown,
a member of the Black Panther Party.

While defending many unpopular cases, Mr. Lynn sought to make blacks an integral
part of the judicial system.

"It's time for a black man to serve on the state's highest court, since 90
percent of all those awaiting trial in state prisons are either black or Puerto
Rican," Mr. Lynn said in 1972 as he sought one of three vacancies on the New
York State Court of Appeals.

Mr. Lynn continued practicing law until a few months before his death.  He is
survived by his wife, Yolanda Moreno; three children, Suzanne Lynn of Manhattan,
Alexander Lynn of Boston and Gabrielle Savage of Woodland Park, Colo., and five
grandchildren.

NAME: Conrad J. Lynn

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Journal;
Ticket To Ride

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 21;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 730 words


The first concert the Beatles played in the United States was at the Washington
Coliseum on Feb. 11, 1964 -- two nights after the country dropped everything to
watch them on "The Ed Sullivan Show." The only kid my friends and I knew who had
a ticket was a girl whose father owned a car dealership. The rest of us were
literally out in the cold -- in front of the Shoreham Hotel, actually, where the
Beatles were said to be arriving by late afternoon.

We had rushed there after school on the Connecticut Avenue bus. It was hard to
know what propelled us. Yes, we had been listening to "Meet the Beatles" night
and day during the three weeks since it first appeared in the racks at Super
Music City. Our own WWDC had been the first radio station in the country to play
"I Want to Hold Your Hand." But we were not the kind of boys to scream about pop
stars. We wore narrow belts, chinos and crew cuts; we took Algebra II seriously.
Yet here we were, screaming, any time a potential Beatlemobile pulled up to the
Shoreham's curb.

My oldest son -- at 15, the same age now I was then -- has at most a bemused
tolerance about the Beatles' music: he indulges it as a parental whim, much as I
once indulged my parents' hankering for Sinatra. And in truth I don't listen
much to the Beatles these days, either; life goes on. Yet the songs remain old
friends who are usually fun to re-encounter. Taking an advance look at "The
Beatles Anthology," the six-hour documentary that is expected to dominate
prime-time TV starting tomorrow night, I was amazed that I was never tempted to
fast-forward through the familiar old performances -- even of the pre-"Rubber
Soul" songs that long ago became elevator music, like "All My Loving" and "This
Boy."

Is the documentary worth all the hype being lavished upon it by the temporarily
and gratingly renamed network A-Beatles-C? Of course not -- nothing is. But it's
very smart -- closer in feel to Ken Burns than to "Entertainment Tonight" -- and
laced with interviews, kinescopes and home movies that haven't been seen before.

Even so, the six hours don't fully capture what drew me and my friends down to
the Shoreham on that freezing February afternoon, and what kept a generation
riveted to the Beatles until they broke up in 1970, just as we entered
adulthood.

What yanked us down Connecticut Avenue, I think in retrospect, was an instinct
that the Beatles were avatars of some change in our lives that we couldn't
define but knew was on the way. In part, this was an accident of the Beatles'
timing: Kennedy had been shot less than three months earlier, and if a
President's corpse could be carried through the benign downtown where we bought
records and saw James Bond movies, anything was up for grabs.

Having been handed a historical moment, however, the Beatles then ran with it --
becoming inseparable from the revolutions, not all of them for the better, in
culture, politics, sex and fashion soon to come. The immediate fallout of their
invasion -- inane confrontations with our high school principal over the new,
Beatles-inspired length of our hair -- would eventually give way to the graver
battles of what became the Vietnam decade. As the 60's darkened along with the
war, the Beatles' music did, too, uncannily in sync with history as it unfolded.

Hearing the songs out of that context decades later -- "Revolution" in a Nike
commercial, for instance -- is another experience entirely, though not always
unpleasant. The Beatles' songs hold up in a way agitprop political art, whether
of the 60's or any era, does not. But as their canon transcends its time, it is
also of its time. If the Beatles had not expressed the 60's so articulately, all
their music would sound as innocuous as "Love Me Do." Indeed, they did as much
as anyone to create the counterculture that half the politicians in the country
are still running against, as they purport to take us back to that pre-Beatles
culture in which father knew best and listened to Lawrence Welk.

Such efforts to regulate culture are doomed to failure, now as then. When
artists have the talent the Beatles did, they can easily circumvent the words of
any politician. That's the power that drew my previously well-behaved friends
and me to scream like maniacs on that cold day in February, though even we had
yet to imagine it was the power to move the world.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Admiral Has to Quit Over His Comments On Okinawa Rape

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 702 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 17


The commander of United States forces in the Pacific was forced to step down
today after he said the recent rape of a 12-year-old Okinawan girl could have
been avoided if the American servicemen involved had simply paid for a
prostitute.

The commander, Adm. Richard C. Macke, apologized after members of Congress and
Japanese officials complained, but it was too late.

Admiral Macke, a 57-year-old Annapolis graduate and combat veteran of the war in
Vietnam, announced late in the day that he had decided to take early retirement,
and both White House and the Defense Department made clear that he had been
forced to do so.

Admiral Macke declined to comment on the matter this evening.

A senior White House official said tonight that Anthony Lake, the national
security adviser, had heard of Admiral Macke's remarks and told the Defense
Department that the statements were "not acceptable."

The official added, "They didn't have to be coaxed," and Admiral Macke was
forced to step down.

Defense Secretary William J. Perry said tonight that Admiral Macke had
acknowledged that he had made a "serious mistake."

"This evening Admiral Macke and I discussed the comment and its impact on our
valued relations with Japan and Okinawa," he said. "We decided that his lapse of
judgment was so serious that he would be unable to perform effectively his
duties as Commander in Chief of U.S. Forces in the Pacific. As a result, Admiral
Macke offered to retire, and I accepted his early retirement."

Admiral Macke later issued a statement apologizing for his comment. "I made a
serious mistake this morning," the statement said. "My recent comment was the
result of my frustration over the stupidity of this heinous and incomprehensible
crime against the young lady. I regret any misunderstanding my comment may have
cause."

Admiral Macke also noted that he had repeatedly expressed sympathy for the girl.

The immediate reaction in Japan was subdued. Japanese television reported the
admiral's resignation without mentioning his comments on the rape.

Still, a Foreign Ministry spokesman criticized the admiral's comments. "The
remarks by Admiral Macke are most inappropriate in view of the terrible incident
that took place in Okinawa," the spokesman, Takeshi Nakane, said.

The episode caused yet another strain in United States relations with Japan.
First, there was the rape itself. On Nov. 7, the three American servicemen
pleaded guilty to conspiring to kidnap and rape the girl.

Then on Wednesday, President Clinton canceled a planned trip to Japan for a
Pacific Rim economic conference because of his long-running stalemate with the
Republicans in Congress over the budget.

Then came the admiral's statement to reporters today. "I think that it was
absolutely stupid, I've said several times," Admiral Macke said of the rape.
"For the price they paid to rent the car they could have had a girl."

A Defense Department official said Admiral Macke had made his comment toward the
end of a breakfast meeting with reporters this morning.

The official said that after Secretary Perry was told of it, he spoke by
telephone with the United States Ambassador to Japan, Walter F. Mondale. Then
Mr. Perry called Mr. Clinton and recommended that Admiral Macke be made to
retire, and the President concurred, the official said.

Before the resignation was reported, Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of
California, said she was stunned by the admiral's remarks condoning
prostitution.

"I would say to Navy Secretary John Dalton, 'Your guys still don't get it,' "
she said. "You better teach them, or else. Rape isn't about money and it isn't
about sex. It's about power over women, and it's a very degrading, terrible,
major felony."

Admiral Macke is the latest naval officer to become involved in a matter
involving insensitivity toward women or outright assault.

The Navy was racked by the Tailhook scandal in 1991, when dozens of women were
sexually assaulted by naval officers. Most recently, the Navy Secretary canceled
the promotion of the officer in charge of equal opportunity, even after he was
acquitted in a court martial on charges of sexually harassing a woman who worked
for him.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Adm. Richard C. Macke (Associated Press)(pg. 5)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

RECORDINGS VIEW;
Arena Rock Loses One Voice and Gains Another

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 38;  Column 1;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1306 words


THE VOICE IS BIG AND GUTSY, with strength behind its rasp. It aches and it
exults; it pleads, and it accuses. Behind it, the band sounds muscular and
polished, with power chords chiming atop a big unswerving beat, propulsive but
unhurried. Within the new songs are traces of old ones, half-remembered hits
from the days of Phil Spector and Roy Orbison and the early British Invasion,
evoking an unbroken rock heritage.

A decade ago, that could have described the music of Bruce Springsteen. But
Springsteen has pulled back from his old, heroic sound; his new album, "The
Ghost of Tom Joad" (Columbia), broods quietly over unemployment, frustration and
short, wasted lives. In some ways, it's like a hi-fi, West Coast sequel to
"Nebraska," the homemade album he released in 1982 between the grander
statements of "The River" and "Born in the U.S.A." It's also where his
award-winning, AIDS-haunted "Streets of Philadelphia" has led, to a territory of
sober rumination and chronic bummers.

Yet many listeners rely on music to stoke a sense of hope, and the sound
Springsteen and others honed was too uplifting to discard. The triumphal tone of
Springsteen's old songs has been taken up by younger performers like Counting
Crows, Hootie and the Blowfish and, most dramatically, Melissa Etheridge, whose
new album, "Your Little Secret" (Island), follows her five-million-selling "Yes
I Am" with more of the confident blare of mid-1980's rock.

It's not a revival but a continuation of the arena-filling sound of the era,
which backs up unironic earnestness with ringing major chords and proclaims it
in singing that grows more vehement with every verse. In the 1980's, songwriters
often tied their fervor to causes or characters, like the troubled narrators in
Springsteen's "Hungry Heart" or "Born in the U.S.A." In the 1990's, however,
people belt for their own romance, and the search for love becomes an
all-consuming quest. "I want to lose all your demons and go," Etheridge sings.
"I want to tear off your chains 'cause I know."

Etheridge has entered a zone of rock that was briefly neglected, that of the
arena anthem. While early-1990's rock bands turned to the self-lacerating
introspection of grunge or the self-mocking frenzy of punk, Etheridge sang for
people whose main anxiety came from unrequited love.

Grunge and punk reveal a crisis of masculinity for intelligent rockers, who can
no longer take for granted the sense of dominance that used to come with
maleness and a loud guitar. (The raw misogyny of so much hip-hop faces male
insecurity with an exaggerated reaction in the opposite direction.) But the old
rock swagger was up for grabs by a woman, and Etheridge grabbed it. Tina Turner
and Joan Jett may be among her models, but so are male rockers: Springsteen, Rod
Stewart, Bob Seger, Bryan Adams and, on the new album, U2.

Etheridge and her co-producer, Hugh Padgham, have outdone their previous
collaboration on "Yes I Am." Etheridge's newer songs are more spacious and more
memorable, with arrangements that hold her voice in reserve and then let her
break through with redoubled urgency. And she homes in on the topic that makes
her fans shout along: the way passion conquers reason. "To hell with the
consequence," she insists in "I Want to Come Over," "You told me you love me."

"Yes I Am" was tied to Etheridge's strummed acoustic guitar, keeping her close
to the Midwestern rock of John Mellencamp. "Your Little Secret" features
Mellencamp's brilliant drummer, Kenny Aronoff, and the album's first single, the
title song, picks up Mellencamp's Rolling-Stones-in-Indiana guitar crunch. But
the album continually looks over its shoulder at Springsteen -- not his
storytelling, but his music.

Etheridge and Padgham have studied the way Springsteen and his producer, Chuck
Plotkin, use sustained keyboard chords as unobtrusive cushions. Songs take up
Springsteen's marching tempos: the Phil Spector beat in "I Want to Come Over,"
the expansive acoustic-guitar march in "All the Way to Heaven" and the
thoughtful keyboard march in "Nowhere to Go," which also borrows guitar from
U2's "With or Without You." U2's resolute pace and resonant guitars reappear in
"This War Is Over," as Etheridge sings, "Melt all the chains in my soul."

After "Yes I Am" was released, Etheridge acknowledged that she is a lesbian, but
in her songs the object of desire remains "you," with no description to restrict
anybody's fantasy. She does sometimes drop a geographical detail, like "the
muddy waters of the mighty Mo" (presumably the Missouri River) in "Nowhere to
Go."

But Etheridge labors to stay generic, setting herself up as a middle-American
Everygal, with details out of Gap ads. "Just my jeans and my T-shirt and my blue
Chevrolet," she sings in "Nowhere to Go." Staying up-to-date, two songs bring up
tattoos.

Etheridge also refers indirectly to her new status as rock's most popular
acknowledged lesbian. Under its cliches and its melodramatic buildup, "I Could
Have Been You" replies to those who condemn homosexuals for choosing an immoral
orientation: "A path I didn't choose," Etheridge insists, adding, "With hate you
justify your crime/ A crime compassion can erase." And in "Shriner's Park,"
another slow-building march, the inevitable pronoun is "you," but the scenario
could easily be the story of teen-age lesbian trysts with a girlfriend who
decided to stay straight.

Most of "Your Little Secret" sticks with common situations -- temptation and
seduction, cheating and losing -- and Etheridge hurls herself into them,
capturing obsession and infatuation in songs like "An Unusual Kiss" and "I Want
to Come Over." Her songs don't withdraw into desire; they make desire fill the
whole world.

But only in pop songs can people live exclusively for passion. Even when he was
helping invent the arena anthem, Springsteen rarely devoted the style to simple
love songs. He saw not just potential lovers but friendships, jobs, families. As
he matured, he lost adolescent visions of heroic romance and started to consider
how adults make it through everyday life.

ON "The Ghost of Tom Joad," he never raises his voice; he sings as if he's
humbled by what he knows. He gently picks his acoustic guitar; keyboards and
whispering drums waft in behind him, as the tunes rise a few notes, then fall to
earth.

It's Springsteen in Woody Guthrie mode, setting stories from newspaper articles
and thinking about justice for the downtrodden. The title song, named after a
character in John Steinbeck's "The Grapes of Wrath," vows that Tom Joad's ghost
will appear "wherever there's somebody fightin' for a place to stand/ Or a
decent job or a helpin' hand." A few other songs also point fingers: "Sir you
tell me the world's changed," a furnace worker sings in "Youngstown." "Once I
made you rich enough/ Rich enough to forget my name." But only a few songs are
heavy-handed. In most of them, Springsteen doesn't find lessons as Guthrie
would; he just tells another tale of someone up against the insurmountable.

The songs are about hobos, ex-convicts and small-town bank robbers, as well as
people new to Springsteen songs: immigrants from Mexico and Vietnam, contracting
AIDS as hustlers or watching their shrimp boats burn. After a night with the
woman he loves, a man in "Dry Lightning" is told, "Ain't nobody can give nobody
what they really need anyway."

There's not much hope, but Springsteen sees the glimmer that makes people keep
trying. Amid the dead-end stories, there's an anthem tucked on to the album:
"Across the Border" is the prayer and vow of a man planning to migrate with his
lover: "I know love and fortune will be mine." Like the singer, we know they'll
have to worry about more than the next night's rendezvous; along with the music,
we're pulling for them anyway.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bruce Springsteen and Melissa Etheridge during the taping of her
MTV "Unplugged" show earlier this year. (Frank Micelotta/Outline)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Joining the Army Is Hazardous to Health

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 14;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 221 words


To the Editor:

" 'Be All You Can Be': Fightin' Words?" (Week in Review, Nov. 12) fails to
mention one factor that discourages young people from joining the military: the
prospect of chronic illness.

Such has been the fate of hundreds of thousands of veterans exposed to atomic
testing in the 1940's, 50's and 60's, Agent Orange in Vietnam, and depleted
uranium weapons, experimental vaccines and chemical agents in the Persian Gulf
war.

If young people were aware of this history of sacrifice and experimentation when
asked to enlist, the military recruiter would become as lonely as the Maytag
repairman.

You also fail to mention one key tool in the military's struggle to keep
thousands of young people signing up: Junior Reserve Officers Training Corps.
This high school military training program will soon be in 2,600 schools. By
putting 14-year-olds in uniforms and letting them handle guns, the military has
found that they are more likely to sign up for service when they are 17 or 18.

So while the military learns from history to expand training activities for
children, it can only hope that these same children will remain ignorant to the
military's history of sacrificing the long-term health of its troops for
short-term political and military goals.

DAN FAHEY
Berkeley, Calif., Nov. 13, 1995

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IDEAS & TRENDS;
Shortfall In the Grain Fields

BYLINE: By BARNABY J. FEDER

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 950 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO


THANKS largely to rapidly increasing export demand, stores of American corn,
wheat and soybeans are lower than they have been for two decades. The harvest
farmers are just finishing would have been a record-setting bin-buster just 20
years ago, but it is a shortfall today, with roughly 1.5 billion more mouths to
feed on the planet and a growing industrial market for vegetable oil and grain
products. Grain reserves worldwide amount to a 48-day supply, the lowest level
since measurements began in 1963, according to the Worldwatch Institute, a
Washington-based environmental group.

What does it all mean? Not much, said Dennis Avery, head of the Center for
Global Food Issues at the Hudson Institute in Indianapolis. "The world has more
food security than at any time in history," he said, citing improvements in
agricultural tools and techniques and the trend toward freer trade in
agriculture.

The Sky Is Falling. Really!

Nothing could be further from the truth, said Lester R. Brown, president of
Worldwatch. "The politics of scarcity is already beginning to manifest itself,"
he said, referring to Vietnam's brief embargo on rice exports early this year
and to reports that some inland Chinese provinces limited grain shipments to
populous coastal provinces. "We are moving into a period so different from the
last half century that we can't even imagine how different it will be."

Mr. Avery and Mr. Brown represent two extremes in a long-running battle that
tangles the boundaries of science, politics and philosophy. Optimists like Mr.
Avery believe the track record of the 20th century proves that the world can
innovate and grow its way out of food shortages despite rising populations,
especially if governments interfere less in agricultural markets. Mr. Brown and
other disciples of Thomas Malthus, the 18th century philosopher who warned about
the dangers of runaway population increases, see such arguments as a complacent
prelude to war, massive famines and epidemic diseases.

One thing is clear: after a long run of successes that had kept prices low and
encouraged politicians and many economists to ignore and even ridicule the
Malthusians, a bad spring could sow second thoughts. Experts in agribusiness
agree that the current, unusually high prices for grain could skyrocket. Add a
troubled harvest in Brazil and other breadbaskets in South America -- or poor
conditions in the winter wheat crop here next June -- and the price of food
could become an election-year issue in the United States.

Sharply higher grain prices next spring might not immediately affect consumers.
Grain is a very small part of the checkout counter cost of bread and breakfast
cereal. Companies like Kellogg and the Interstate Bakeries, the maker of Wonder
bread, might also shield shoppers from the impact by living with lower profits
or even losses until their competitors seem ready to raise prices. At the same
time, meat prices could fall as livestock and poultry producers dump animals
into the market rather than feed them high-priced grain. The upward pressure on
food prices for Americans might be delayed for months.

Big grain importers, however, like Indonesia, Russia and China would feel the
consequences of higher prices almost immediately. Hard pressed to compete with
wealthier countries for grain, these developing countries might respond by
expanding their own planting, with little attention to the environmental costs.
Satellite photos already suggest a sharp increase this year in fires to clear
more farmland in Brazil's rain forests, a direct reaction to the rising price of
grain.

To relieve some of the pressure, Washington has already set aside restrictions
on how much land farmers can plant next year without losing their eligibility
for subsidies, a move that will bring millions of acres back into production.

Listening to Malthus

A shortfall next spring would make it harder than ever for environmental groups
to defend rules that limit planting on wetlands. It could also undermine the
already embattled Conservation Reserve Program, which pays farmers to idle 32
million acres of environmentally sensitive land. Much of this land, Mr. Avery
and others say, could be farmed with little damage using current techniques.
They argue that expanding American exports will protect rain forests and other
environmentally vital areas.

Soaring prices might also make political life rough for defenders of a number of
policies that have supported farmers by boosting demand in difficult times, from
export subsidies to tax breaks for ethanol. Prominent members of that group are
talking tough for now: Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman told the National
Association of Farm Broadcasters convention in Kansas City this month, "I'm not
in the mood to cut the legs from under all those people who have waited all
these years for higher grain prices."

But farm groups fear that a tough spring in the fields would reconfigure
political reality. Their biggest nightmare: an export embargo on grain supplies
large enough to protect Americans from big price increases. Previous embargoes
severely damaged the nation's reputation as a reliable supplier, allowing Europe
and Brazil to capture a big chunk of the market.

"You can't just jump in and out of export markets," said John Keeling, director
for agricultural policy at the National Corn Growers Association. "It would be
very awkward for us politically, but we'd be arguing for higher food prices for
Americans."

The chances of such actions seem remote for now, even if prices soar. But the
stresses could easily rise to the level where the Malthusians once again get a
more respectful hearing.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Today's unusually high prices for grain could skyrocket, experts
say. Above, the harvest in Trego County, Kan. (Charlie Riedel)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NOVEMBER 12-18;
The Mouse Makes the Man

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 2;  Column 3;  Week in Review Desk

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In Hanoi's Lenin Park, a photographer charges 5000 dong (about
50 cents) for a picture with Mickey. (Reuters)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
Showing Up in a Shutdown

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 438 words


CALL it the Lindsay Rule. By any name, Congress and the White House ignored it
big time last week when they told 800,000 Federal workers to stay home.

The rule -- christened here in honor of former Mayor John V. Lindsay of New
York, who violated it himself -- states that you never tell people that they are
unessential. It demoralizes them, and it can come back to haunt you.

In January 1966 Mr. Lindsay entered City Hall, and was immediately hit with a
mass-transit strike. To keep Manhattan from turning into a parking lot, he
pleaded that commuters look in the mirror, weigh their importance and stay home
"if you're not essential to your job."

His appeal fell on deaf ears. How many of us want to think that the world can
get along fine without us? Determined job-holders made a traffic nightmare of
Manhattan, and Hizzoner struggled to recover politically.

This time, workers were told en masse that they do not stack up to others
pulling down Federal paychecks. One can only imagine the resentment that may
burst forth after the President and Congress finally walk away from their
budgetary O.K. Corral.

Even now, you have to wonder how some workers were deemed to be vital and others
not.

Being Dispensed With

Soldiers were not furloughed. Well, you say, we can't do without the Army. But
are all soldiers essential? One Vietnam-era draftee, recalling his days of
grinding out Army press releases, knows that his job was not critical. Couldn't
his Generation X successor take the month off to save taxpayers money?

Congressional aides were still on the payroll, but National Park Service rangers
were not. Explain that one. Can anyone seriously argue that most Americans care
more about staffing an obscure House subcommittee than keeping the Statue of
Liberty open?

Are the two chefs who have been kept on at the White House more important than
the clerks who process 16,000 veterans claims each day?

Yes, gravediggers should keep up the good work at Arlington National Cemetery.
But what about those furloughed Federal health inspectors who had helped keep
people alive?

New York learned the perils of "prioritizing" when it laid off thousands of
municipal employees while on the brink of bankruptcy in 1975. Police officers
were saved whenever possible. Bridge painters were let go. It seemed to make
sense -- until bridges started to fall apart for lack of proper maintenance.

That's the problem with "essential." Someone who seems expendable today may be
indispensable tomorrow. And the opposite is also true. Bill Clinton and Newt
Gingrich may both take that as a cautionary reminder.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: While the Government closed the National Zoo in Washington last
week, its animals still had to be fed. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Admiral's Gaffe Pushes Navy To New Scrutiny of Attitudes

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 14;   Column 5;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 714 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 18


The uproar over remarks made by the commander of United States forces in the
Pacific about the rape of a 12-year-old Japanese girl has rekindled criticism
over the Navy's insensitivity toward women.

The commander, Adm. Richard C. Macke, was forced to step down late Friday after
he told reporters that the three American servicemen accused of raping the girl
in Okinawa could have avoided the whole incident by hiring a prostitute.

"I think it was absolutely stupid," Admiral Macke said, then added, "I've said
several times, for the price they paid to rent the car, they could have had a
girl."

Senior Navy officials expressed shock and disappointment today at the latest in
a series of embarrassing incidents seeming to suggest that the Navy has made
little headway in changing its attitudes and behavior toward women since the
Tailhook scandal in 1991, when scores of women were assaulted at a convention of
naval aviators.

"There is no place in today's Navy for attitudes that reflect a regard for women
as property or that show insensitivity toward the victim of rape and brutal
assault," Navy Secretary John H. Dalton said.

The remarks by Admiral Macke, 57, an Annapolis graduate and fighter pilot in the
Vietnam War, sent senior Administration officials into a fury on the same day
that President Clinton made a lengthy apology about the rape case to Japanese
television in an effort to mend strained United States-Japan relations.

In Okinawa, Governor Masahide Ota said the admiral's remarks reflected "a grave
lack of understanding" and were "an insult to women."

In the past month, the promotion of the Navy's former top equal-opportunity
officer, Capt. Everett L. Greene, was canceled after the Navy Secretary, John H.
Dalton, decided that the officer had displayed poor judgment in writing sexually
suggestive cards and poems to a woman who worked for the captain.

The United States Naval Academy has implicated 24 midshipmen in selling or using
drugs. And a drunken Navy petty officer on a commercial airliner reportedly
groped a female sailor next to him, while none of the 20 other Navy sailors and
officers on board stopped him.

In an effort to quash the rash of problems, Adm. Jeremy Boorda, the Chief of
Naval Operations, last week ordered the fleet to suspend its operations for one
day within the next month to figure out how to keep its 433,000 active-duty and
100,000 Navy reservists out of trouble.

But many critics inside and outside the military say the Navy's laudatory
efforts to educate everyone from sailors to admirals about sexual harassment,
and to punish offenders, have run into much resistance.

"The Navy has done a good job with its programs, and it has opened some eyes,
but there is a lot of anger out there among men," said a female officer at the
Naval War College in Newport, R.I. "I don't think many men in the Navy saw
Tailhook as being something bad. They just got caught. And now women are
perceived as a threat to their careers."

Other analysts and even many Navy officers say it will take years to change
attitudes.

"The nature of the service is that it's the most isolated from civilian
interaction," said Charles Moskos, a military sociologist at Northwestern
University. "Because they're at sea for six months at a time, going into port is
an aberrant action."

But a senior admiral, speaking on the condition of anonymity, rejected the
characterization. Senior commanders also scoffed at the notion that sailors were
encouraged to hire prostitutes in foreign ports. Ship health specialists, of
course, recognize the reality of dealing with a ship full of mostly young,
single men, and advise them to have protected sex.

All branches of the military have weathered sexual harassment scandals. But the
Navy's seem to receive the spotlight most often. Asked last week why the Navy
continued to suffer well-publicized indignities, Admiral Boorda had no clear
answer.

"I don't want to make excuses for the Navy," he said. "We have 433,000 people on
active duty and 100,000 reservists, and there are going to be a few people who
don't get the word."

But it is especially troubling to Admiral Boorda and his senior aides, Navy
officials said today, when the offenders are four-star admirals like Admiral
Macke.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
NOW FOR THE HARD PART

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section A;  Page 23;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In announcing the Bosnian peace accord yesterday, President Clinton declared
that the role of U.S. troops in implementing this agreement will be "a clear,
limited, achievable mission," with minimal risks. I think that such a minimalist
mission -- but only such a minimalist mission -- can be sold to the American
public and Congress.

But before we can judge whether that is really the mission President Clinton is
dispatching U.S. forces on, we need to know not only the fine print of this
agreement, but what has not been printed at all, only whispered to the parties
in the hallways of Dayton. There was obviously a lot of 11th-hour horse-trading.

When American diplomats were negotiating the withdrawal of U.S. troops from
Vietnam they accepted a lot of ambiguity in the accord, and told different
things to different people -- but that was in order to get U.S. troops out. It
would be very worrying if we have adopted the same sort of diplomacy in Dayton
to get U.S. troops in.

Here are the questions Congress should be asking:

1. Initial reports suggest that this deal came about as a result of a
Croatian-Serbian squeeze play on the Bosnian Muslims. And no wonder. Croatia and
Serbia, the two big powers in this theater, got virtually everything they wanted
out of this deal -- international recognition for the slices of Bosnia they have
seized. It is the Muslims who wanted a reunified Bosnia, but got far less. The
question is: What has the U.S. promised the Muslims in terms of military support
and training for their army? And does Washington have the backing of the Serbs
and the Croats for playing the role of peacekeeper with one hand while arming
the Muslims with the other?

The U.S. has to be very careful that it is not drawn into a process whereby the
Muslims use the U.S. Army to get for them on the ground in Bosnia what they
could not get at the negotiating table in Dayton. This is also a crucial point
to sort out with our allies, because the Germans, British and French have never
liked the idea of the U.S. upgrading the Muslim army while also serving as
peacekeepers. Do Paris, Bonn, London and Washington share the same objectives
under the NATO umbrella?

2. This agreement states that while Bosnia is being divided into self-governing
Serbian and Croatian-Muslim states, these two halves are supposed to be united
under an "effective" umbrella central government, central bank, national
parliament and constitutional court. Also all refugees are to be allowed to
return home. What role will the U.S. military play in achieving those difficult
goals? What if the Serbs and Croats drag their feet in participating in these
federal institutions or in letting refugees return?

3. How will we know when this mission has succeeded? Will we declare victory and
bring the troops home only after all-Bosnian elections and a return of refugees
to their original homes? Will we declare victory and bring the troops home after
12 months in which we have given the parties a legitimate breathing space to
solidify peace, whether they have done so or not? Or will we declare victory
after we have built up the Muslim army enough so that there will be a stable
balance of power among the three parties? There has always been a trade-off in
the Balkans between stability and justice. Which is our objective?

Finally, a question for President Clinton: In traveling around this country I am
sure you have noticed that not only is there no public enthusiasm for this
mission, there is virtually no public understanding of it. Even those inclined
to support you on this aren't quite sure why.

The stakes for you could not be higher. If this peace mission succeeds, your
whole foreign policy will be judged very differently than it has been up to now.
But if you can't get the public's support for this mission, or if this mission
fails on the ground because it turns out not to have been either limited or
clearly defined, everything else you've achieved in foreign policy will be
forgotten.

Putting 20,000 U.S. troops into a risky peacekeeping role in the Balkans, with
relations with NATO and Russia on the line, is a major foreign policy endeavor.
To make it a success will require you to exhibit something that you have never
exhibited before -- a sustained, personal involvement with foreign policy. That
is the only way you can sell this.

But first, you have to tell us exactly what you're selling.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

A Different Holiday for Vietnamese Catholics

BYLINE: By JON NORDHEIMER

SECTION: Section B;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 610 words

DATELINE: ATLANTIC CITY, Nov. 22


On the surface, the holiday that drew Vietnamese parishioners to Our Lady Star
of the Sea Church, just a couple of blocks away from the neon gaudiness of the
casinos, had nothing to do with the American tradition of Thanksgiving.

Some showed up in colorful dress: traditional Vietnamese embroidered outfits
known as ao dai on the women, saffron-colored gowns and tiara-like headpieces on
the girls, satiny blue robes and caps on the men.

They were celebrating the Feast of the 100 Martyrs, a holy day for Vietnamese
Catholics.

Some 300,000 of the more than one million Vietnamese refugees in the United
States are Roman Catholics, and about two-thirds of the 600 who settled in the
Atlantic City area gathered last night in a religious and cultural ceremony
filled with thanksgiving and sorrow, followed by a meal of spring rolls, rice
and chicken.

"Vietnamese people give thanks every day for being in this country," said the
Rev. Joseph Anh Nguyen, a priest who shuttles between his Vietnamese flocks in
Atlantic City and Camden, N.J. "But on 100 Martyrs Day their thoughts go back to
Vietnam and the relatives left behind."

The official observance of the holy day actually falls on Nov. 24 and
commemorates the 117 European missionaries and converts to Christianity who were
tortured and beheaded, burned at the stake or similarly killed during a 261-year
period that ended in 1886.

The holy day had to be celebrated early because many men and women in the parish
hold jobs in the casinos -- the industry that drew them to Atlantic City from
other states -- and almost everyone works daily shifts on this long holiday
weekend.

"The casinos stop for no one," smiled Thomas Le, a 49-year-old blackjack dealer
at Trump Plaza.

Thousands of the Vietnamese who have come to this country since the fall of
Saigon in 1975 have prospered. But some who live in the poorer sections of
Atlantic City and Camden arrived later, after the first wave. Some escaped the
Communist regime by sea and spent long years in camps in Thailand or the
Philippines.

The re-establishment of diplomatic relations last year between Washington and
Hanoi gave many people hope of eventual reunion with family members left behind,
Father Nguyen said. But one man, who insisted on being identified only as
Nguyen, said he doubted the authorities in Vietnam would let him visit his
homeland.

"I was an officer in the South Vietnam army so the Communists sent me to
re-education camp for seven years before they let me go," said Nguyen, 50. He
said he escaped a year later and was able to enter the United States in 1984,
working in small jobs at low pay until he found work at a casino as a dealer.

Five years ago he sent for his wife and three children, now grown, to try to
resume a life that between war, imprisonment and exile had left little time for
relationships. "The children come here and are attracted by the bright lights,
video games and big cars," he said. "They have little time for the old ways."

In that way, America was perhaps a mixed blessing.

"In Vietnam our families lived closely together and everyone was responsible for
raising and disciplining children," said Michael Hoang Vu, 30, who said he
escaped from Vietnam and entered this country in 1982. His parents came to this
country from Ho Chi Minh City two years ago and there was much rejoicing, said
Mr. Vu, an electrical engineer who works as an aircraft safety supervisor for
the Federal Aviation Administration.

But his parents, who live with Mr. Vu's siblings in Kansas, are stymied by the
language barrier. "There is little for them to do," he said. "They can't even
watch TV."

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A special Mass at Our Lady Star of the Sea Church in Atlantic
City marks the Feast of 100 Martyrs, a holy day for Vietnamese Roman Catholics.
About 400 of the 600 nearby Vietnamese residents attended yesterday. (Laura
Pedrick for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Chih-Kung Jen Is Dead at 89; Leader in Microwave Physics

BYLINE: By WILLIAM DICKE

SECTION: Section D;  Page 15;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 593 words


Chih-Kung Jen, who was born in a mud house in a remote village in China and made
his way to the Ivy League and a career as a theoretical and experimental
physicist in the United States, died on Sunday at a daughter's home in Needham,
Mass. He was 89 and lived in Silver Spring, Md.

Dr. Jen worked for 27 years at the Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins
University in Baltimore, where he was head of the microwave physics group and
vice chairman of the research center. In 1966, he was named the first William
Parsons Professor of Chemical Physics at the university.

In 1972, he led the first delegation of Chinese-born scientists from the United
States to China after President Richard M. Nixon's trip there led to a renewal
of contacts between the two countries.

Dr. Jen specialized in microwave spectroscopy, the measurement of the absorption
or emission by atoms or molecules of radiation in the microwave portion of the
electromagnetic spectrum. Colleagues said he made pioneering contributions in
the field.

His research in the late 1920's provided early experimental proof of the
existence of the ionosphere, a layer of ionized air high above the earth's
surface that reflects radio waves. Later he was part of a team at the physics
laboratory that developed an innovative process to isolate groups of normally
short-lived atoms at extremely low temperatures for study of their structures
and behavior.

He was born in 1906 in a peasant village in Shanxi Province in northern China
and became the only member of the immediate family who ever learned to read. He
was educated at Tsinghua University in Beijing, and received a bachelor's degree
in electrical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology; a
master's degree in radio communication from the University of Pennsylvania, and
a Ph.D. in physics from Harvard University in 1931.

He returned to China two years later to teach at Tsinghua University, but the
Japanese invasion in 1937 forced him and his new wife, Pao-Cheng Jen, to flee.
The Japanese occupied Beijing on the couple's wedding day.

The newlyweds took part in what has been called the "academic long march," a
great exodus of students and faculty members from colleges in Beijing and
Tianjin, first to Changsha and then to Kunming more than 1,200 miles away in
southwest China. Some went by way of Vietnam, others went by sea and many took a
route across high mountain ranges; not all survived.

In Kunming, the academics established a "refugee university" with 3,000 students
that operated for eight years under primitive conditions, with teachers and
professors alike in constant danger from Japanese air attacks. Dr. Jen once
recalled that the classes were in English as well as Chinese. Although the
students would have preferred instruction solely in their native tongue, the
only textbooks available were in English.  "We understood that the will to learn
is far more important than books and classrooms," he said.

After the war, he was awarded a fellowship by the Chinese Government in
recognition of his wartime contributions and returned to Harvard in 1946 to
teach physics. In 1950 he joined the physics laboratory at Johns Hopkins. He
retired in 1977.

In addition to his wife, of Silver Spring, he is survived by four daughters, May
Koo of Mountain View, Calif., Linda Jen-Jacobson of Pittsburgh, Phyllis Jen of
Needham, and Erica Jen of El Rancho, N.M.; a brother, Ren Zhi-Jian of Beijing; a
sister, Ren Zhi-Fang of Lanzhou, China; nine grandchildren, and a
great-grandson.

NAME: Chih-Kung Jen

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Chih-Kung Jen (Erica Jen)


TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: November 26, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1520 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   8   THE LOST WORLD, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $25.95.)
                Scientists visit a Costa Rican jungle that is the breeding
                ground of dinosaurs; a sequel to "Jurassic Park."

 2      5   4   THE CHRISTMAS BOX, by Richard Paul Evans. (Simon & Schuster,
                $12.95.) When a young family moves in with a widow, they all
                learn about the significance of Christmas.

 3      2   6   SILENT NIGHT, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon & Schuster, $16.) A
                family finds adversity and renewed courage during a
                Christmastime visit to New York.

 4      7   3   THE CHILDREN'S BOOK OF VIRTUES, edited by William J. Bennett.
                Illustrated by Michael Hague. (Simon & Schuster, $20.) Stories
                and poems.

 5      4  10   THE HORSE WHISPERER, by Nicholas Evans. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A
                troubled woman seeks solace for herself, her daughter and their
                horse from a wrangler in Montana.

 6      3   4   THE HUNDRED SECRET SENSES, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $24.95.) The
                changing relationship between a Chinese-American woman and her
                older Chinese half sister.

 7      6  10   MORNING, NOON, AND NIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $24.) The
                mysterious drowning of a respected tycoon leads to the
                revelation of a tangle of scandals.

 8      9   6   POLITICALLY CORRECT HOLIDAY STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $9.95.) Five classic Christmas stories retold to
                avoid offending current sensibilities.

 9      8  91   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life. (+)

 10    11   5   FINDING MOON, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $24.) A man's
                search for a relative provides him with many escapades in
                war-torn Southeast Asia in the 1970's.

 11    12   2   THE ISLAND OF THE DAY BEFORE, by Umberto Eco. (Wolff/Harcourt
                Brace, $25.) The wanderings of a 17th-century Italian castaway
                on a derelict ship.

 12    10  12   COMING HOME, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St. Martin's,
                $25.95.) A British woman comes of age during World War II.

 13    15   5   LOVE IN ANOTHER TOWN, by Barbara Taylor Bradford.
                (HarperCollins, $15.) A middle-aged woman, deserted by her
                husband, finds a new career and romance.

 14    14  20   BEACH MUSIC, by Pat Conroy. (Talese/Doubleday, $27.50.) An
                American living in Rome returns to South Carolina and tries to
                cope with his past.

 15         1   DRAGONS OF SUMMER FLAME, by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman.
                (TSR, $23.99.) Volume 4 of the "Dragon Lance" fantasy saga.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1          1   MISS AMERICA, by Howard Stern. (Regan Books, $27.50.) Anecdotes
                and fulminations from the radio talk show host.

 2      1   9   MY AMERICAN JOURNEY, by Colin L. Powell with Joseph E. Persico.
                (Random House, $25.95.) The autobiography of the former
                Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

 3      2   4   CHARLES KURALT'S AMERICA, by Charles Kuralt. (Putnam, $24.95.)
                From Alaska to Florida: the most recent travels of the
                itinerant television reporter.

 4      3   8   EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE, by Daniel Goleman. (Bantam, $23.95.)
                Factors other than I.Q. that contribute to a successful and
                happy life.

 5      5   2   DAVID BRINKLEY, by David Brinkley. (Knopf, $25.) From a boyhood
                in North Carolina through five decades as a television
                newscaster: a memoir.

 6     14  12   MY POINT ... AND I DO HAVE ONE, by Ellen DeGeneres. (Bantam,
                $19.95.) Observations on life and the pursuit of happiness by
                the television star and stand-up comedian.

 7      6   4   LINCOLN, by David Herbert Donald. (Simon & Schuster, $35.) The
                life of the 16th President.

 8      4   7   A GOOD LIFE, by Ben Bradlee. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) The
                memoirs of the former executive editor of The Washington Post.

 9      7  48   SISTERS. Essays by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J.
                Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets
                of sisters of varied callings and backgrounds.

 10     8  23   A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown,
                $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A. Tour in 1993 and
                1994. (+)

 11         1   MY LIFE IN HIGH HEELS, by Loni Anderson with Larkin Warren.
                (Morrow, $23.) The memoirs of the television actress.

 12         1   DAYS OF OUR LIVES, by Lorraine Zenka. (Regan
                Books/HarperCollins, $25.) An album of facts and pictures
                celebrating the television show's first 30 years.

 13         1   MINDHUNTER, by John Douglas and Mark Olshaker. (Drew/Scribner,
                $24.) The memoirs of the former leader of an F.B.I. team
                charged with studying the behavior of serial killers and
                assassins.

 14    11   3   THE MORAL COMPASS, edited by William J. Bennett. (Simon &
                Schuster, $30.) Stories, essays and poems that celebrate
                "reliable standards of right and wrong."

 15    12   7   HIGH TIDE IN TUCSON, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins,
                $22.) Essays about motherhood, travel, natural history and
                other topics by the novelist.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  131  MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Relationships. (+)

 2      2  36   THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra.
                (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $14.) How to "generate wealth
                in all its forms." (+)

 3      3   5   DAVID LETTERMAN'S BOOK OF TOP TEN LISTS, by David Letterman,
                Steve O'Donnell, et al. (Bantam, $16.) More than 150 lists from
                "Late Show With David Letterman."

 4          1   THE MARTHA STEWART COOKBOOK, by Martha Stewart. (Clarkson
                Potter, $27.50.) Recipes.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 11, at 3,985 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 50,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above. A dagger (+) indicates that some
bookstores report receiving bulk orders for a book.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE ALL-AMERICAN SKIN GAME: Or, The Decoy of Race. The Long and the Short of It,
1990-1994, by Stanley Crouch. (Pantheon, $24.) Tough, sharp-witted essays,
speeches and reviews from an omnivorous and optimistic black (he says Negro)
humanist and student of jazz and blues.

THE COLLECTED SHORT FICTION OF BRUCE JAY FRIEDMAN. (Donald I. Fine, $25.)
Forty-seven stories about psychiatrists, Jewish mothers, Hollywood, death, guilt
and other cosmic forces that make Mr. Friedman's comic world go round.

FROM THE BEAST TO THE BLONDE: On Fairy Tales and Their Tellers, by Marina
Warner. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) An agile, learned, eloquent
investigation of this influential literary form, more anthropological than
Freudian.

LEWIS CARROLL: A Biography, by Morton N. Cohen. (Knopf, $35.) A charming,
intriguing, conscientious life of Charles Lutwidge Dodgson, a peculiar child
adult who became a peculiar adult child without much happening in between.

MORALITY PLAY, by Barry Unsworth. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.50.) Medieval
English players re-enact a child's murder in order to solve it in this bravura
novel that shines period sensibilities on current (and timeless) issues.

ONCE UPON A DISTANT WAR, by William Prochnau. (Times Books/Random House,
$27.50.) Mr. Prochnau's research revives the real colors of the faded years
1961-63, when a band of young, soon-to-be-famous reporters began checking
official statements about the war in Vietnam against the facts in the field.

THE PILLARS OF HERCULES: A Grand Tour of the Mediterranean, by Paul Theroux.
(Putnam, $27.50.) A horrible tourist but a grand interlocutor, Mr. Theroux talks
to whomever he meets, yielding slice after slice of the strangeness of everyday
life around the great inland sea.

THE STORIES OF VLADIMIR NABOKOV, edited by Dmitri Nabokov. (Knopf, $35.)
Fifty-two short stories this miraculous writer collected during his lifetime and
13 he didn't, faithfully assembled by his son and, when required, translator.

TOM: The Unknown Tennessee Williams, by Lyle Leverich. (Crown, $35.) A balanced,
responsible, candid reconstruction of Williams's early life, from whose endless
frustration, humiliation and depression he fashioned the suffering, desperate
self-representations of his mature work.

AN UNCOMMON WOMAN: The Empress Frederick, Daughter of Queen Victoria, Wife of
the Crown Prince of Prussia, Mother of Kaiser Wilhelm, by Hannah Pakula. (Simon
& Schuster, $35.) Lucky in birth, happy in marriage, severely disappointed in
her disastrous son.

THE VERY BEST MEN. Four Who Dared: The Early Years of the CIA, by Evan Thomas.
(Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) It took a lot of nerve and a lot of money to create
the Central Intelligence Agency and bring it as far as the Bay of Pigs; but a
good time was had, as this account by Newsweek's Washington bureau chief shows.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THIS WEEK;
Indochina, Mon Amour

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 25;  Column 1;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Saskia Reeves and Jacqueline McKenzie star in "Traps," set in
1950's French-occupied Vietnam, where the weather is sultry, war is imminent and
illicit love is in the air. Opens Friday. (Filmopolis Pictures)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

OVER THERE;
Why the Yanks Are Going. Yet Again.

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 1;   Column 1;   Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1580 words

DATELINE: PARIS


IT was widely assumed, in the aftermath of the cold war, that America's
commitment to European security would diminish. What the United States had done
for Western Europe after World War II with the Marshall Plan and the creation of
NATO, the European Union would do for its neighbors in Eastern Europe in the
aftermath of Communism. The notion had a certain intellectual allure, as well as
obvious financial benefits for America. But it was finally laid to rest in
Dayton, Ohio, last week by the Pax Americana that put a stop to the slaughter in
Bosnia.

The peace, hammered out over 21 days of sometimes burlesque negotiation, is
inevitably uncertain because it is an attempt to build a Bosnian state of no
obvious cohesion on a terrain still raw with the wounds of war. The shouting and
maneuvering in Ohio could easily degenerate into shooting and mayhem in Bosnia.

But in the manner of its making and in the plans for its enforcement, the
settlement does contain one certainty: America's burden is about to grow
because, in the end, the fall of the Soviet empire and the Balkan war that
followed have exposed the critical weaknesses of the European Union and
Washington's unique powers of suasion in the old and the new Europe. Whatever
Congress may think about President Clinton's commitment to send 20,000 United
States troops as an indispensable one-third of a NATO force to police the peace,
the evidence of enduring European dependence on American leadership now appears
overwhelming.

It was not supposed to be this way. Rather than call on American muscle for the
third time this century in the face of war on the continent, Europe had hoped to
mark its emancipation by settling the latest Balkan conflict itself. A
half-century of growing cohesion and prosperity seemed to have prepared the
Europeans. When Yugoslavia began its bloody disintegration in June 1991, Jacques
Poos, Luxembourg's Foreign Minister, announced that "the age of Europe has
dawned."

Accompanied by the Dutch and Italian Foreign Ministers, and supported by a Bush
Administration eager to leave a European war to those most directly affected by
it, Mr. Poos then waded into the Balkans. In essence, the three men bore the
message of Jean Monnet, the European Union's founding father: "Faire l'Europe,
c'est faire la paix" -- "To build Europe is to build peace." The Balkan leaders
listened carefully, signed the first of countless cease-fires, and went straight
back to war.

Good Intent vs. Power

The Europeans persisted. Envoy followed envoy, plan followed plan. But their
efforts were always undermined by the fact that the European Union is a trading
giant and a military midget. The 15-member Union could provide soldiers in
United Nations uniform to donate rice; it could not provide heavily armed
soldiers to back tough policy decisions. Its defense arm, the Western European
Union, still amounts to very little; and diplomacy, unbacked by the credible
threat of force, is a vapid thing, particularly in the Balkans, where borders
were always drawn in blood.

To see Carl Bildt, a former Swedish Prime Minister who this year became the
European Union's envoy to Bosnia, beside Richard C. Holbrooke, America's chief
Balkan mediator, was to perceive the gulf between good intentions and power.

Mr. Bildt, a lonely figure, paced the streets of Sarajevo with his briefcase and
complained that he needed "a phone card" to contact a West Eurpean capital. Mr.
Holbrooke was flanked by generals, whose titles he would readily exalt to
impress his Balkan interlocutors, and supported by all the high-tech
paraphernalia of American intelligence and military might.

Moreover, as ever, the Europeans were divided. European Union remains an
oxymoron.

Old alliances, forgotten through the postwar years of peace, resurfaced with the
arrival of war on the continent. Germany tended to side strongly with Croatia
and Bosnia's Muslims -- a sympathy evident in Bonn's extraordinary unilateral
decision to recognize Croatian independence in December 1991 -- whereas France
and Britain were moved by old ties to Serbia, their ally and friend through two
world wars.

"As long as I'm alive, France will never make war on Serbia," Francois
Mitterrand said while he was President of France. He liked to recall how
Frenchmen fought shoulder to shoulder with the Serbs during World War I. Such
bonds made repeated Serb atrocities hard to perceive because there was a
psychological block to believing them.

The old Europe was also very much alive in the Balkans. The barracks of the
Bosnian Serbs are still adorned with posters warning of the dangers of
"Deutschmocracy" and bearing images of the swastika. In Zagreb, by contrast,
"Danke Deutschland" -- "Thank You Germany" -- became a second national anthem
after Germany bulldozed the rest of the European Union into recognition of
Croatia.

Such extreme sentiments made it almost impossible for Germany, by far the most
powerful West European state, to act forcefully in the Balkans. Its presence was
too sensitive. Indeed the necessity, and thus the strength, of the
German-American alliance, rooted in Germany's commitment to NATO as the anchor
for its defense and vehicle for any military projection, has been one of the
enduring lessons of the latest Balkan wars. More than any other two nations,
Germany and the United States have seen eye-to-eye on the conflict; this in turn
has tended to limit Europe's diplomatic potential and make Washington's
involvement inevitable.

The wars of Yugoslavia's destruction have also shown the allure of the
many-faceted American dream. In states emerging from Communism, American
merchandise and might still have a beacon-like power. America is a vivid idea,
Europe a vague notion or a troubled memory.

Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian President, who once worked as a banker in New
York, was seduced by America's glamor and financial power. Alija Izetbegovic,
the Bosnian President, cleaved to the United States as the bulwark of the
tolerant values being flouted by "ethnic cleansing." Croatia's Franjo Tudjman
saw that America could be the source of the military assistance and diplomatic
support he needed to take on the Serbs. All of them craved acceptance by
Washington; all of them held "Europe" in mild derision.

This was the backdrop to the Clinton Admininistration's very belated, but
ultimately decisive, intervention in the Bosnian conflict over the last four
months. The American success has provoked much carping in Europe, particularly
from the French. Mr. Holbrooke has been accused in Paris of claiming as his own
a plan devised a year ago by Alain Juppe, now France's Prime Minister. The
French representative in Dayton complained of being cold-shouldered. A French
senator, alluding to the death of more than 50 French peacekeepers in Bosnia,
lambasted America last week for grabbing the "Bosnian treasure from soil soaked
in the blood of Frenchmen."

The complaints amount essentially to sour grapes. America succeeded because only
America could. That is the harsh lesson of four years of war in the Balkans.
America remains a European power -- not just a member of NATO, but its
cornerstone; any attempt to disregard that fact amounts to an invitation to
disaster.

The Clinton Administration long flirted with that disaster. Its policy, until
last summer, was to look the other way while mouthing velleities about the
Europeans' resistance to the use of NATO air power. Europeans, with peacekeepers
on the ground, had a point when they repeatedly complained of the American
desire "to fight to the last European."

Misplaced Hope

The Administration's shifting descriptions of the war betrayed Washington's
incoherence. Serbian genocide against Muslims became a "problem from hell" and
an intractable feud marked by "atrocities by all three of the major parties" --
by implication, too intractable to do anything about.

Behind all this, there lurked fears, stoked by the Pentagon, of involvement in a
Vietnam-like quagmire. But there was also something deeper: the notion that
Europeans could take care of themselves now, or at least that they were no
longer so dependent on American leadership.

Bosnians paid a terrible price for this belief. Moreover, the NATO alliance
almost came unstuck. "It took some time to realize that we are still part of the
balance of power in Europe," said Mr. Holbrooke. "We are needed now to
counteract tribal nationalism and bring stability in the vast land mass from the
eastern German border to the western Russian border, where so many overlapping
territorial claims and potential conflicts lurk."

This American realization came too late to save the Muslims of Srebrenica or the
Serbs of the Krajina. But, in all likelihood, American troops will now go to
Bosnia to police the peace -- symbols of a renewed commitment whose necessity
has been painfully learned. Meanwhile, German money for reconstruction will pour
into an area where one of the few things shared and respected across the battle
lines throughout a long war has been the Deutschmark.

This shared undertaking is indicative of the main forces at work in
post-Communist Europe. Far from receding, American military and political
leadership has become more necessary. Its natural complement is German economic
might. Beside these realities, talk of building the European Union into a
political and military power as well as a trading bloc seems largely illusory.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In Germany, American soldiers get inoculations for Bosnia
mission. (Reuters); In Sarajevo, American supplies -- here, sacks of flour --
are arriving.; Near Tuzla, U.N. troops search for mines near a future base for
G.I.'s. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

ARTS/ARTIFACTS;
Artistry and Invention Seamlessly Joined

BYLINE: By RITA REIF

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 43;  Column 1;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 790 words


IN THE WORLD OF WEAVERS, Lenore Tawney is almost legendary. During the 1950's
and 60's, she invented techniques that transformed the craft and made weavings
that looked like airy sculptures. Then four years ago, at the age of 84, Mrs.
Tawney developed serious vision problems. She also made a discovery: a cache of
her best early work, which had been missing for 15 years, had turned up in a
friend's attic in New Jersey.

That work, appropriately called the Attic Collection, is one reason for the
renewed interest in her work. In fact, she is busier now than ever with her own
exhibitions. Two solo shows opened this year in Pittsburgh and in Chicago. Five
others, from Honolulu to Amsterdam, are planned for the next 18 months.

"I've always liked to travel," said Mrs. Tawney, who plans to attend all the
openings.

For the moment, it's the show at the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam, which opens
in May, that's consuming most of her attention. It will exhibit for the first
time most of the 48 pieces in the Attic Collection. "I've been working intensely
to finish the knots and braids and other details on these works so they can now
be exhibited," she said.

These pieces were misplaced in 1976, after she was evicted from her studio in
lower Manhattan and sent them to be stored at the Quakertown, N.J., home of the
ceramist Toshiko Takaezu. They were found only in 1991, in Ms. Takaezu's attic.

The collection covers Mrs. Tawney's entire career at the loom, from 1955 to
1976, and includes pieces that demonstrate how she used the techniques she
invented, called the open warp and the open reed, to change the texture and
shape of weaving in the 1950's and 1960's. There are also examples of her
Surrealist collages and constructions in boxes from the 60's and 70's.

Mrs. Tawney is probably the only one who knows exactly which works are going
where, and she is supervising the packing and shipping of everything. Greeting a
visitor to her all-white studio in the Chelsea section of Manhattan recently,
she was dressed all in white -- shirt, pants and a beret, which covered most of
her reddish hair. She exudes energy and seems taller than her five feet and
decades younger than her years. Only occasionally is it apparent that she sees
dimly now.

Her most familiar pieces are gossamer in texture, as delicate as a spider web.
In the 1950's, however, her weaving was anything but fragile: the colors were
often gaudy and the textures robust as she experimented with color and fibers.
By 1961, in her first solo show, at the Staten Island Museum, the colors were
neutral -- black, white, straw -- and the new elongated pieces were as airy as
fish nets.

"It was the beginning of the art fiber movement," said Jack Lenor Larsen, a New
York textile producer. One of Mrs. Tawney's finest works from this period is
"Dark River," a subtly curved, narrow weaving of parallel vertical threads. In
it, she transformed an abstract image into that of a figure of a cloaked woman,
crowned with a wig of braids. At 14 feet, the weaving is so tall that its owner,
the Museum of Modern Art, has never exhibited it.

THE ATTIC COLLECTION CONTAINS A similar work, "Murmuring River," which is only
nine feet tall. Among the other pieces is a 1974 weaving depicting an American
flag in reverse as a protest to the Watergate scandal.

Leonora Agnes Gallagher, one of five children born and raised on the shores of
Lake Erie and the Black River in Lorain, Ohio, knew her own mind from early
childhood. Asked recently when she changed her first name, she said: "About the
first grade. Why? Too many letters."

At 20 she left home for Chicago, where she became a proofreader for a legal
publisher and took courses at night at the Art Institute of Chicago. In 1941,
she married George Tawney, a psychologist, who became ill and died 18 months
later.

She moved to New York in 1957 and continued weaving until she was evicted from
her studio. She then went to India and spent six months at an ashram. While
there, she received a commission from the General Services Administration for a
work for the Federal Building in Santa Rosa, Calif.

Rather than a weaving, she created a blue fiber work of 2,500 threads, each of
which was tied to a canvas canopy near the ceiling. The 16-foot linen strands
are knotted at the end to drop like threads of rain over the enormous lobby. "
'Cloud' took me right off the loom," Mrs. Tawney said, "and there I was hanging
from the ceiling."

While her work has taken many forms, thread remains at its core. "Every one of
my boxes is full of thread, and there is thread in my collages too," she said.
"We wear fiber and are closer to fiber than almost anything else. It's our
diapers -- and our shrouds."
 Personal and literary explorations of the less visible (and therefore more
conjectural) half of life by a gifted critic and acutely intuitive memoirist.

SUSPENDED ANIMATION: Six Essays on the Preservation of Bodily Parts. By F.
Gonzalez-Crussi. (Harvest/Harcourt Brace, paper, $16.) Elegant meditations in a
sort of formal rococo style by a pathologist who knows that death is more fun
when you thoroughly understand it.

Poetry

THE ANNALS OF CHILE. By Paul Muldoon. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) Easier of
access and more emotionally direct than his previous work, these poems are also
more arcane and allusive -- especially the long autobiographical sequence
"Yarrow," an account of the birth of the poet's imagination.

ATLANTIS: Poems. By Mark Doty. (Harper Perennial, cloth, $22; paper, $11.) These
new poems are the best yet by Mr. Doty; together they form a fierce meditation
on the death of a lover as they look at the world "in a state of grief so pure
it is a kind of ecstasy."

THE COLLECTED POEMS OF LANGSTON HUGHES. Edited by Arnold Rampersad and David
Roessel. (Knopf, $30.) Except for juvenilia, all the poems, including hundreds
Hughes himself did not include in collections. Altogether they remind us that he
had perhaps the greatest affinity for popular speech and song of any American
poet in this century.

THE HUSBANDS: An Account of Books 3 and 4 of Homer's "Iliad." By Christopher
Logue. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.) A heroic, often brilliant, portion of the
author's long-term project of bringing this distant, uncomfortable, alien poem
closer to readers of contemporary poetry.

THE INFERNO OF DANTE: A New Verse Translation. By Robert Pinsky. (Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, $35.) A near-symphonic rendition of the tour through hell attains a
truly Dantean velocity without missing a jot or a tittle.

A SCATTERING OF SALTS: Poems. By James Merrill. (Knopf, $20.) Merrill's last
collection, published just weeks after his death. These poems have the unfailing
style and varied brilliance one expects, but also a sense of summing up -- a
wealth of poetry reaching its final form.

SELECTED POEMS, 1965-1990. By Marilyn Hacker. (Norton, $22.) Supple, and
colloquial, formalism gives an inviting elegance to poems of often astonishing
directness, heated passion and a vision of the human family that calls into
question virtually all of what are called traditional values.

Politics & Current Affairs

THE ALL-AMERICAN SKIN GAME: Or, The Decoy of Race. The Long and the Short of It,
1990-1994. By Stanley Crouch. (Pantheon, $24.) Tough, sharp-witted essays,
speeches and reviews from an omnivorous and optimistic black (he says Negro)
humanist and student of jazz and blues.

ALL GOD'S CHILDREN: The Bosket Family and the American Tradition of Violence. By
Fox Butterfield. (Knopf, $27.50.) A Times correspondent's painful examination of
social pathology from generation to generation, always getting worse, told with
a novelist's determination to see it whole.

AMAZING GRACE: The Lives of Children and the Conscience of a Nation. By Jonathan
Kozol. (Crown, $23.) In an impoverished neighborhood in the Bronx, Mr. Kozol
details, with his customary sensitivity, the devastation wreaked upon children.

AUTOPSY ON AN EMPIRE: The American Ambassador's Account of the Collapse of the
Soviet Union. By Jack F. Matlock Jr. (Random House, $35.) A scrupulously sober,
fair-minded and intelligent analysis of the Soviet collapse by a diplomat on the
scene from 1987 to 1991.

BETRAYAL: The Story of Aldrich Ames, an American Spy. By Tim Weiner, David
Johnston and Neil A. Lewis. (Random House, $25.) How a turncoat C.I.A. officer
sold his agency to the Soviets and got away with it for nine years without even
being careful; lucid narration by three correspondents of The New York Times.

BROKEN COVENANT: American Foreign Policy and the Crisis Between the U.S. and
Israel. By Moshe Arens. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) A senior Israeli politician
indicts Bush Administration policy as meddlesome and duplicitous.

BURY ME STANDING: The Gypsies and Their Journey. By Isabel Fonseca. (Knopf,
$25.) A diligent account of a spirited but hapless minority whose aversion to
history is such that many do not recall the half million slaughtered in World
War II, or indeed that such a war took place.

CALL THE BRIEFING! Bush and Reagan, Sam and Helen: A Decade With Presidents and
the Press. By Marlin Fitzwater. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) The press
secretary to Presidents Ronald Reagan and $25.) The press secretary to
Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush includes a few gems in his discreet
recollections.

CASINO: Love and Honor in Las Vegas. By Nicholas Pileggi. (Simon & Schuster,
$24.) The unease and aimlessness of the gangster life, captured fly-on-the-wall
fashion and conveyed in the perceptions of the crooks themselves.

THE CENTER HOLDS: The Power Struggle Inside the Rehnquist Court. By James F.
Simon. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) A professor at New York Law School provides a
lively and accessible narrative about how the current Supreme Court reaches its
judgments.

CITY LIFE: Urban Expectations in a New World. By Witold Rybczynski. (Scribner,
$23.) Why our cities aren't like Paris, explained by a witty and subtle
architect; mainly, their democratic vistas give no special focus to kings or
bishops.

A CIVIL ACTION. By Jonathan Harr. (Random House, $25.) This tale of a lawsuit
(Massachusetts householders vs. industrial polluters) is most disquieting when
it suggests that legal quirks and personalities determine who, if anyone, is
compensated.

COMRADE CRIMINAL: Russia's New Mafiya. By Stephen Handelman. (Yale University,
$27.50.) A reporter's account of post-cold-war Russia, now a lawless land at the
mercy of organized crime.

DAVID BRINKLEY: 11 Presidents, 4 Wars, 22 Political Conventions, 1 Moon Landing,
3 Assasinations, 2,000 Weeks of News and Other Stuff on Television and Growing
Up in North Carolina. By David Brinkley. (Knopf, $25.) The veteran broadcast
journalist rambles somewhat haphazardly but frequently with great charm over the
momentous events he has witnessed and the forces that shaped him -- told in the
cadences of that distinctive voice.

THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE: How Law Is Suffocating America. By Philip K. Howard.
(Random House, $18.) A lawyer argues that this would be a better country if we
had less law.

DEFENDING PORNOGRAPHY: Free Speech, Sex and the Fight for Women's Rights. By
Nadine Strossen. (Scribner, $22.) The president of the American Civil Liberties
Union polemicizes againt the branch of the feminist movement that advocates
censorship of sexually explicit materials.

THE DE-MORALIZATION OF SOCIETY: From Victorian Virtues to Modern Values. By
Gertrude Himmelfarb. (Knopf, $24.) The distinguished historian argues that the
West has lost its moral compass over the course of the 20th century.

DRIVE-BY. By Gary Rivlin. (Holt, $25.) A meticulous journalistic re-creation of
that too-ubiquitous urban horror, the drive-by killing of teen-agers by
teen-agers.

THE END OF AFFLUENCE: The Causes and Consequences of America's Economic Dilemma.
By Jeffrey Madrick. (Random House, $22.) A journalist turned economic historian
argues that historical changes have killed the prosperity many Americans
remember, and that no economic or political nostrum can bring it back.

THE END OF REFORM: New Deal Liberalism in Recession and War. By Alan Brinkley.
(Knopf, $27.50.) In the late 1930's, a distinguished historian argues, liberal
interventionism lost its nerve and settled for underwriting consumer demand,
with the results we now see around us.

FIRST IN HIS CLASS: A Biography of Bill Clinton. By David Maraniss. (Simon &
Schuster, $25.) An account, written by a Washington Post reporter, of Mr.
Clinton's life up to his announcement that he was running for President; rich in
detail and reticent in interpretation.

FRIENDS IN HIGH PLACES: The Rise and Fall of Clark Clifford. By Douglas Frantz
and David McKean. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The authors, a reporter and a lawyer,
see Mr. Clifford's crash -- a criminal indictment after 50 years of smooth
cruising at altitude in Washington -- as the inevitable end of such a career.

A GOOD LIFE: Newspapering and Other Adventures. By Ben Bradlee. (Simon &
Schuster, $27.50.) A memoir by the former editor of The Washington Post, who
was, during Watergate, the world's most famous editor; his comfortable prose
makes his accomplishments look easy.

HAPPY DAYS: My Mother, My Father, My Sister & Me. by Shana Alexander.
(Doubleday, $27.50.) The journalist attempts to solve the psychological puzzles
of her upbringing with an emotionally frigid mother, a passive father and a
bizarre disruption of family life.

HEART: A Memoir. By Lance Morrow. (Warner, $22.95.) A moving work of literal
introspection: in the wake of his second heart attack and second bypass
operation, Mr. Morrow tries to find out what's really wrong with his life and
himself.

AN INTIMATE HISTORY OF HUMANITY. By Theodore Zeldin. (HarperCollins, $25.) Not
history so much as informed rumination by an Oxford social historian who talks
to many people (mostly Frenchwomen) about the fundamentals of human experience
-- hope, despair, love, etc. -- and thinks that hope still has a chance.

LOSING GROUND: American Environmentalism at the Close of the 20th Century. By
Mark Dowie. (MIT, $25.) A courageous critique of the environmental movement that
contends its leadership has ceded the moral high ground to become just another
special interest in Washington.

MOVING VIOLATIONS: War Zones, Wheelchairs, and Declarations of Independence. By
John Hockenberry. (Hyperion, $24.95.) Swaggering in a wheelchair isn't easy, but
this candidly aggressive National Public Radio correspondent is up to the job
(or any other).

MY AMERICAN JOURNEY. By Colin L. Powell with Joseph E. Persico. (Random House,
$25.95.) The autobiography of the former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
shows the making of the man who decided not to run for President.

NEOCONSERVATISM: The Autobiography of an Idea. By Irving Kristol. (Free Press,
$25.) In this collection of essays, Mr. Kristol shows that his temperament has
remained constant even as his politics have shifted.

THE NEXT AMERICAN NATION: The New Nationalism and the Fourth American
Revolution. By Michael Lind. (Free Press, $25.) An intelligent, industrious, not
very cheerful look at possible futures. Balkanization through identity politics?
Stratification, Brazilian style?

THE NIGHTINGALE'S SONG. By Robert Timberg. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) Mr.
Timberg, a graduate of the United States Naval Academy, examines some of his
fellow alumni in Government service (overrepresented in the Iran-contra affair)
and finds that their conduct was influenced by fear of a second Vietnam.

NIGHTMOVER: How Aldrich Ames Sold the CIA to the KGB for $4.6 Million. By David
Wise. (HarperCollins, $25.) Same Ames, same story, somewhat gentler on the
agency; enhanced by the authority of a veteran espionage writer.

THE POLITICS OF DIPLOMACY: Revolution, War and Peace, 1989-1992. By James A.
Baker 3d with Thomas M. DeFrank. (Putnam, $32.50.) The former White House chief
of staff, Secretary of the Treasury and Secretary of State in the Reagan and
Bush Administrations gives his accounting of American diplomacy during those
years and tries to distance himself from Mr. Bush's disastrous re-election
camapaign.

RACIAL HEALING: Confronting the Fear Between Blacks and Whites. By Harlon L.
Dalton. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A black law professor at Yale University offers
refreshingly straight talk about the need to confront racial problems without
evasion or euphemism.

REASON TO BELIEVE. By Mario Cuomo. (Simon & Schuster, $21.) The former Governor
delivers a polemic against the Republican revolution and urges a renewal of
community ties.

RETHINKING AMERICA. By Hedrick Smith. (Random House, $25.) An examination of
America's economy and prescriptions for repairing it to accord with a changed
world order, by a journalist who does not fear big subjects.

THE REVOLT OF THE ELITES AND THE BETRAYAL OF DEMOCRACY. By Christopher Lasch.
(Norton, $22.) The ills of democracy, Lasch passionately contends, arise from
such defaults as the abdication of responsibility for the community by economic
elites and the propagation by academics of a skeptical relativism.

SIMPLE RULES FOR A COMPLEX WORLD. By Richard A. Epstein. (Harvard University,
$35.) The brilliantly contrarian law professor at the University of Chicago
offers a prescription for a more productive and efficient -- and libertarian --
society.

TEMPTATIONS OF A SUPERPOWER. By Ronald Steel. (Harvard University, $18.95.) The
author, who teaches international relations at the University of Southern
California, criticizes American foreign policy as muddled and wasteful and
offers suggestions in keeping with contemporary conditions.

TRUST: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity. By Francis Fukuyama.
(Free Press, $25.) A fascinating argument -- that institutions between the
family and the state (like Rotary or the Boy Scouts) are good for civility and
good for capitalism too -- and dazzling case studies of industrial nations that
have such groups or don't.

THE TWILIGHT OF COMMON DREAMS: Why America is Wracked by Culture Wars. By Todd
Gitlin. (Metropolitan Books/Holt, $25.) A former president of Students for a
Democratic Society, now a sociology professor at New York University, eloquently
sounds an alarm over the degeneration of left-wing activism into self-absorbed
identity politics.

VIRTUALLY NORMAL: An Argument About Homosexuality. By Andrew Sullivan. (Knopf,
$22.) The author, who is the editor of The New Republic, reflects reasonably on
society's dealings with the minority of which he is a member; he thinks society
could do a lot better.

WHERE THE SUCKERS MOON: An Advertising Story. By Randall Rothenberg. (Knopf,
$25.) A lively rendition, by a former advertising columnist for The Times, of
real life at an agency that tried to sell cars by ridiculing ads for cars.

WHY WACO?: Cults and the Battle for Religious Freedom in America. By James D.
Tabor and Eugene V. Gallagher. (University of California, $24.95.) A carefully
documented and engaging study by two scholars of religious conversion, arguing
that intolerance of unconventional religions underlay the disastrous
confrontation between the Government and the Branch Davidians in 1993.

THE WINNER-TAKE-ALL SOCIETY: How More and More Americans Compete for Ever Fewer
and Bigger Prizes, Encouraging Economic Waste, Income Inequality, and an
Impoverished Cultural Life. By Robert H. Frank and Philip J. Cook. (Martin
Kessler/Free Press, $25.) An economist and a professor of public policy contend
that the star system -- in which a very few monopolize pay and prestige, while
the many suffer -- is permeating the economy to the detriment of the social
fabric.

Religion & Philosophy

THE DEATH OF SATAN: How Americans Have Lost the Sense of Evil. By Andrew
Delbanco. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) Passionate and erudite, Mr. Delbanco
explores the ethical problems of secular rationality; when Satan was real he
lived within us, but now evil is externally located, in capitalism, Communism,
neurosis or any other convenient scapegoat.

GOD: A Biography. By Jack Miles. (Knopf, $27.50.) Not a joke but a scholarly,
entertaining literary inquiry into the character called God as His multiple
personalities have been rendered through the ages in the Hebrew Bible.

JOHN DEWEY: And the High Tide of American Liberalism. By Alan Ryan. (Norton,
$30.) In his study of Dewey's philosophy, the author finds it a model for
"middle-of-the-road radicalism."

THE ORIGIN OF SATAN. By Elaine Pagels. (Random House, $23.) The author, a
professor of religion at Princeton, looks at how changing conceptions of the
diabolic offer insight into Western history.

POPE JOHN PAUL II: The Biography. By Tad Szulc. (Lisa Drew/Scribner, $27.50.)
Mr. Szulc, a seasoned reporter of Polish birth, inquires into the special
circumstances of Polish Catholicism and the special stresses of fascist and
Communist domination that formed the present Pope.

Science

AFTER THE FACT: Two Countries, Four Decades, One Anthropologist. By Clifford
Geertz. (Harvard University, $22.95.) The leading anthropologist of his
generation looks back on his career and finds himself with more questions than
answers.

ANCESTRAL PASSIONS: The Leakey Family and the Quest for Humankind's Beginnings.
By Virginia Morrell. (Simon & Schuster, $30.) In a model of science writing, the
author, a correspondent for Science magazine, traces the history of the family
that has dominated paleoanthropology.

THE BEAUTY OF THE BEASTLY: New Views on the Nature of Life. By Natalie Angier.
(Peter Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) Essays and excursions by a New York
Times science reporter who deals gracefully with current ideas about the
innerest workings of us organisms.

EDWIN HUBBLE: Mariner of the Nebulae. By Gale E. Christianson. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, $27.50.) A readable, entertaining life of the brilliant astronomer whose
work, fundamental to modern theories of the universe, never interfered with his
self-promotion, pretension and vanity.

ENGINEERS OF DREAMS: Great Bridge Builders and the Spanning of America. By Henry
Petroski. (Knopf, $30.) The author, a civil engineer and historian of science,
shows in his history of American bridges that hubris can be as fatal to
engineers as to generals.

THE ENGINE OF REASON, THE SEAT OF THE SOUL: A Philosophical Journey Into the
Brain. By Paul M. Churchland. (Bradford/MIT, $29.95.) A philosopher's argument,
clear, witty and scientifically up-to-date, that all of human mental life,
however subjective it feels, is reducible to material activity taking place in
the brain.

FIRE IN THE MIND: Science, Faith and the Search for Order. By George Johnson.
(Knopf, $27.50.) Careful, balanced explorations of the places where scientific
understanding of this extremely strange universe and religious and philosophical
perceptions of it may illuminate each other.

MEMORY'S GHOST: The Strange Tale of Mr. M. and the Nature of Memory. By Philip
J. Hilts. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A look at research on memory, centered on the
story of Henry M., a 69-year-old man whose memory was destroyed by an operation
in 1953; written by a New York Times science reporter.

A MOMENT ON THE EARTH: The Coming Age of Environmental Optimism. By Gregg
Easterbrook. (Viking, $27.95.) Essays on the most complex of modern subjects,
treating our considerable environmental accomplishments and our puzzling neglect
of threats (diseases, for instance) in other people's backyards.

MR. WILSON'S CABINET OF WONDER. By Lawrence Weschler. (Pantheon, $21.) A
many-minded journalist views and views again David Wilson's storefront Museum of
Jurassic Technology in Culver City, Calif., where some things are what they seem
to be.

NANO. The Emerging Science of Nanotechnology: Remaking the World -- Molecule by
Molecule. By Ed Regis. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) Crisp science journalism about a
possible world of endless bounty, produced by incredibly tiny machines.

NOAH'S CHOICE: The Future of Endangered Species. By Charles C. Mann and Mark L.
Plummer. (Knopf, $24.) The authors persuasively contend that humans will decide,
by default or by intention, who goes extinct, and at present have not a clue how
to do so wisely.

PALE BLUE DOT: A Vision of the Human Future in Space. By Carl Sagan. (Random
House, $35.) A scientist predicts that when the solar system meets its end, our
species will survive by colonizing other worlds.

Science Fiction

BLOODCHILD: Novellas and Stories. By Octavia E. Butler. (Four Walls Eight
Windows, $17.) This volume comprises the entire output of short fiction by Ms.
Butler. Readers of her moving novel "Parable of the Sower" will especially
appreciate the title story, which explores the role of human beings in a
symbiotic relationship with powerful aliens.

EVOLUTION'S SHORE. By Ian McDonald. (Bantam/Spectra, paper, $12.95.) The
protagonist of this powerfully understated allegory is an ambitious electronic
journalist who turns out to be the ideal guide to an enigmatic alien entity that
threatens the continuation of civilization-as-we-know-it.

FEERSUM ENDJINN. By Iain M. Banks. (Bantam/Spectra, paper, $12.95.) The plot of
this puzzle story of almost excessive invention explains how a high-tech but
stagnant civilization on a far-future earth is roused to save itself. The novel
constantly challenges the reader's patience but amply rewards those who stay the
course.

FOUR WAYS TO FORGIVENESS. By Ursula K. Le Guin. (Harper Prism, $20.) Another of
Ms. Le Guin's solidly written and densely imagined fictions whose sociological
and anthropological resonances never obscure the concerns of individuals caught
up in the great events of history.

THE GOLDEN NINETIES. By Lisa Mason. (Bantam/Spectra, paper, $12.95.) A novel
that thrusts the reader, through the legerdemain of time travel, into a lusty,
brawling 19th-century San Francisco that Ms. Mason brings to life with a winning
mixture of intelligence and passion.

LEGACY. By Greg Bear. (Tor, $22.95.) On a planet named Lamarckia, evolution has
taken a different turn from the Darwinian competition among individuals that has
filled Earth with armies of tough survivors. When human settlers intervene, the
outcome is nothing less than tragedy on a global scale.

RESURRECTION MAN. By Sean Stewart. (Ace, cloth, $22.95; paper, $11.) A tightly
focused, emotionally intense novel that tracks the coming of age of a likable
young man named Dante in a world where magic, bred of anger in the inner cities,
has returned to claim a place in our streets and our psyches.

Spies & Thrillers

CHINA WHITE. By Peter Maas. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) An investigative reporter,
in his first thriller, explores heroin trafficking, with its interconnections
between Chinese gangs, the mob and American intelligence agencies.

THE CODICIL. By Tom Topor. (Hyperion, $21.95.) When a wealthy industrialist
leaves half his estate to the child he fathered in Vietnam, a private
investigator must uncover secrets about the dead man's past in order to deliver
the legacy.

A CROOKED MAN. By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) An
attentive thriller by a daily reviewer for The Times debates the
decriminalization of drugs in an up-to-date Washington environment.

ENIGMA. By Robert Harris. (Random House, $23.) A thriller based on the actual
code-breaking activities carried on in Bletchley Park in England during World
War II.

KOLYMSKY HEIGHTS. By Lionel Davidson. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) An American agent
braves Siberia to uncover the secret of a Soviet doomsday machine.

THE LAST HIGH GROUND. By Robin A. White. (Crown, $23.) Cultures clash but
eventually collaborate as an American investigator and a Japanese accountant
pursue a Japanese mafioso who is sabotaging Boeing airplanes.

OUR GAME. By John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) In a British adventure novel redolent
of John Buchan and Eric Ambler, a retired Treasury official and secret spymaster
sets off in search of a vanished friend -- a onetime double agent.

SHELLEY'S HEART. By Charles McCarry. (Random House, $23.) A really smart
thriller about the Presidency, by a journalist who well understands how the
gears of power are shifted.

SLEEPER SPY. By William Safire. (Random House, $24.) This newspaper's one-man
diversified literary industry offers a cerebral thriller about a Russian agent
everybody's looking for and whose real identity has become lost to the Russians
themselves.


Sports

THE COURTS OF BABYLON: Tales of Greed and Glory in a Harsh New World of
Professional Tennis. By Peter Bodo. (Scribner, $25.) A senior writer at Tennis
magazine looks at changes in the professional tour that have reduced players
from "gentlemen to jerks."

MY USUAL GAME: Adventures in Golf. By David Owen. (Villard, $23.) Mr. Owen, a
journalist, had a handicap numbering in the dozens when he set out to devote
every waking moment to improving his golf game; he recounts his obsessive
odyssey in hilarious detail here.

ONE PITCH AWAY: The Players' Stories of the 1986 League Championships and World
Series. By Mike Sowell. (Macmillan, $27.95.) Recollections of the dramatic
series of baseball games that decided the pennants, then the World Series, of
1986.

ONLY IN AMERICA: The Life and Crime of Don King. By Jack Newfield. (Morrow,
$23.) An indictment of the flamboyant boxing promoter, written by a veteran
investigative reporter who is currently a columnist at The New York Post.


Travel, Nature & Adventure

THE CITY OF FLORENCE: Historical Vistas and Personal Sightings. By R. W. B.
Lewis. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $27.50.) An autobiographical, anecdotal,
historical memoir, filled with love and learning, about a distinguished
scholar's affair with a miraculous city.

MY OLD MAN AND THE SEA: A Father and Son Sail Around Cape Horn. By David Hays
and Daniel Hays. (Algonquin, $19.95.) And so they do, round trip from New
London, Conn., becoming better, wiser and more loving people en route but never
overloading a marvelous sailing yarn.

THE PILLARS OF HERCULES: A Grand Tour of the Mediterranean. By Paul Theroux.
(Putnam, $27.50.) A horrible tourist but a grand interlocutor, Mr. Theroux,
indifferent to ruins and cathedrals, talks to whomever he meets, yielding slice
after slice of the strangeness of everyday life around the great inland sea.

SAVAGES. By Joe Kane. (Knopf, $25.) A superb report on life among the Huaorani,
a virtually intact Amazonian tribe whose resolve to stay as and where they are
confronts the resolve of governments and energy companies to pump the earth from
under their feet.

THE SIGN OF THE CROSS: Travels in Catholic Europe. By Colm Toibin. (Pantheon,
$24.) An Irish novelist ponders his relationship with Roman Catholicism and his
Irishness, augmented by his reports of Holy Week visits to Eastern Europe,
Spain, the Balkans and Rome.

VENICE REDISCOVERED. By John Pemble. (Oxford University, $25.) A historian's
fresh, fascinating account of the potent symbolic resurrection of Venice in the
European imagination after its political death in 1815.

 WALT WHITMAN'S AMERICA: A Cultural Biography. By David S. Reynolds. (Knopf,
$35.) An extensive historical excavation, aiming to show how Whitman, an
enthusiast for almost everything, transmuted into his poetry images from all
aspects of American culture.

NAME: Lenore Tawney

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 17, 1995, Sunday

CORRECTION:

A caption on Nov. 26 about the work of the weaver Lenore Tawney misattributed a
photograph of a weaving that resembles a reversed American flag. The
photographer was Lisa Kahane, not George Erml.

The listing of notable books of the year on Dec. 3 omitted an entry. It should
have read:

GRAPHIC: Photos: A reversed flag was made as a political protest. Below, the
artist at her studio between her works "Seaweed" (foreground) and "Murmuring
River." (George Erml; Jim Estrin/The New York Times)Drawings.

TYPE: BiographyList

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Pentagon Confident, but Some Serbs 'Will Fight';
Military Now Says Bosnia Peace Plan Will Work

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1203 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 26


In the corridors of Congress and across the country, critics of United States
involvement in NATO's plan to enforce a Bosnia peace accord have drawn
comparisons with three other American missions: Vietnam, Lebanon and Somalia.

A few months ago, the Pentagon, which has opposed nearly every peacekeeping
mission since the end of the cold war, would have agreed. But after reviewing
details of the accord initialed last week, even the most skeptical commanders
now express confidence that the NATO force, including 20,000 American troops,
can achieve a tightly circumscribed set of goals with minimum casualties.

That is largely because the agreement meets virtually every condition the
American military insisted on for success: Clear goals, a powerful force, NATO
command and control, robust rules of engagement, a one-year time limit and the
expressed cooperation of the rival factions.

"By the time this thing gets approved, it will be a highly refined operational
plan that will be executable," said a senior Army planner who just a few months
ago expressed grave doubts about sending American troops to Bosnia.

Administration officials appeared on television programs today to expand on that
theme. Anthony Lake, President Clinton's national security adviser, promised on
the ABC News program "This Week with David Brinkley" that the "very powerful,
well-trained American force would be allowed to defend itself."

"If anybody fools with our forces, they will get hit," Mr. Lake said. "They will
get hit immediately. They will get hit very hard, and we would expect that any
other challengers, threats to our forces would be intimidated."

Defense Secretary William J. Perry, asked about threats by Bosnian Serbs in
Sarajevo suburbs to resist the agreement, said that "we fully expect to find
some individuals resisting" the accord.

Appearing on the CBS News program "Face the Nation," Mr. Perry reiterated that
the leaders of the warring sides had initialed the accord and that the
Administration expects that "there will be complaince with this treaty by the
parties."

Commanders say critics of a Bosnia mission fail to realize how much the military
has learned from such entirely different conflicts as the one in Vietnam, where
the United States fought its longest war, or in Lebanon and in Somalia, where
the American role in those local conflicts was short and in some respects
disastrous, or more pointedly, the United Nations operation in Bosnia.

For the Pentagon the lessons are as straightforward as they are painful: No more
vaguely defined, open-ended operations. No more limits on protecting forces. No
more "mission creep," tasks added incrementally without political consensus.

Moreover, in contrast to Vietnam and Lebanon, there is a peace agreement for
Bosnia and the factions have consented to NATO troops, including Americans, to
enforce it. President Clinton insisted on letters from Serbian, Bosnian and
Croatian leaders promising to insure the safety of American and other troops.

Recognizing that rogue militia or snipers might still oppose the deal, the
60,000-member NATO force will have "a very, very broad range of authorities,
which should enable it to do all that's necessary to enforce its specific
military tasks," said Lieut. Gen. Wesley Clark, the Pentagon's senior
representative at the talks.

Since the failed Army raid in Mogadishu, Somalia, in October 1993, in which 18
American soldiers died, the military has reversed its record and successfully
led the operation to withdraw all foreign troops from Somalia, rushed aid to
Rwanda and sent 20,000 troops to help restore democracy in Haiti with a total of
about half a dozen casualties.

To be sure, Bosnia will be much riskier than Rwanda or Haiti. Americans will be
injured and perhaps killed. Even with the upbeat American military assessment,
there is no guarantee that the accord will heal a nation ravaged by nearly four
years of killing.

NATO troops will be responsible for enforcing a cease-fire in a
two-and-a-half-mile wide buffer zone between the rival factions, and for
insuring the safety of relief workers, police trainers and international aid
specialists as they rebuild the country. But the NATO force, wary of tasks
commanders say are best left to local authorities, will not help deliver relief
aid, protect thousands of returning refugees or insure free elections except in
emergencies.

As Mr. Perry said, the role of the NATO force is to separate the armies, enforce
a cease-fire and put the rival troops and their weaponry in cantonments, giving
relief workers a yearlong breathing space to reestablish civil functions.

But Mr. Clinton will face a wary public and an openly skeptical Congress when he
makes a nationally televised address on Bosnia on Monday night. The
Administration argues that after playing a pivotal role in negotiating a peace
agreement, the United States, as the leader of NATO, is obliged to help enforce
it.

A generational split divides Republicans. Veteran lawmakers in the House and
Senate are committed to NATO and an American leadership role in the world. But
junior Republicans, particularly in the House, oppose intervention overseas.

Fewer of those lawmakers have any military background, making the sales pitch to
Congress more difficult. Only 37 percent of all House members have military
experience, compared with 70 percent of the House 20 years ago, according to the
American Legion. About half of all Senators are veterans, compared with 73
percent in 1975.

"The Senate, given how involved each Senator is with foreign policy, will be
more inclined to listen to the arguments" said a senior Pentagon official. "But
the House will be very difficult."

Indeed the House this month voted to withhold the financing of the $1.5 billion
United States share of the operation unless Mr. Clinton gains Congressional
approval in advance.

"I'm convinced that this is not going to turn into another Vietnam," said Gen.
Dennis Reimer, the Army Chief of Staff, who served in Vietnam, told reporters
last week. But he added that the Vietnam War, in which more than 58,000
Americans died, is "always a part of all the thinking that we do on these types
of operations."

NATO commanders say they are ready for Bosnia and will not be hampered by the
restrictions placed on United Nations peacekeepers. NATO troops will have the
orders and equipment, including M1-A1 tanks and Apache attack helicopters, to
defend themselves with the authorization to "use deadly force whenever
necessary," Mr. Perry said.

Finally, NATO forces are to leave Bosnia by December 1996. Mr. Perry said on
Friday that if all goes well, troops deployed next month might begin returning
home by next June. All forces are to be out by December.

How will American officials know if they have succeeded?

"It means creating a stable environment, to return Bosnia back to a normal
situation, for people to live normal lives, that they would have a reasonable
degree of protection and self-defense capability, and that the fighting will
stop," James Pardew, a senior Defense Department negotiator at the talks, told
reporters last week. "We'll know it when we see it."


LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
The Way It Really Was Not

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 693 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


"History has had assigned to it," wrote Leopold von Ranke in 1874, "the office
of judging the past and of instructing the present for the benefit of the
future." But the historian rejected that propagandistic assignment, proposing a
different purpose: "to seek only to show what actually happened."

That goal of impartially discovering wie es eigentlich gewesen -- the way it
really was -- is now expected of the best historians. But truth in biography has
been undermined by a new breed of cinematic pseudo-historians who hype conflict
and twist facts to suit dramatic requirements or political ends.

The dismayed ghost of von Ranke visited me the other night during the showing of
a TV movie about the Chicago mobster Sam Giancana.

I remember "Momo," as Frank Sinatra's Nevada business associate was called. A
generation ago, I had a hand in making known the gangster's connection with the
Kennedy White House, through a mistress he shared with the President.

Some of the scenes in the movie rang true. Giancana was indeed approached by the
C.I.A. to assassinate Castro, and the jealous mobster did induce government
agents to wiretap a female singer he lusted after.

But political fiction was added. In the film, Giancana is approached by another
mobster, purportedly on behalf of Joseph P. Kennedy, to steal the 1960
Presidential election in Chicago. The viewer is led to believe that a corrupt
deal was struck between the Kennedys and the mob from which all other plots
flowed.

I was never an admirer of old Joe Kennedy, the former bootlegger and stock
manipulator (and derogator of the Sadie Glotzes) who used his fortune to help
finance his son's election. And yes, like all old Nixon hands, I think the Cook
County pols added a "cemetery vote" to the rolls to swing the election there to
John Kennedy.

But a deal with the mob to deliver Illinois? No evidence of that exists. The
baseless charge adds a delicious connotation of corruption to the Kennedy clan
-- but when drama must be served, history is often subverted.

In another docu-drama, "JFK," director Oliver Stone sought to blacken the
reputation of Lyndon Johnson. Stone's purpose is not to illuminate history, but
to spread distrust about American institutions; hence the notion that Johnson
and the C.I.A. conspired to murder Kennedy.

In his forthcoming Nixon hatchet job, the same cine-propagandist tries to tie
Nixon in to murders during the Eisenhower years. (When I recently teased Stone
in a language column, he exploded in a letter about my working for an
"unindicted co-conspirator"; when it comes to hypersensitivity to press
criticism, this muddler of history is positively Nixonesque.)

Next week, another amalgam of fact and fancy in a TV movie about Nixon and
Kissinger will probably be "history" to an unsuspecting audience. In it, Nixon
will be shown wanting to delay peace with North Vietnam until after his
re-election, so he could then bomb the North to kingdom come; Kissinger is shown
to be equally cynical, wanting to achieve closure in negotiations -- only so he
could claim credit for the re-election.

That's not the way it was. I was there. The President and his aide had
differences over negotiating tactics, but their motive was to end the war with
honor, the sooner the better. Walter Isaacson's critical biography, on which the
movie is supposedly based, does not viciously impugn motives and patriotism. But
the screenplay needed dramatic conflict.

Moreover, Nixon is portrayed -- caricatured -- as a lush. Booze is in his hand
in almost every scene. Nixon-haters nail him for any number of faults, but
alcoholism is a new one.

Not all film biographies are phony; a recent docu-drama on the TV reporter
Jessica Savitch was both accurate and riveting. Fiction can illuminate history,
as Herman Wouk has shown in books and screenplays, but the writers and directors
who attach the names of real people to their fictional characters are using a
cheap device to spike their dramas.

Those who profit from violence on television are rightly being denounced; what
of those who deliberately do violence to the truth about what really happened?

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION REVIEW;
Heroes, Warts And All

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 5;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 600 words


In three two-hour segments, beginning tonight at 8:05 and continuing tomorrow
and Thursday at 8:05 (with repeats at 10:05 each evening), TBS takes an
anything-but-idolatrous look at this century's American sports heroes in "Idols
of the Game." The legends, the role models, are put in the deflating context of
social and cultural whirlwinds, conjuring a largely white male world buffeted by
the fierce winds of racism, sexism and insistent stereotyping.

This collection of profiles, buttressed with great archival material, seems to
meander at times, but each two-hour segment has a unifying thesis. Tonight it's
inventing, or at least defining, the All-American mythic hero. Who is he, or
she? Going back to the Olympic Games of 1912 in Stockholm, the documentary
begins with Jim Thorpe, the American Indian athlete who would later see his gold
medals confiscated because he had briefly played baseball for money.

And then there was Babe Ruth, the Sultan of Swat, who came out of poverty to
become the epitome of excess, of insatiable appetites. Ruth was a drunk and a
phenomenal athlete. Decades later, Hank Aaron would get bundles of racist hate
mail as he set about topping Ruth's lifetime record of 714 home runs. In the
1930's, Joe Louis would give Americans a propaganda coup by coming back to
defeat the German boxer Max Schmeling. Louis, a true icon for his people, would
end up being a host at a gambling casino. Muhammad Ali, who was stripped of the
heavyweight title because he refused to fight in Vietnam, is recalled as "our
last sports idol of any political significance."

And so it goes, one black athlete after another, from Jesse Owens to Jackie
Robinson, excelling year after year despite formidable racist hurdles. The
white-male fanatic was increasingly limited to exercises like golf, described
here as "definitely a sport for the wealthy." Arnold Palmer, we're told,
provided a "comfort zone for white Americans" inhabited by players "less
threatening than Louis or Robinson."

Tomorrow's essay focuses on sexism in sports, spending much of its time on two
extraordinary women: Babe Didrikson and Billie Jean King. Thrown in for hefty
measure are intriguing snapshots of Joe Namath and Mickey Mantle. The final
installment of "Idols of the Game" explores the prickly subject of "Love and
Money," which asks how men and women dedicated to their various sports wind up
the pawns of corporate entities hawking sporting goods. On tap with chilling
observations are Charles Barkley, Michael Jordan, Mary Lou Retton and Roone
Arledge. It is not, we all know, a pretty picture.

Written by Robert Lipsyte, a sportswriter for The New York Times, and produced
by Kathy Sulkes, his wife, "Idols of the Game" has an unfortunately hokey
format. The narrator, sporting a fedora and wise-guy delivery, is Dabney
Coleman, who is not a sportswriter but played one on television in a series
called "Slap Maxwell." Still, as an antidote to the unbridled hype of today's
sports scene, "Idols of the Game" offers a desperately needed dose of
perspective.


IDOLS OF THE GAME
TBS, tonight, tomorrow
 and Thursday at 8:05

Steven Weinstock, executive producer; written by Robert Lipsyte; Kathy Sulkes,
series producer; produced by Cathe Neukum (Part 1), Mary Brown and Kathy Sulkes
(Part 2) and Oren Jacoby (Part 3); Felice McGlincy, coordinating producer;
original score composed by Michael Whalen. A production of TBS. For TBS: Jacoba
Atlas, supervising producer; Vivian Schiller, senior producer; Pat Mitchell
executive producer. Scribe played by Dabney Coleman.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Muhammad Ali in a comic mode. (Archive Photo)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Heroin Influx Ignites a Growing AIDS Epidemic in China

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1275 words

DATELINE: DADINGHU, China


Ai Hang is 23 and appears as robust and muscular as any farmhand in this
village. Saved from handsomeness by a crooked grin, he has a self-assuredness
that is beguiling, so it seems almost believable when he says he just might
defeat the sickness inside him whose symptoms he has never felt.

"The health clinic people said I have AIDS and that I would only live for six
months or a year, but it has been already two years and I still have all this
energy and good health," he said, sitting on the mat floor of his bamboo-frame
house, his arms draped over his blue plaid sarong. "I told those health clinic
people: What if I don't die? Do you want to bet some money?"

Mr. Ai is one of the victims of the heroin plague that swept into China as the
country opened its borders to trade in the 1980's.

It has undermined the health and stability of thousands of peasant villages,
with sudden deaths from overdoses and crime where virtually none existed before.
And it has brought with it the companion plague of the human immunodeficiency
virus, which is spreading rapidly among China's population of intravenous drug
users.

Six years ago, when he was 17, Mr. Ai had never heard of the AIDS virus when he
and his friends, with whom he often drank the pungent rice wine of the Dai
ethnic minority, bought some packets of the white powder known as No. 4 and
sprinkled it on their cigarettes to get higher than they ever had on wine.

No. 4 is the purest grade of heroin produced in the laboratories of neighboring
Myanmar, formerly called Burma, whose mountains are a 20-minute walk across the
rice paddies from here.

"At first we smoked it, but a year later we started using needles," Mr. Ai said.
"We would buy one needle for more than 10 of us, and sometimes we would use the
same needle for a month."

They never knew the danger. No one told them.

Officially, China's Ministry of Public Health says there are 2,428 reported
cases of H.I.V. infection nationwide, but few people have been tested, and
health officials privately estimate that China has as many as 100,000 carriers
of the virus.

More than half are believed to be here in Yunnan Province, which shares borders
with Myanmar, Laos and Vietnam and where needle sharing by drug users, as well
as sexual intercourse, has spread the disease.

Earlier this year, the Academy of Medical Science estimated that the number of
H.I.V. infections could exceed 266,000 by 2000. While this is far from the worst
infection rate in Asia, its rapid incipient growth in a country whose blood
supplies remain largely unscreened for the virus is a cause for concern.

[On Oct. 28 the Health Ministry announced that it was undertaking a large-scale
public education campaign on AIDS prevention and would mobilize China's
hospitals to enforce a rigid blood-screening code.]

"This country is a large target for a much more serious outbreak of H.I.V.
infection," said a Western physician who recently visited here.

In the nearby village of Handeng, no one has ever told Old Zhuang, as
45-year-old Zhuang Xiangsai is familiarly called, that the horrible symptoms he
suffers are from the onset of AIDS.

"Generally speaking, if they test positive for H.I.V. they don't inform them,
because it creates psychological pressures," said Chen Gangsheng, a longtime
resident of Ruili, the county seat in this district.

The village chief of Handeng, Shuai Hanya, 50, is fed up with the AIDS problem.
He said with a snort, indicating he was not serious, that if he finds any more
cases, "I'll just cut off their heads."

As he escorted a visitor to Mr. Zhuang's home recently, Mr. Shuai, a Communist
Party member, warned: "Old Zhuang is sick and pretty soon he'll be dead. And it
smells pretty bad when he coughs."

Up the bamboo ladder to the second floor of the grass-roofed house, Mr. Zhuang
could be heard stirring in the darkened room. He crawled out from under the
mosquito net suspended over the pallet that is serving as his deathbed and
scooted gingerly across the floor. His white cotton shirt hung loosely over his
decimated frame. His head drooped with a blank gaze under disheveled hair.

Mr. Zhuang is the son of an opium addict, and possibly the grandson of an opium
addict. His wife and stepdaughter do not know on which of his forays into the
heroin dens and brothels of Ruili he acquired his infection.

"He doesn't think about his wife and daughter," said the stepdaughter, Qin
Meisu. "He just cares about himself."

When the village chief inquired after his health, a soft, high-pitched noise
came from Mr. Zhuang, more whine than speech. He complained that there was a
ghost in his backbone that was trying to kill him with excruciating pain.

"When he's in there, I have pain all over," he said, leaning weakly on his arms
and staring at the floor as if he lacked the strength to lift his head.

The blood that comes up when he coughs betrays an advanced tubercular state, and
his stepdaughter said, "When he sleeps, he sometimes groans and makes loud
noises.

"The last couple days, we bought some drugs for him. "If we buy him a little
opium or heroin, he feels better."

In Mandarin Chinese, AIDS is pronounced EYE-dze-bing, which is partly a
transliteration but also carries the meaning "the sickness that comes from
love."

On the streets of Ruili, love, as it were, is for sale from hundreds of
prostitutes who parade through the charcoal smoke of the sidewalk food stalls
and outdoor karaoke bars. The nightly cacophony seems to render human speech
unintelligible, but the flesh market, as the locals call it, is undeterred.

Only in the last two years have condoms come to Ruili, because in the past
China's population control program imposed birth control on women through
intrauterine devices and sterilization. By the time condoms arrived, a wave of
H.I.V. infections had already rolled through the brothels, city residents say.

A big public education campaign here against sexually transmitted diseases
includes information about AIDS prevention for the first time, but Ruili's
public health officials refuse to discuss the local rate of infection, which is
said by medical officials in Beijing to be the highest in the country.

"In the last two to three years they haven't released any statistics on AIDS,
because they are afraid it would start a panic," said a longtime Ruili merchant.

The most positive development in some of the villages around Ruili is that
village leaders have taken the initiative against drug addiction, no longer
ignoring the crisis.

In Dadinghu, the village chief, You Wensen, explained his technique: "We
mobilize the entire village and family members of those on drugs and we threaten
them, 'If you keep using drugs, all the people here will not help you when you
ask for help, and we will kick you out of the village.' "

In a culture where everything from harvesting to house building requires the
help of neighbors, it seems to be working.

Those addicts who resist are hauled off to the detoxification center, where the
"cure" is 12-hour days laboring in the fields with no help against the pains of
withdrawal.

But for villagers like Mr. Ai, the local campaign to monitor and support H.I.V.
carriers is over.

"The hospital in the city used to send someone to regularly check the four
people with H.I.V. and gave them condoms and made them take very expensive
medicines," said Mr. You, the village chief. "They used to come every 10 days,
but now they haven't come in a long time."

Mr. Ai said: "They don't come anymore to give me drugs. They told me that since
there is not going to be a cure for this disease, there is no point."


LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: AIDS is spreading in China, particularly in Yunnan Province, the
heroin gateway. Ai Hang, 23, was infected by sharing needles with friends.
(Patrick E. Tyler for The New York Times)

Maps shows the location of Dadinghu, China.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

TV SPORTS;
Two Views of Athletes That Offer Rare Insight

BYLINE: By Richard Sandomir

SECTION: Section B;  Page 20;  Column 1;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 935 words


It is easy to focus the TV sports eye on the expansion of ESPN's "N.F.L.
Gameday" to 90 minutes, John Madden's Thanksgiving Day discourse on why the legs
of today's turkeys cannot support their girth (must be the beer), Fox's
shameless cross-promotion of Terry Bradshaw's Sunday guest shot on "Married With
Children" by featuring him and the show's cast in the opening sketch of Fox's
National Football League pre-game show.

All those items -- and Ahmad Rashad portraying Joe Smith's barber to open NBC's
"Inside Stuff" on Saturday -- keep company in the business-as-usual department.
Meanwhile, there has been a noteworthy spate of new sports feature and
documentary works, all executed with vision, viewpoint and verve.

Emotionally, no program in recent memory has exceeded CBS's "World Ride: The
Possible Dream." The production, which followed disabled cyclists on an
exhilarating worldwide jaunt, superbly balanced plots about envy, teamwork and
athleticism with an intense but not maudlin curiosity about how people with one
leg, a useless arm or paralyzed legs can endure such rigors. Produced with a
subtle lyricism, "World Ride" tracked the cyclists over 13,000 miles.

There are wonderful moments, from Mongolians sprinkling riders with mare's milk
to a Polish cyclist, whose hands were blown off by a grenade, joyfully joining
the group. There are tough times, such as when Rex, who has one leg, agrees to
leave the original core group of seven cyclists after refusing to sacrifice his
need to ride for speed for the team's need to ride together.

"The world is always saying to us, 'This thing you want to do is impossible, you
can't do this,' " says Charles Kuralt, the narrator. "Certain human beings
always answer, 'Yes, I can.' " The show made you feel the pain of pedaling a
three-wheeled hand cycle across the sands of the Gobi Desert and the exuberance
of Rory, who, after months on muddy, sandy and cobblestone roads, said: "I don't
know anything else. I don't know engineering anymore."

HBO's "Fields of Fire: Sports in the roads, said: "I don't know anything else. I
don't know engineering anymore."

HBO's "Fields of Fire: Sports in the 60's" and TBS's "Idols of the Game" have a
similar intention: place sports in the context of the time.

HBO's one-hour program (rerunning Thursday at 8 P.M.) is a smart and flashy
review of a time dominated by Muhammad Ali, Joe Namath, Billie Jean King, Tommie
Smith and John Carlos, when athletes spoke out and acted out.

It would be difficult to fail with the material of "Fields of Fire." The
producers George Roy and Steve Stern provide savvy description of the fight for
respect by black and female athletes, the campaigns for players' rights, the
impact of drugs and the effect of the Vietnam War.

It is a cynical, angry, funny hour that surpasses in quality nearly all other
HBO documentaries. Somehow, even Namath's white shoes symbolize 60's rebellion.
Describing his clenched-fist protest on the medal stand at the 1968 Summer
Olympics, the sprinter Tommie Smith said: "I felt, 'My glove's going to God.'
People thought it was a hate message. It was a cry for help for my brothers and
sisters." In another segment, Jim Brown said: "If white America is afraid of my
being equal, the hell with white America."

King's heroism is contrasted with the Title IX blatherings of Barry Switzer,
then the Oklahoma football coach, about why women's sports "will be non-revenue
producing and I don't think the budget should be split equally."

The three-part "Idols of the Game," which began last night (Parts 2 and 3 will
be shown tonight and Thursday at 8:05 P.M.), is a thick almanac of sports' past
century, chronicling how athletes define and are defined by their economic,
social and political times. Its skepticism is provided by the series' writer,
Robert Lipsyte, who writes a column for The New York Times, and is delivered by
Dabney Coleman, who plays "The Scribe," a subjective, intrusive, fedora-wearing,
know-it-all narrator.

Discussing Charles Barkley's public service commercials, done for Nike, he says:
"Someone figured a social conscience made him a better investment."

"Idols" is a cynical interpretation of sports history. Not shocking, but not
authorized hagiography. That Turner Broadcasting -- with ties to baseball,
football, basketball and other sports -- would broadcast the series is
surprising, given networks' aversion to offending their partners.

Here, Knute Rockne is a cynical, image-building opportunist; money and
television are the corrupters of sport and Arnold Palmer is the perfect postwar
suburban hero from a whites-only world of country clubs. Jackie Robinson is good
enough to be baseball's first black player but not its first black manager.

Ali is a dominant figure here, but his story is more familiar than Babe
Didrikson's. "Idols" tellingly reveals her short life, from her track excellence
and speculation that she was a man to her emergence as a golfer.

A fascinating visual in the series is the juxtaposition of Vassily Alexeyev, the
mountainous Soviet weight lifter, with Stephanie Bodie, a 130-pound teen-ager
who can clean and jerk 214 pounds. Has she come a long way? Perhaps. But to show
how far female weight lifters must yet travel, "Idols" shows a "Today Show" chat
with 110-pound Cassie Clark in which Katie Couric marvels naively at how
sweet-voiced Clark is, not a baritone Hans or Franz.

Hopefully, the documentarians' reservoir of energy is not exhausted. Intelligent
works -- not blooper reels or rote reviews of a World Series -- are needed to
uplift and inform.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BALKAN ACCORD: THE ADDRESS;
CLINTON LAYS OUT HIS CASE FOR U.S. TROOPS IN BALKANS: 'WE MUST DO WHAT WE CAN'

BYLINE: By ALISON MITCHELL

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 6;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1621 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 27


President Clinton tonight sought to rallyAmericans to support the dispatch of
20,000 United States troops to Bosnia, acknowledging that the peacekeeping
mission will not be free of risks, but declaring that "there are still times
when America -- and America alone -- can and should make the difference for
peace."

In a 20-minute televised address from the Oval Office, Mr. Clinton appealed to
American idealism and to a lofty sense of the national interest, and accepted
personal responsibility for the danger that the mission could present to
American lives.

"America cannot and must not be the world's policeman," Mr. Clinton said. "We
cannot stop all war for all time but we can stop some wars. We cannot save all
women and all children. But we can save many of them. We can't do everything but
we must do what we can do."

Mr. Clinton pledged that the American mission, as part of NATO, would be
focused, of limited duration, and carried out under the command of an American
general. At the same time, the President conceded that American troops could
face "accidents in the field or incidents with people who have not given up
their hatred."

Saying his "most difficult duty" as President is to put American forces in
danger's way, Mr. Clinton said, "I assume full responsibility for any harm that
may come to them."

But he added sternly: "America protects its own. Anyone -- anyone -- who takes
on our troops will suffer the consequences. We will fight fire with fire, and
then some."

The President drew a distinction between war and the peacekeeping mission
provided for in an accord the United States brokered last week to end three and
a half years of terror and carnage in Bosnia.

"Let me say at the outset: America's role will not be about fighting a war," Mr.
Clinton said. "It will be about helping the people of Bosnia to secure their own
peace agreement."

Mr. Clinton's address -- the 10th Oval Office address of his Presidency -- set
into high gear a campaign to win Congressional support for the dispatch of
American troops into the Balkans, despite threats of resistance from Bosnian
Serbs, public skepticism, and much doubt on Capitol Hill that the United States
has a strategic interest in Bosnia that justifies risking American casualties.

Critics and supporters alike considered the address one of the most crucial of
Mr. Clinton's Presidency as he sought to win bipartisan support to put troops
into the volatile region before Christmas. The President said a small number of
troops were likely to go to Bosnia next week to lay the groundwork for the
thousands more to come. Mr. Clinton planned to follow up on his speech with a
meeting on Tuesday with the bipartisan Congressional leadership and committee
chairmen before heading off on a long-planned trip to Europe.

The President appealed on an emotional level to Americans' compassion and
ideals, and also made the strategic case that Europe's stability is vital to
American security.

He invoked images of raped women and skeletal men in concentration camps, and
recalled a recent conversation he had with Pope John Paul II, in which the Roman
Catholic leader pleaded that this century should not end, as it had begun, with
war in Sarajevo.

"My fellow Americans," Mr. Clinton said, "in this new era, there are still times
when America -- and America alone -- can and should make the difference for
peace."

At times, Mr. Clinton used his speech tonight to present almost a primer-like
history of America's role in Europe across two world wars and the cold war and
an explanation of what had ensued in the Balkans since the war began in the
former Yugoslavia four years ago.

Mr. Clinton said: "Let us never forget: a quarter of a million men, women and
children have been shelled, shot and tortured to death. Two million people, half
of Bosnia's population, were forced from their homes and into a miserable life
as refugees."

Mr. Clinton said that only the NATO alliance could now help end Europe's "worst
nightmare since World War II." And as NATO's leader, he added, the United States
had to be an essential part of the mission.

Almost immediately after the address, some leading Republicans began falling
cautiously in line behind the President. Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader,
said that Mr. Clinton had made "a good statement" and said it would be "very
helpful" that the troops would serve under an American general.

In an interview with CBS News after the President's speech, Mr. Dole said that
whatever Congress does "the troops will go to Bosnia." The Kansas Republican,
who is his party's leading Presidential contender, said that he wanted to find a
way to support the President, although he added the caveat, "I think we need to
wait and see what the American reaction is."

Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, another candidate for the Republican
Presidential nomination and chairman of the Foreign Relations subcommittee on
European affairs, was even more supportive of Mr. Clinton.

"I felt the President made a strong case for American leadership in Bosnia," he
said, "and I believe that Americans have every right to anticipate that Congress
will work closely with the President to make sure that the goals and mission are
attainable."

But Representative Benjamin A. Gilman, a Republican from upstate New York who is
chairman of the House Committee on International Relations, said the President
had not done enough to convince him of the need to send American troops.

"I think Congress needs far more substance on this plan," he said. "We need to
know that Bosnia won't become another Afghanistan or Vietnam."

Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, another Republican Presidential contender, was
harsh. He said Mr. Clinton "made no credible case for sending American soldiers
to stand between the warring sides in Bosnia."

Congress will be under a tight timetable to make a decision. The North Atlantic
Council, the political arm of NATO, is expected to give its approval later this
week to the final plan to deploy a 60,000-member NATO force -- a third of it
American -- to enforce the peace accord initialed by the Presidents of Bosnia,
Serbia and Croatia at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio. The
Bosnian Serbs initialed it later.

The plan calls for the troops to enforce a cease-fire in a
two-and-a-half-mile-wide buffer zone between the rival factions.

Administration officials dismissed threats by Bosnian Serb leaders that they
could keep fighting and that, as the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, put
it, Bosnia "is going to bleed for decades."

Nicholas F. Burns, the State Department spokesman, said that Dr. Karadzic and
Gen. Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb military leader, both of whom have been
indicted by the United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague, would not have
positions of authority once the peace agreement takes effect.

"These two individuals have seen their best day, and their best day is behind
them," Mr. Burns said.

The White House hopes to have won Congressional support for the deployment by
mid-December, in time for a full signing ceremony of the peace accord in Paris.

While Mr. Clinton has maintained that he has the Constitutional authority as
Commander in Chief to send the troops on his own, aides say he is seeking a
nonbinding resolution of support similar to the one President Bush narrowly
pushed through Congress before the 1991 Persian Gulf war.

Mr. Clinton's national security team plans to fan out across Capitol Hill this
week to testify at a series of hearings that begin on Tuesday. And the
President, who leaves on Tuesday evening on his trip to Europe, planned to visit
American troops based in Germany, who will be among the first sent to Bosnia.

As a Presidential candidate in 1992 -- with reports emerging from the Balkans of
Bosnian Serb detention camps and so-called "ethnic cleansing" campaigns -- Mr.
Clinton called for a "multilateral military effort" including air strikes to
punish and contain aggression in Bosnia.

But once in office, Mr. Clinton was unable to solidify the Western allies around
a policy of lifting the United Nations arms embargo against the Muslim-led
Bosnian Government and of using air power to defend Sarajevo against the Bosnian
Serb attacks.

His attention to the war became episodic and crisis-driven until this summer
when the Bosnian Serb drive into United Nations-designated "safe areas"
threatened the collapse of the entire peacekeeping mission in Bosnia.

Concerned that the United States would be forced to send thousands of troops to
assist the United Nations forces in a costly withdrawal on the eve of the 1996
Presidential campaign, Mr. Clinton moved to take back the diplomatic and
strategic initiative toward the Balkans.

He authorized the intense diplomacy that culminated last week in the peace
agreement. The Administration's diplomacy was significantly aided by a Croatian
Government offensive that forced the Croatian Serbs to withdraw from an area
they had occupied, and by agreement of America's European allies to use NATO
bombing to halt Bosnian Serb attacks on safe areas.

Earlier today, Mr. Clinton announced a $2 million American commitment to an
effort to support educational services for children throughout the former
Yugoslavia.

The fighting in the Balkans, he said, "has seriously harmed the most innocent
and most vulnerable members of that society -- its children."

He quoted from the diary of Zlata Filipovic, a Sarajevo girl who wrote of her
experiences in the Bosnian war: "For me, the school is a symbol of normal life.
When they take away my school, I said this really means something. They took my
childhood. They took my school."


LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Clinton acknowledged that the Bosnia mission poses
risks. (Reuters) (pg. A1); Two American soldiers trained with gasmasks last
month as they prepared at the Grafenwohr training ground in Germany for possible
duty with a NATO peace enforcement mission likely to be sent to the Balkans.
(Associated Press) (pg. A15)

Map of Bosnia and Herzegovina shows the current areas of control and the
location of Tuzla. (pg. A15)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BALKAN ACCORD: ONE DISTRICT;
In Gingrich Country, Bosnia Plan Is a Hard Sell

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS

SECTION: Section A;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words

DATELINE: KENNESAW, Ga., Nov. 28


This small town northwest of Atlanta supported President Bush's summons to the
Persian Gulf war nearly five years ago with flags, candlelight vigils and yellow
ribbons. But President Clinton's rallying cry Monday night to send American
troops to Bosnia was met with broad skepticism.

Many residents responded to Mr. Clinton's televised speech on Monday night by
recalling America's recent military past. Dr. Frank Boone, the local
veterinarian, said the Bosnia plan differed from the 1991 gulf war because
"there had been an obvious land grab by Saddam Hussein" to justify American
intervention, and the possible threat to American oil supplies "made the idea of
war easier to sell."

Even more often, residents likened the proposal for an American-led peacekeeping
force in the Balkans to the ill-fated mission of United States forces in Beirut
in 1983 when 241 American servicemen were killed, or to the mission of United
States troops in Somalia in which American soldiers were killed or captured and
the body of one was dragged through the streets of Mogadishu in October 1993.

"It's a hard statement in these politically correct times, but the purpose of
our military is to export violence," said Norm Coomer, a 31-year-old former
marine who was stationed in Beirut and later in Panama. "I was a 17-year-old kid
in Beirut who couldn't load his weapon or even make a gesture to the Lebanese
for fear of starting something. Our troops in Bosnia will be the same as we were
in Beirut, and we're going to lose a lot of people."

Here in the home district of Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich, it was clear
that the messenger in many ways eclipsed the message.

Nowhere was that more evident than among the lunchtime crowd at My Country
Kitchen, a diner where lithographs of Fess Parker as Daniel Boone and John Wayne
as Davy Crockett in the 1960 movie "Alamo" preside over the steam tables.

"I'm to the right of Genghis Khan, and most of the time I think that Newt is
really the President," said Carole Thompson, publisher of a monthly newspaper,
The Bright Side. "Clinton doesn't have a whole lot of credibility with people
like us."

Mayor J. O. Stephenson, who four years ago was as staunch in his support of Mr.
Bush as he is now dismissive of Mr. Clinton, echoed that view.

"It doesn't set well in my stomach that someone with the stand he had on the
Vietnam War is now trying to send troops over there," the Mayor said, referring
to Mr. Clinton's avoidance of the draft and participation in protests against
the war. "If this were coming from a military man, it might be a little
different."

Even when they were supportive of Mr. Clinton's ultimate peacekeeping goals in
Bosnia, those interviewed in this town of 5,000 people faulted him for not using
the right selling points in his speech.

Steven Weatherby, 23, one among the 28 students in Michele Zebich-Knos's
international politics course at Kennesaw State College, said he thought that
the Bosnia plan was justified on humanitarian grounds. But the President, he
said, should have spoken less on the strategic significance of the Balkans and
painted a starker picture of the ethnic cleansing, rapes and starvation and the
slaughter of innocents to better tug at the emotions of the nation.

"Look, I was convinced that we should be in there before Clinton spoke, and I
think he is getting a raw deal," he said. "He could have done a better job of
selling it. It would have been a little deceptive, but not directly deceptive."

Five years ago, some 200 Kennesaw residents were among those sent to the Persian
Gulf, and on the day that the ground war began 2,600 residents marched down
South Main Street with candles in support of the troops. The lobby of City Hall
was decorated with a "Patriots Tree" bearing the names of those serving in the
gulf.

Back then, residents clearly saw Saddam Hussein as an enemy who could threaten
the entire Middle East. But many do not now agree with Mr. Clinton's suggestion
that ethnic strife in the Balkans could spread and destabilize central Europe,
Ms. Thompson said.

During a lively hourlong discussion of the President's speech in Ms.
Zebich-Knos's classroom, which sits in the shadow of the Civil War's Kennesaw
Mountain battleground, an informal survey showed that 4 students supported the
NATO mission, 20 opposed it and 4 others were undecided.

Asma Benyoussef, 20, a native of Libya who was among the four students
supporting the mission, said she liked the tone of the speech with its emphasis
on "moral obligation" and the "U.S. leadership role in the world." But such
concepts, she lamented, probably do not have the gravity of a single oil well in
the mind of the American public.

"We saw it in Kuwait," she said. "The moment it happened, we were there. These
things, like oil, are very important. A comparison between Bush then and Clinton
now can be made, and Bush had the economic incentive on his side."

As for the professor, whose grandparents immigrated to the United States from
Serbia just before World War I, she said the President's speech had the right
blend of history and "broadening concepts," but it was one she thought he would
have to give again and again before substantial numbers of Americans would be
persuaded to support him.

"He touched on the concepts that Americans who know nothing about Bosnia need to
know," she said. "But he needs to be more convincing. One speech will not do."

Views Across the Country

"Listening to Clinton, all I heard that mattered to me was that there could be
heavy casualties, and that the whole thing will cost us a lot."
GERRY ZARMIN
copy center owner, Chicago

"I was already convinced, but he got other people to see the human aspect. He
alluded to the rapes and killings without beating it over our heads."
KRISTIE SELLS, 29
consultant, Malden, Mass.

"If we get involved, you know it's going to get complicated. It's 20,000 troops
at first, but if something goes wrong, it'll be a lot more than that. It's their
civil war. Let them handle it."
JEFF MAYER-HELMER, 26
son of Yugoslav immigrants, DeKalb, Ill.

"When he brought up World War I, and said how our having pulled back then left a
vacuum in the world, and that allowed the atrocities that followed, I found that
pretty compelling."
THERESA McCAUGHEY
architect, Chicago

"We're the big guy in the world. There are some terrible atrocities, too much
killing, and it's our moral obligation to step in and help stop it."
BOB WEBBER, 36
respiratory therapist, Cortland, Ill.

"He was saying that Bosnia was in our vital national interest. How so? Do they
have oil?"
LYLE GEORGE, 38
pillow salesman, Seattle.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Residents of Kennesaw, Ga., had mixed feelings over President
Clinton's appeal to send American troops to Bosnia. Asma Benyousset, 20, a
student at Kennesaw State College, supports the plan. Norm Coomer, 31, a veteran
of the American mission to Lebanon, opposes it. (Photographs by Alan S. Weiner
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Lincoln Center's Welcome Festival

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 324 words


In the center of Manhattan Island is another island known as Lincoln Center --
home to some of the greatest music and dance in the Western Hemisphere. This
summer that small island will be the site of a very big festival.

Lincoln Center Festival 96, the first in a three-year cycle, will run from July
22 to Aug. 11, packing in 206 performances of 61 programs and providing its
audiences with a kind of total immersion in the performing arts. Most of the
theaters and performance spaces, more often than not dark in summer, will be
blazing. So will many of the resident companies, along with imports like
Reigakusha, a gagaku ensemble (traditional court orchestra with dancers) from
Japan.

If Festival 96 has no one theme, it does have interlocking subthemes. For
instance, a concert version of Beethoven's "Leonore," an early version of
"Fidelio," will be performed by John Eliot Gardiner and his Orchestre
Revolutionaire et Romantique on period instruments. The next night a modern
orchestra version of "Fidelio" itself will be performed by Kurt Masur and the
New York Philharmonic. Dublin's Gate Theater will do the complete plays of
Samuel Beckett, 19 in all, while several musical groups will collaborate on a
Morton Feldman retrospective, one of whose pieces he titled "For Samuel
Beckett."

Some of the programs, like the Brooklyn Tabernacle Choir, are quintessentially
American. Others, like the Thang Long Water Puppets from Vietnam and the Kirov
Orchestra and Kirov Opera Chorus, are quintessentially Vietnamese and Russian.
But because all of them will be performing in a city that is home to so many
cultures, they are, in a sense, quintessentially New York.

"Does New York need a festival like this?" is one of the questions the planners
of Festival 96 anticipated having to answer recently. Had it come up, Lincoln
Center's president, Nathan Leventhal, had the perfect reply. "New York deserves
a festival like this."

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Representative Schroeder Plans to Quit

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 794 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 28


Representative Patricia Schroeder, a Colorado Democrat who crusaded against
excessive military spending and for women's rights, who described Ronald Reagan
as the "Teflon President" and who then nearly ran for his job, said today that
she would retire next year after 24 years in the House.

Her departure, for what Mrs. Schroeder said remained an uncharted second career,
deprives Congress of its longest-serving female member and one of its most
durably liberal -- and pithiest -- political gadflies.

Mrs. Schroeder seized the national ear with both hands in her first year when,
grappling for power with one of the House's oldest bulls, she declared that the
chairman of the Armed Services Committee was a sexist who "doesn't believe that
anyone with a uterus can make a decision on military affairs."

The chairman, Representative F. Edward Hebert, Democrat of Louisiana, refused
even to give Mrs. Schroeder a chair to use at committee hearings. Undeterred,
she helped lead a revolt that ousted Mr. Hebert from the chairmanship in the
next session of Congress.

Mrs. Schroeder has seemed to delight in tweaking powers in both parties ever
since. She acknowledged as much today, telling reporters at a news conference
that despite the best efforts of more senior Democrats, "I've always been hard
to paper-train."

Her retirement surprised even Mrs. Schroeder's political associates, who said
that she faced no serious rival for her Congressional seat in the Denver area.
In an interview, she said she was quitting because, at the age of 55, her
prospects for a second career outside Congress were rapidly ebbing.

"I've always felt this wasn't going to be the only thing I ever did," Mrs.
Schroeder said, "although I have absolutely no idea what I will do next. At 55,
you've got to go fairly soon or suddenly people start saying, 'That's
interesting, but you're too old.' Ageism is still alive and well in America."

She said she would like to remain in public life, perhaps as a writer or
lecturer. She said she would not rule out a return to elective politics but
would not seek the seat that Senator Hank Brown, a Republican, will leave vacant
when he retires next year.

Mrs. Schroeder is the 15th House member to announce retirement this term. All
together, 25 House members -- 18 Democrats and 7 Republicans -- have either said
they would retire or are expected to run for higher office in 1996. Mrs.
Schroeder was first elected to the House, in 1972, in improbable fashion.
Against a Republican opponent whom few thought could lose, she ran a campaign
based on opposition to the Vietnam War, support for the environment and the
premise that Colorado -- which was then bidding to be host for the Winter
Olympics -- had more pressing uses for its tax money than sports.

In Congress, she became known as a dogged legislator on issues affecting women
and the family. She was also an advocate of requiring American allies to assume
more of the cost of stationing United States forces abroad, and she pushed to
limit sharply the testing of nuclear weapons.

But while Mrs. Schroeder frequently verged on national political stardom and
influence, she never quite made the final leap. Her closest brush was a long
"exploratory campaign" for the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1987. That
trial run ended on her own accord, in part, she said, because she was repelled
by the dehumanizing nature of Presidential campaigning.

Her withdrawal from the Presidential campaign stirred even more publicity than
her deliberations on running, largely because her announcement ended with a
handkerchief and a spurt of tears in the arms of her husband, Jim.

Chided by some for looking un-Presidential -- and, even worse, stereotypically
female -- Mrs. Schroeder shot back, "Tears signify compassion, not weakness."

Today, Mrs. Schroeder was ebullient, not tearful, at her retirement
announcement. Indeed, in recent months, she appeared at the top of her political
game, as she put it today.

Although she often seemed overshadowed when Democrats dominated the House and
her independent streak and flip comments seeming to diminish her authority, Mrs.
Schroeder had rebounded as a member of the House's new Democratic minority. In
particular, she had delighted in ridiculing the new Speaker, Newt Gingrich,
Republican of Georgia.

Ann Lewis, a longtime Democratic operative, said today that she still had a
political poster from Mrs. Schroeder's first campaign. Printed entirely in what
Ms. Lewis called "off-pink," it depicts a very old woman shuffling down a Denver
street, beside the caption, "Cheer up. The Olympics are coming."

"It's a little offbeat," Ms. Lewis said. "It makes a point.

"To me, it's always kind of stood for Pat Schroeder."

NAME: Patricia Schroeder

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Saying that she wanted to pursue an opportunity outside of
elective office while there is still time, Representative Patricia Schroeder,
55, above, announced yesterday in Washington that she will retire. (Reuters) (pg
B16)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 1, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

FILM REVIEW;
No Wonder the Guests Are Nervous

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 14;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 545 words


Movies like "Traps" that glibly equate kinky sexual behavior with political and
moral decay are at best naive, at worst ludicrous. This solemnly overheated
drama, which opens today at Cinema Village, is set in French Indochina in 1950.
Whenever it wants to put Daniel (Sami Frey), the ruthless French owner of a
Southeast Asian rubber plantation, in a sinister light, it shows him making
creepy passes at his nervous house guests.

Those guests, Louise and Michael Duffield (Saskia Reeves and Robert Reynolds),
are an English writer and photographer who have been engaged to concoct a
photojournalistic essay for the rubber company's corporate publication. Although
their assignment is to show Asian workers submitting happily to French
domination, the world the couple stumbles into is far from serene. Communist
insurgents are methodically taking over the country's rural areas, and even
Daniel's trusted Asian servant, Tuan (Kiet Lam), has joined the Vietminh.

The Duffields watch aghast as their host acquiesces to the police torture of
suspected terrorists. In the most suspenseful scene, Daniel's emotionally
unstable daughter, Viola (Jacqueline McKenzie), and Louise are captured by the
Communists and threatened with execution.

The film's cut-and-dried morality is glaringly reflected in Louise and Michael's
marital strife. While Michael is content to grind out the required corporate
propaganda, Louise's eyes are opened to the injustices of French colonialism. In
the most preposterous of several sex scenes, Michael gratuitously rapes his wife
while Viola listens attentively through the wall. Later in the film, Michael
wakes up in the morning beside Daniel, who apparently molested him after he
passed out drunk. Michael immediately goes ballistic, and the melodramatic
aftermath would probably have made Hemingway blush.

"Traps" is the first feature directed by Pauline Chan, an Australian film maker
who was born in Vietnam, where portions of the movie were shot. Adapted by Miss
Chan and Robert Carter from "Dreamhouse," a novel by Kate Grenville, the film is
handsome and atmospheric. And the cast, especially Mr. Frey, the fine French
actor who was so electrifying in "My Life and Times With Antonin Artaud," brings
an anguished seriousness to the roles.

It's not the actors' fault that their characters don't make psychological sense.
Their shrill erotic charades are metaphoric shortcuts in a film that can't be
bothered to develop credible characters or tell a complex story.

"Traps" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It
has nudity and some violence.

TRAPS

Directed by Pauline Chan; written (in English, with some subtitled French and
Vietnamese) by Robert Carter and Ms. Chan, based on characters from Kate
Grenville's novel "Dreamhouse"; director of photography, Kevin Hayward; edited
by Nicholas Beauman; music by Stephen Rae; produced by Jim McElroy; released by
Filmopolis Pictures. At Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street, Greenwich Village.
Running time: 97 minutes. This film is rated R.

WITH: Saskia Reeves (Louise Duffield), Sami Frey (Daniel Renouard), Robert
Reynolds (Michael Duffield), Jacqueline McKenzie (Viola Renouard), Kiet Lam
(Tuan) and Hoa To (Tatie Chi).

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Saskia Reeves, foreground, and Jacqueline McKenzie. (Filmopolis
Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 1, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

DOLE BACKS PLAN TO SEND U.S. FORCE ON BOSNIA MISSION

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 6;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1324 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 30


In a major boost to President Clinton's decision to send American troops to
Bosnia, Bob Dole, the Senate Majority leader, today threw his support behind the
mission.

Mr. Dole made his announcement from the Senate floor in tandem with Senator John
S. McCain, the Arizona Republican and former prisoner of war in Vietnam who has
been one of his party's most bitter critics of any military intervention in
Bosnia.

Mr. Dole said he was drafting a resolution supporting the President's decision
-- with conditions intended to bring the troops home quickly -- and hoped it
would pass late next week or early the following week. That would give Mr.
Clinton much needed bipartisan political backing before the scheduled signing of
the Bosnian peace agreement in Paris on Dec. 14, which would be immediately
followed by deployment of most of the American troops.

After announcing his support, Mr. Dole, the frontrunner for the Republican
Presidential nomination, acknowledged in an interview that American troops would
be in Bosnia by the time the Senate voted. But he said that opposing the
President after he had made his decision would undermine the soldiers' morale.

The Administration was swift in praising Mr. Dole. "I welcome Senator Dole's
expression of support," Secretary of State Warren Christopher said in a
statement. "His leadership can help build a bipartisanship consensus endorsing
the President's decision to deploy troops as part of the NATO-led international
force for peace in Bosnia."

Mr. Dole said of his decision: "It wasn't easy. I knew the easy way out was to
go out and trash everything." He added, in an allusion to his Presidential
rivals who have opposed the Bosnia mission: "I know I'll get a few whacks out
there, but I've been around here long enough to know that at this point we
shouldn't be so partisan."

Mr. Dole added that he was holding meetings with experts on Bosnia to persuade
recalcitrant Senators to support him, and that he was also discussing a joint
strategy with the House Speaker, Newt Gingrich.

The Administration is likely to run into much more trouble in the House, whose
members are younger and less swayed by Mr. Clinton's argument that failure to
take part in the mission would destroy NATO.

Several hours after Mr. Dole's announcement, White House officials traveling
with Mr. Clinton in Belfast, Northern Ireland, said the President had decided to
allow a military spending bill that he needs to help pay for the Bosnian mission
to become law without his signature. Although he had said he would veto the $243
billion bill because it contained more money than he had requested, it would
also provide the $2 billion needed to pay for the Bosnia operation.

Late tonight, Mr. Clinton qualified his approval of the bill in a statement
issued by the White House that noted his strong concerns about "excessive
spending for projects that are not currently needed" for defense. The statement
said Mr. Clinton would send Congress legislation that would eliminate money for
those projects.

The announcement today by the two key Republicans does not signify a ringing
endorsement of Mr. Clinton, whose Bosnia policy has come under attack from
Republicans and Democrats and which -- as both lawmakers pointedly observed
today -- is opposed by the vast majority of their constituents.

Rather, their decision stems more from resignation that Mr. Clinton is going to
send 20,000 troops no matter what, and that it would be unseemly not to line up
behind the Commander in Chief.

"The bottom line is that the President intends to send these troops to Bosnia
one way or another," Mr. Dole said in the Senate. "And so, it seems to me that
we in the Congress have a responsibility to try to insure -- to our best ability
-- that as this deployment goes forward, that we create the conditions to end it
quickly and successfully so that U.S. forces can return to their families.

"So here we are, and I believe the Congress will do the right thing. We will end
up supporting U.S. forces."

Mr. Dole has long held the view that a President should be supported once he
decides something as important as committing troops abroad. He argued
passionately against the use of American troops to oppose President Saddam
Hussein after Iraq invaded Kuwait, but once President Bush decided to do so, Mr.
Dole worked hard to win support for him.

Mr. Dole's decision this time carries with it the long-term political benefit of
making him seem above partisanship at a time when most other Republicans seeking
the nomination, particularly Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, have been strident
opponents of the decision to send 20,000 American troops to Bosnia.

Mr. Dole, who was severely wounded in World War II, commands respect on military
issues. The fact that he spoke together with Mr. McCain, who carries a lot of
weight with younger lawmakers because of his imprisonment in Vietnam, is
expected to blunt Senate opposition to the deployment.

But neither men made any secret of the fact that they have serious concerns
about sending Americans to Bosnia. Mr. Dole listed two major concerns: the
possibility of casualties and the potential that Americans will be drawn into a
"quagmire with no way out."

Throughout the Bosnian war, Mr. Dole was the leading Republican proponent of
arming and training the Bosnians. Today he said that he wished that sending
troops could have been avoided and that Mr. Clinton had long ago embraced his
policy as an alternative to intervention.

"If we'd lifted the arms embargo a year ago, we wouldn't be talking about
sending American troops now, but that didn't happen," he said.

In explaining his own support, Mr. McCain was more blunt. "This is not something
I want to do," he said in an interview. "I've got calls in my office running
100-to-1 against. But the President has the constitutional authority to do this
and I want to do everything I can to minimize the loss of life and insure a
peace agreement is lasting. I've got to do what I think is right. Otherwise,
what the hell am I doing here?"

Senator Joseph Lieberman, the Connecticut Democrat who had cosponsored
legislation with Mr. Dole on lifting the arms embargo on Bosnia, praised Mr.
Dole for his action.

"The remarks of the majority leader were more than statesmanlike," Mr. Lieberman
said in the Senate. "They were in fact patriotic, in the sense that by taking
the position he has, he's put the interests of his country ahead of politics."

The unpopularity of sending Americans to serve abroad, even in a situation
defined as enforcing peace, was underscored earlier in the day in testimony
before the House International Affairs Committee by Secretary of State
Christopher.

Asked by Representative Christopher H. Smith, Republican of New Jersey, whether
the timing of the American-led peace initiative was motivated by Presidential
politics, Mr. Christopher said no.

"I'm not a political expert," he said. But, he added, "It does not look to me,
based upon what the polls are, that the President is taking a position that is
politically popular. Indeed, from what I gather it is a very politically risky
position."

The Senate resolution, which is in rough draft form, will condition support on a
commitment by Mr. Clinton that the Bosnian Government will be able to defend
itself after the NATO-led force leaves in about one year, Mr. McCain said.

It also states that the American troops will engage only in military activities,
not nation-building activities like the return of refugees or the policing of
streets.

The United States has committed itself to helping the Bosnian Government arm and
train its military, but not as part of the peace enforcement operation of NATO,
which opposes the plan. The American military will also not carry out that task.
Rather, it will be done with still-undefined American participation in
conjunction with other countries.


LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 2, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton's Peace Strategy;
President Hopes to Do Well With Voters By Doing Good on the International Stage

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 1;   Column 4;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1168 words

DATELINE: DUBLIN, Dec. 1


On the evidence of a rousingly successful three-day visit to Britain and Ireland
this week, Bill Clinton has finally defined a role for himself in foreign policy
that he finds congenial: Peacemaker in Chief.

Dwight D. Eisenhower won the Presidency in 1952 with his promise to "go to
Korea" to try to end the war there, and Richard M. Nixon won in 1968 after
speaking of a "secret plan" for achieving peace in Vietnam. Mr. Clinton
apparently hopes to apply a new, more ambitious twist to that old formula:

Calm the fevers of conflict around the world, he seems to be thinking, and you
can do well by doing good; you can curb violence and earn the reward of a second
term.

After a long period of indecision and uncertainty, Mr. Clinton found a
prescription for peace that worked, at least temporarily, in Haiti. He presided
over another incremental agreement in the Middle East, even if he did not
actually negotiate it.  And then 10 days ago, in Dayton, Ohio, his
Administration teased the Bosnian combatants into a tenuous accord, which is to
be signed in Paris on Dec. 14.

The disparate peace efforts have coalesced in the President's mind, his aides
say, into a vision of a world "where communication and cooperation are the order
of the day" and where "conflicts long thought impossible to solve are moving
along the road to resolution," as he put it in Belfast on Thursday. Or as he put
it today at College Green in the heart of Dublin, quoting the Irish Nobel Prize
winner Seamus Heaney, "We are living in a moment where hope and history rhyme."

At a time where racial, religious, class and territorial conflicts ruin lives
every minute of every day of every year, Mr. Clinton's vision is a strikingly
optimistic one, some would say a Utopian one. At times these days he sounds at
least as much like a United Nations Secretary General as like a President.

His enthusiasm for peacemaking is substantial enough to prompt him to send up to
20,000 troops to Bosnia.  He acknowledged today that they would face
considerable peril, and so will he. If American units suffer large casualties,
support for the enterprise among might dissolve in the heat of a Presidential
campaign.

But then Bill Clinton is one of nature's optimists, adept at reinventing and
relaunching himself and redefining the problems he faces. He has traveled far
from inauspicious beginnings in his life and career. He has survived adversity
that would have finished many a politician, as in New Hampshire early in 1992.
He thinks others can do the same.

So he urges everyone to "take chances for peace," and refers in tones of
anguished respect, in almost every speech, to Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, whose
assassination last month redoubled Mr. Clinton's zeal.

This week the President has jumped with both feet into peacemaking in Northern
Ireland. While acknowledging that "people must make their own peace, from their
heads and from their hearts," and denying any intention "to impose a peace on
anyone," he has exhorted and cajoled the British and the Irish, the Catholics
and the Protestants.

"Have the patience to work for a just and lasting peace," he said in
Londonderry. "Reach for it. The United States will reach with you."

People in Ulster and Ireland reacted exuberantly to the President's efforts,
even though, intensely political people that they are, they are well aware that
one purpose of the trip was courting the votes of Irish-Americans. Echoing the
crowds' cheers, political leaders there and here praised him lavishly. Mr.
Clinton loved every last minute of it.

A few suggested that the Presidential trip was just a big publicity stunt.  But
publicity stunts, staged at the right time and place, have their purposes, and
not necessarily selfish ones. The effort to resolve any longstanding quarrel is
like a political campaign in some respects. To keep it going, spirits must be
lifted, cynicism and defeatism must be combated and recognition must be accorded
for successes. Mr. Clinton did all of that for the advocates of peace.

This President has trod where others feared to. He gave a worldwide platform to
Gerry Adams of Sinn Fein, who has close links to Catholic terrorists, over
British objections.  Some British officials now acknowledge, privately of
course, that he helped to prod the negotiators. He subtly encouraged the idea
that he would be displeased if the process were deadlocked when he came here.
As the time for his takeoff from Andrews Air Force Base approached, politicians'
minds in London and Dublin were concentrated sufficiently to find a way forward.

For the Irish, it is manna from heaven. Smaller and weaker than Britain, they
have long sought outside help to redress the balance. Mr. Clinton has not
explicitly agreed to play that role, but merely by caring, merely by coming, he
has helped.

"He is the first President to have an actual policy on Northern Ireland and its
troubles," an Irish diplomat said. "The others smiled a lot, and ducked.
Kissinger always developed a headache whenever anyone asked about Ireland."

For the British, this is something to be endured, with jaws set. After the
last-minute agreement this week to shoot for all-party talks in February, a
senior British politician said to an American friend, "I suppose Clinton will
take credit for this, too, but I'll tell you one thing: there will be no
handshake on the White House lawn this time."

He forced the British into a de facto reversal of their longstanding policy of
tolerating no mediators, in fact no involvement of any kind by the United States
or others in the Northern Ireland question.

Mr. Clinton sought to defuse that sort of talk with a speech at Westminster on
Wednesday, in which he praised the British for their steadfastness as allies,
their commitment to democracy and human rights and their efforts to find a
solution in Northern Ireland. He gave them credit for almost everything except
winning the Revolutionary War.

For all that, there were complaints about what he has been up to. In an open
letter in The Daily Mail in London on Thursday, Simon Heffer, a right-wing
columnist, bitterly denounced Mr. Clinton for meddling in British affairs,
reminding the President that "Britain is not a third-world country; it is not a
colony, or a client state, of America."

Privately and perhaps even publicly, the President is likely to continue to try
to influence events in Northern Ireland. If the commission headed by former
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine comes up with a plan to deal with the
weapons caches on both sides, Mr. Clinton will probably press for its adoption,
whatever objections the British may voice.

Mr. Clinton will no doubt gain votes among the Irish-Americans, who have been
drifting away from the Democrats. But he seeks much more than that -- a broad
international movement toward peace, with the United states leading the way, and
Bill Clinton, not entirely incidentally, gaining votes among people of all
partisan persuasions.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 2, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Army Children Express Their Doubts

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 5;   Column 4;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 957 words

DATELINE: BAUMHOLDER, Germany, Nov. 30


When President Clinton visits this United States Army base on Saturday, his
intention, in part, will be to stiffen the resolve of soldiers scheduled to form
the first wave of American troops into Bosnia.

But that probably won't make him too popular with the seventh grade at the
American school here, where the question is not just whether Americans have any
business in Bosnia at all, but what happens to those they leave behind?

"I wonder how Chelsea Clinton would feel about it, missing Christmas and not
spending Father's Day and all those other special days with your dad," said
Sebastian Fries, whose father will be leaving in mid-December to join the NATO
peacekeeping force for a year.

"Clinton didn't go to the war he was supposed to go to," he said, referring to
the President's opposition to the Vietnam War as a young man. "He had
connections, so he wouldn't have to be away for a year."

The remark reflected a surprising vehemence among the seventh graders who,
perhaps voicing opinions held privately by their parents, seemed to view the
American deployment as unnecessary, dangerous and frightening.

Some of the 12- and 13-year-olds wept as they talked of the prospect of living
without fathers cast variously as playmates, buddies, homework-helpers and chess
partners. Some told of stress and arguments at home in advance of the
deployment. Some thought their fathers might die. Many said they hadn't
discussed it with their parents at all.

One girl, Cerise Lake, who is returning to the United States because both her
parents are going to Bosnia, summed it up like this, "I think it's kind of,
like, stupid."

"This is the first time my Dad's going to war," said Greg Campbell, another
seventh grader. "And I don't know how I'll feel. People die in wars. I don't
want my dad to die."

The students are not the only source of worry among those who will stay behind
in this west German base, which clings to fog-bound hills 30 miles from the
French border.

"We are suddenly all going to be single parents," said Nancy Carlisle, 32, who
is expecting her second child in April. "We have a lot of wives who have never
been alone before."

By the time her husband, an infantry captain, returns, she said, the baby will
be six months old and the four-year-old will be five. She said she planned to
have a videocassette recording of the birth.

"There are a lot who think their husbands shouldn't go," said Bert Keene, 41,
the wife of an artillery staff sergeant. Like Mrs. Carlisle, she works in a
volunteer support group to solve personal problems among the 12,000 American
soldiers and civilians on the base. "They don't know it's their husband's job,
it's what they volunteered to do."

Even simple things, like paying bills and dealing with paychecks, represent
uncharted territory for some young spouses, and some have asked to be flown to
the United States during the deployment.

Dependents have been told that the move to Bosnia will last a year, without
furlough, with little chance of making phone calls home. So in advance, people
have been addressing unfamiliar matters. "We made the will," Mrs. Keene said.

But others said that even routine activities will be affected. "Little things
like going shopping or doing the laundry are going to become major things," said
Betty Underwood, 27, who also works in the family support group and, like the
other two women, said she supported the deployment to Bosnia.

In many ways, this base is little America writ large. Its American population
far outnumbers the 3,000 population of the adjacent German town. The Americans
live in neat, white apartment houses. The base offers an array of entertainment,
from bowling to bingo, movies to aerobics classes. In the town, there is a Pizza
Hut and a McDonald's.

With its pristine corridors, the American school almost defies the prevalent
image of American educational systems in crisis. But educators are paying close
attention to the likely prospect of fear and stress among students as they come
to terms with the fact that their parents are paid to do dangerous work.

"Fear may be the predominant reason" for stress, says the latest issue of the
school newsletter, "fear for the safety of those in the military as well as fear
for their own safety."

Terry Arbuckle, the school psychologist, sent a pamphlet to parents that offered
such advice as, "If you don't talk about the deployment, the children may feel
it's too terrible and frightening to talk about."

Uncertainty seems to deepen the worries of young people who sense that, as the
school newsletter put it: "Deployment interrupts the natural order of things. It
is very unsettling. Stability is gone and this is very threatening."

Amber Adams, one of the students, said: "It makes me angry, because my dad's got
to leave just before my brother turns three. My dad works with mines and I don't
know what's going to happen. I don't really talk to him about the mines because
it makes me worried."

Jeremy Green said that since the deployment was announced, "there's a lot of
stress, there's a lot of arguing" at his home. And it seemed to enrage many of
the students who do not understand why their parents should go to Bosnia at all.

"I was wondering," said Robin McClare, "how come Americans go into other
people's problems when we can't solve our own,"

Justin Zimmerman added, "The U.S. is acting like a parent to the whole world."

One student, Christina Spencer, began to talk about her stepfather, who she said
was "a lot like a real father." But why, she asked, did he have to leave for
Bosnia just before Christmas? Why did he have to leave when her sister was only
four years old?

And then the tears came and she could speak no more.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Germany showing location of Baumholder.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 2, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Oregon's Hatfield to Retire After 5 Terms in Senate

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 6;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 841 words

DATELINE: SILVERTON, Ore., Dec. 1


Senator Mark O. Hatfield, one of the last of a breed of liberal Republicans and
an Oregon political institution for nearly half a century, said today that he
would retire from the Senate when his fifth term ended next year.

The announcement, which was expected, means that the Senate Appropriations
Committee will no longer be run by a man who is at odds with the direction of
most of his party's major initiatives. Most recently, Mr. Hatfield, 73,
infuriated younger Republicans by casting the deciding vote against a
balanced-budget amendment, citing its threat to social programs among some of
the reasons for his vote.

In departing, Mr. Hatfield raises to 11 the number of Senators who have
announced their retirement this year -- the most since 1896, when 12 retired.
The Associated Press today reported that another Republican Senator, Alan K.
Simpson of Wyoming, might also announce his retirement on Saturday.

A lifelong pacifist after his War War II experience in Iwo Jima and as one of
the first American officers to see Hiroshima after the atomic bomb was dropped,
Mr. Hatfield coupled his resignation speech with criticism of President
Clinton's plan to send American troops to Bosnia.

"I do not believe we can solve 800 years of history by sending our troops over
there," said Mr. Hatfield, who has never voted for a military authorization bill
in nearly 30 years in the Senate.

He had cast one of only two Senate Republican votes against sending troops to
the Persian Gulf war in 1990, and joined forces with Senator George McGovern in
trying to end the Vietnam War.

"The Senate is losing one of the very best," said Senator Robert C. Byrd,
Democrat of West Virginia.

Republicans could lose two seats in Oregon -- Mr. Hatfield's and that of Senator
Bob Packwood, who resigned in September after allegations of sexual misconduct.

Mr. Hatfield chose a hospital dedication ceremony in this small town in the
Willamette Valley, a place with Norman Rockwell murals on downtown walls, to
tell Oregonians it was time for him to step down.

As a sort of New Deal Republican, who has always believed in government as a
force to better people's lives, Mr. Hatfield recalled the issues that have
inspired him.

"As a young man I felt the call of public service and believed in the positive
impact government can have on the lives of people," he said. "Government service
has allowed me to work to promote peace, protect human life, enhance education,
safeguard our environment, improve the health care of Oregonians, and guard the
rights of individuals. I have dedicated my public life to these principles."

Aside from an ethics charge that brought him a rebuke from the Senate in 1992
for accepting gifts, Mr. Hatfield's career has largely been free of blemishes.
He is sometimes referred to in this state as "Saint Mark."

Hospitals, research centers, commuter rail systems, roads and health clinics
from the Pacific shore to the high desert of eastern Oregon were built in large
part because of the old-fashioned political pork that came from Mr. Hatfield.

"If you took a map of the state and placed a dot on every building named after
Mark Hatfield as a result of his Federal giving, it would look like a map with
chicken pox," said Bill Lunch, a political science professor at Oregon State
University.

Gov. John Kitzhaber, a Democrat, said in an interview, "Senator Hatfield's
announcement brings to a close what may be the single greatest public career in
Oregon's history."

Elected to the Oregon Legislature in 1950, Mr. Hatfield became one of the
state's youngest governors in 1958, when he was 36. He served two terms as
Governor, then was elected to the Senate in 1966. More than two million acres of
wilderness was set aside in Oregon, largely because of Mr. Hatfield's support,
and his steering of health care dollars into this state has made it a leading
medical research center.

In recent years, Mr. Hatfield's advocacy of peace and public works has become
increasingly at odds with the direction of the Republican Party.

"If he was 38 years old and running today, a guy like Hatfield probably couldn't
get the nomination of his own party," Mr. Lunch said. "He's just too moderate."

With two Republican Senate vacancies, Oregon is a major battleground state for
the makeup of the Senate, which will lose to retirement two other Republicans,
Hank Brown of Colorado and Nancy Landon Kassebaum of Kansas, as well as eight
Democrats.

People here are currently voting in a three-week-long ballot-by-mail process for
the primary to decide who will succeed Mr. Packwood.

Mr. Hatfield, who plans to teach, write, and relax in a home he has bought on
the Oregon Coast, has not endorsed anyone for his seat.

"I started my second term in the Oregon Legislature in 1953, on the day Harry
Truman left the Presidency," Mr. Hatfield said. "He said that was the happiest
day of his life because he was being elevated back to the rank of private
citizen. Today, I have a good idea of how President Truman felt."

NAME: Mark O. Hatfield

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A pensive Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, at a
hospital dedication yesterday in Silverton, Ore., before announcing his
retirement. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography  ; YUGOSLAVIA; BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 2, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Maxwell Thurman, 64, General Who Led '89 Panama Invasion

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 28;   Column 5;   National Desk

LENGTH: 403 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 1


Gen. Maxwell Thurman, who led the 1989 invasion of Panama and was a principal
architect of the all-volunteer United States Army, died today at Walter Reed
Army Medical Center. He was 64.

General Thurman had been found to have leukemia in 1990.

Dubbed "Mad Max" and "Max atollah" by colleagues, because of his aggressive
style, General Thurman delayed his retirement at the request of the Bush
Administration so he could spearhead the effort to oust Gen. Manuel Antonio
Noriega from control in Panama.

General Thurman was named commander of the United States Southern Command, based
at Quarry Heights, Panama, in September 1989. He was responsible for United
States forces in South and Central America and pledged to confront "tyranny in
all its insidious forms."

He was widely credited with persuading the Pentagon leadership and the Bush
Administration to use military force against the Noriega government.

After a 37-year career, General Thurman retired in February 1991, the year after
he had learned that he had an aggressive form of leukemia.

The general made his reputation as an aggressive, take-charge commander. One
officer said General Thurman was known for "driving his staff crazy because he
was a bachelor, and the guy never went home."

Born on Feb. 18, 1931, in High Point, N.C., General Thurman was a graduate of
North Carolina State University in Raleigh, where he enrolled in R.O.T.C. and
got his officer's commission.

He held a variety of staff and command positions in Europe and the United States
and served in Vietnam, first as a corps intelligence adviser and later as
commander of the Second Battalion, 35th Field Artillery, during the Tet
offensive. That series of battles in 1968 was considered a public relations
disaster for the United States but a tactical victory in the field for American
forces.

Before taking the top spot at the Southern Command, General Thurman was Vice
Chief of Staff and commanding general of the United States Army Training and
Doctrine Command at Fort Monroe, Va. He also headed the Army's Recruiting
Command at Fort Sheridan, Ill., where he worked to develop the service's "Be all
that you can be" recruiting campaign.

It was during these years, the mid-1980's, that he was credited with vastly
improving the quality of the average American soldier.

General Thurman is survived by his brother, Lieut. Gen. John R. Thurman 3d of
Alexandria, Va.

NAME: Maxwell Thurman

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Noteworthy Collection

BYLINE: By LAUREL GRAEBER

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 86;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1900 words



This selection of paperbacks is from the New & Noteworthy column since the 1995
summer reading issue.

THE ALIENIST
By Caleb Carr. Bantam, $6.99.
Fiction about a turn-of-the-century serial killer.

ALL'S FAIR: LOVE, WAR, AND RUNNING FOR PRESIDENT
By Mary Matalin and James Carville
with Peter Knobler.
Random House and Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $13.
The rival spin specialists talk campaigns and courtship.

ARABIAN NIGHTS & DAYS
By Naguib Mahfouz. Translated by Denys Johnson-Davies. Anchor/Doubleday, $12.
A dark retelling of "The Arabian Nights."

THE ARABISTS: The Romance of an American Elite
By Robert D. Kaplan. Free Press, $13.
The diplomats who guide us in the Middle East.

THE ASSAULT
By Reinaldo Arenas. Translated by Andrew Hurley. Penguin, $10.95.
A novel narrated by a Government informer in a totalitarian state.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A FACE
By Lucy Grealy. Harper Perennial, $12.
Her self-restoration after a disfiguring cancer.

BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir
By Barbara Bush. St. Martin's, $6.99.
How a demure girl became a popular First Lady.

THE BEAK OF THE FINCH: A Story of Evolution in Our Time
By Jonathan Weiner. Vintage, $13.
A contemporary study of how natural selection works.

BITTER WINDS: A Memoir of My Years in China's Gulag
By Harry Wu and Carolyn Wakeman. Wiley, $14.95.
Two decades of imprisonment described by a dissident.

THE BOOK OF INTIMATE GRAMMAR
By David Grossman. Translated by Betsy Rosenberg. Riverhead, $13.
A novel about an Israeli boy who really won't grow up.

BREATH, EYES, MEMORY
By Edwidge Danticat. Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
Fiction about a young Haitian girl sent to America.

CAL
By Bernard Mac Laverty. Norton, $11.
A novel about a young, unwilling I.R.A. accomplice.

THE CATCHER WAS A SPY: The Mysterious Life
of Moe Berg
By Nicholas Dawidoff. Vintage, $13.
How a former baseball player became a secret agent.

CHINA WAKES
By Nicholas D. Kristof and Sheryl WuDunn.
Vintage, $14.
A study of a nation ruled by individuals, not by law.

THE COLLECTED STORIES
By Grace Paley.
Noonday/Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $14.
Forty-five works from a long and distinguished career.

THE CONFIRMATION MESS
By Stephen L. Carter. Basic Books, $12.
How to make the Federal appointments process fairer.

DAISY BATES IN THE DESERT
By Julia Blackburn. Vintage Departures, $12.
The biography of an Irish self-taught anthropologist who lived among Australian
aborigines.

D-DAY, JUNE 6, 1944: The Climactic Battle of World War II
By Stephen E. Ambrose.
Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $16.
The strategy behind the bloody victory at Normandy.

DICTATORSHIP OF VIRTUE: How the Battle Over
Multiculturalism Is Reshaping Our Schools,
Our Country, and Our Lives
By Richard Bernstein. Vintage, $13.
Has diversity become its own worst enemy?

THE DOWNING STREET YEARS
By Margaret Thatcher. Harper Perennial, $16.
A British Prime Minister's prime moments.

EATING PAVLOVA
By D. M. Thomas. Carroll & Graf, $10.95.
What Freud might have said if he'd done a memoir.

ELIZABETH BISHOP: Life and the Memory of It
By Brett C. Millier. University of California, $16.95.
A biography celebrating the most private of poets.

EXTRA INNINGS: A Memoir
By Doris Grumbach. Norton, $12.
Acerbic observations on the world and old age.

THE FAMILY HEART: A Memoir of When Our Son Came Out
By Robb Forman Dew. Ballantine, $11.
A novelist's reaction to her son's homosexuality.

FATHERALONG: A Meditation on Fathers and Sons,
Race and Society
By John Edgar Wideman. Vintage, $12.
A black author's relations with the men in his family.

A FISH IN THE WATER: A Memoir
By Mario Vargas Llosa. Translated by Helen Lane. Penguin, $14.95.
The Peruvian author's early life and presidential run.

GAY NEW YORK: Gender, Urban Culture, and the
Making of the Gay Male World, 1890-1940
By George Chauncey. Basic Books, $15.
How homosexual men created their own milieu.

THE GOOD HUSBAND
By Gail Godwin. Ballantine, $12.
A novel about a dying woman and her stoic mate.

HARRIET BEECHER STOWE: A Life
By Joan D. Hedrick. Oxford University, $15.95.
A Pulitzer Prize-winning study of a crusading author.

HOUSE OF SPLENDID ISOLATION
By Edna O'Brien. Plume, $10.95.
Fiction about an I.R.A. terrorist and his hostage.

THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG
By J. M. Coetzee. Penguin, $10.95.
A novel whose hero is none other than Dostoyevsky.

IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War
By Tobias Wolff. Vintage, $12.
The author on his sad and bitter tour in Vietnam.

IN THE LAKE OF THE WOODS
By Tim O'Brien. Penguin, $10.95.
A novel about a Vietnam veteran's flight from his past.

IN THE TENNESSEE COUNTRY
By Peter Taylor. Picador USA, $10.
The author's last novel, about a family's secrets.

A JOURNEY THROUGH ECONOMIC TIME: A Firsthand View
By John Kenneth Galbraith. Houghton Mifflin, $11.95.
Observations on events and their economic effects.

LAST TRAIN TO MEMPHIS: The Rise of Elvis Presley
By Peter Guralnick. Back Bay/Little, Brown, $14.95.
The singer's early years as a humble country boy.

LONG WALK TO FREEDOM: The Autobiography
of Nelson Mandela
By Nelson Mandela. Back Bay/Little, Brown, $13.95.
From imprisoned dissident to South African President.

LOUISA MAY ALCOTT: A Modern Biography
By Martha Saxton.
Noonday/Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $15.
There was much more to her than "Little Women."

MANDATE OF HEAVEN: The Legacy of Tiananmen Square and the Next Generation of
China's Leaders
By Orville Schell. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $14.
Odd alliances between entrepreneurs and autocrats.

A MAP OF THE WORLD
By Jane Hamilton. Anchor/Doubleday, $12.
A novel about a woman, rural life and betrayal.

MEA CUBA
By Guillermo Cabrera Infante.
Translated by Kenneth Hall with the author.
Noonday/Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $15.
Essays on the Castro regime by a Cuban expatriate.

THE MORAL ANIMAL: Evolutionary Psychology
and Everyday Life
By Robert Wright. Vintage, $14.
Why ethical behavior is really in our genes.

A NEW WORLD: An Epic of Colonial America From the Founding of Jamestown to the
Fall of Quebec
By Arthur Quinn. Berkley, $15.
How nasty, brutish and short were our ancestors' lives.

9 HIGHLAND ROAD
By Michael Winerip. Vintage, $13.
Life inside a group home for the mentally ill.

NO ORDINARY TIME. Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt: The Home Front in World War II

By Doris Kearns Goodwin.
Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $16.
A Pulitzer Prize-winning study of unusual partners.

NONE TO ACCOMPANY ME
By Nadine Gordimer. Penguin, $11.95.
Fiction about a lawyer in post-apartheid South Africa.

OF LONG MEMORY: Mississippi and the Murder
of Medgar Evers.
By Adam Nossiter. Addison-Wesley, $12.
A killing that galvanized the civil rights movement.

ON THE EDGE: The Clinton Presidency
By Elizabeth Drew. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $14.
How the White House's egalitarianism has gone awry.

ONCE UPON A TIME: A Floating Opera
By John Barth. Back Bay/Little, Brown, $12.95.
An autobiography-cum-novel with chronological twists.

ONE ART: Letters
By Elizabeth Bishop. Selected and edited by Robert Giroux. Noonday/Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $16.
More than 500 examples of the poet's correspondence.

ONE OF US: Richard Nixon and the American Dream
By Tom Wicker. Random House, $16.
New thoughts on the embattled former President.

ONE TRUE THING
By Anna Quindlen. Dell, $6.99.
A novel about a journalist and her dying mother.

RAISING THE DEAD
By Richard Selzer. Penguin, $9.95.
A former surgeon's own brush with mortality.

RARE & ENDANGERED SPECIES: A Novella & Stories
By Richard Bausch. Vintage Contemporaries, $12.
Games of the heart, played at home and among family.

ROALD DAHL: A Biography
By Jeremy Treglown. Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $13.
Why the author who wrote for children acted like one.

ROOMMATES: My Grandfather's Story
By Max Apple. Warner, $5.99.
A memoir of an irascible but loyal patriarch.

SEX IN AMERICA: A Definitive Survey
By Robert T. Michael, John H. Gagnon, Edward O. Laumann and Gina Kolata. Warner,
$12.99.
What you and your neighbors do -- and don't do.

SEXUAL VIOLENCE: Our War Against Rape
By Linda A. Fairstein. Berkley, $14.
A prosecutor's perspective on a familiar crime.

THE SHADOW OF THE PANTHER: Huey Newton
and the Price of Black Power in America
By Hugh Pearson. Addison-Wesley, $14.
A portrait of a brilliant strategist and ruthless killer.

SHELTER
By Jayne Anne Phillips. Delta, $11.95.
A novel of innocence lost in West Virginia, 1963.

SHOT IN THE HEART
By Mikal Gilmore. Anchor/Doubleday, $14.95.
The youngest brother of an executed felon reflects on the family heritage of
rage and violence.

SMALL WORLD: An Academic Romance
By David Lodge. Penguin, $10.95.
A satire about the quest for an endowed faculty chair.

SNOW FALLING ON CEDARS
By David Guterson. Vintage Contemporaries, $12.
A novel about a Japanese-American on trial in 1954.

A SON OF THE CIRCUS
By John Irving. Ballantine, $7.99.
Fiction about the secret life of an Indian surgeon.

SPEAK NOW AGAINST THE DAY: The Generation Before
the Civil Rights Movement in the South
By John Egerton. Chapel Hill Books/University of North Carolina, $18.95.
Paying tribute to the men and women who first challenged bigotry.

STRANGE JUSTICE: The Selling of Clarence Thomas
By Jane Mayer and Jill Abramson. Plume, $12.95.
How he won, and why Anita Hill was telling the truth.

TRUE NORTH: A Memoir
By Jill Ker Conway. Vintage, $12.
The author recounts her adventures in academia.

TURMOIL AND TRIUMPH: My Years as Secretary of State
By George P. Shultz.
Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $20.
A memoir of the Reagan era, told by a loyalist.

VOYAGE TO THE GREAT ATTRACTOR: Exploring
Intergalactic Space
By Alan Dressler. Vintage, $13.
The long and bumpy route to a new cosmology.

THE WATERWORKS
By E. L. Doctorow. Signet, $6.99.
Part mystery, part Oedipal drama, set in old New York.

A WAY IN THE WORLD
By V. S. Naipaul. Vintage International, $13.
A novel about colonialism and its consequences.

THE WESTERN CANON: The Books and School of the Ages
By Harold Bloom. Riverhead, $15.
The author's view of what ought to endure in academe.

WHAT I LIVED FOR
By Joyce Carol Oates.
William Abrahams/Plume, $14.95.
A novel about an Irish-American businessman's search for the meaning behind two
deaths.

WHO WE ARE: A Portrait of America Based on
the Latest U.S. Census
By Sam Roberts. Times Books/Random House, $13.
What the data say about us and our country.

WHO WILL RUN THE FROG HOSPITAL?
By Lorrie Moore. Warner, $11.99.
Fiction about an adolescent friendship remembered.

A WHOLE NEW LIFE: An Illness and a Healing
By Reynolds Price. Plume, $10.95.
The novelist's triumph over spinal cancer.

WINCHELL: Gossip, Power and the Culture of Celebrity
By Neal Gabler. Vintage, $16.
A portrait of the founding father of tabloid journalism.

WOMEN AND GHOSTS
By Alison Lurie. Avon, $9.
Spooky tales of spirits, some dead, some not.   LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD-CLASS SHOPPING: TOKYO;
Along Ginza Street, 'Just Looking' Is Safest

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF;    NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF is head of the Tokyo
bureau of The Times.

SECTION: Section 5;   Page 12;   Column 3;   Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1129 words


AS customers bearing overflowing shopping bags bustled through shop doors in the
twilight, Christmas decorations twinkling in the windows and the strains of
"Hark! the Herald Angels Sing" emanating from a music store, Ginza Street seemed
like a fine place to buy some presents for friends. So the other day I walked
with my 3-year-old son, Gregory, down this famous street that cuts through the
heart of commercial Tokyo and the soul of Japanese shopping. I bought everything
that I felt an impulse to buy, and I spent -- but no, I'm getting ahead of my
story.

I live in Tokyo, but the visiting shopper would want to stay at the Hotel Seiyo
on the East End of the Ginza. The Seiyo is a small hotel with a luxurious
ambiance -- I stepped around a Rolls-Royce to enter the main door -- where the
bathrooms have televisions and the suites have mini-saunas. Rooms start at $480
a night; a top suite is $2,800 a night. The Seiyo's lounge is also a cozy place
to rest after a shopping spree, and relatively speaking it's a bargain: a coffee
is $12.

I started off my excursion on the West End of Ginza Street, at Familia
children's store. Like nearly all the buildings on the milelong street, it is
new, because almost the entire area was destroyed by bombing in World War II. As
a result, the sidewalks are unusually spacious, with room for the streams of
passers-by and a few displays that spill out from the adjacent stores. But don't
expect okonomiyaki pastries, Japan's answer to pizza, or other street food; that
would be declasse. It is considered rude to stroll and munch.

The Ginza area itself was originally part of Tokyo Bay, but in the early 1600's
a work force of 10,000 men filled it in with earth. Then in 1612 the silver mint
-- or Ginza -- was situated on the reclaimed land, and shops and restaurants
sprang up around it. It became one of the liveliest areas of Japan, and in the
1870's Ginza Street was the first in Japan to be paved and to get sidewalks.
There was even an expression, ginbura, meaning to amble along the Ginza.

Gregory did not really amble into the children's store -- he seemed shot from a
cannon -- but I ginbura'd behind him. As he played with other children in a gray
spaceship in the middle of the floor, I looked at the merchandise. Nice gray
overcoat, with a hood, perfect for a boy or girl. Price, $300. A beautiful music
box playing Christmas carols, with "Santa's Musical Workshop" inscribed on it,
$380.

With Gregory in tow, I headed past the barber shop -- kids' haircuts, $50 -- to
the toy shop on the fourth floor. It was decorated with children's drawings of
Snoopy, and kids were sprawled on the floor playing with train sets. Gregory
quickly spotted a nifty wooden fire engine a bit more than a foot long, with an
adjustable ladder. I picked it up and noted how smoothly the wheels turned. What
a great Christmas present for Gregory! But it was $245.

We continued down Ginza Street, pausing to admire a nice pair of brown loafers
in the window of a shoe shop. The heel is coming off one of my brown shoes, so
I'm in the market. "They're Italian-made from calfskin, with an antique finish,"
the salesman explained. They run $830 a pair, so I'm still in the market.

Next stop was Tokyo Kyukyodo, a narrow brick building that, based on tax
assessments, is built on the single most expensive piece of real estate in
Japan, perhaps the world. We pushed through the crowd of customers on the ground
floor who were buying Christmas cards, postcards and wrapping paper (gorgeous
designs at $18 for a sheet 3 feet by 2 feet). The vast majority of Japanese are
not Christians, of course, but they are holiday opportunists who have seized
upon Halloween and Valentine's Day as well as Christmas to brighten the year.
Christmas trees, at $400 each, are not a big item in Tokyo, but stores turn to
Christmas decorations to give people one more reason to spend.

Kyukyodo has plenty of traditional Japanese items. I admired a nice calligraphy
brush perfect for practicing my Japanese writing, but it was priced at $4,500.
For those with fine noses, the store sells fragrant bits of wood, like
sandalwood. One palm-sized bit of broken kyara, a particularly aromatic wood
from Vietnam, was $1,100. Where I'm from, in northwestern Oregon, you can buy an
acre of land for that.

At the main intersection of Ginza Street, where it meets Harumi Street, are
several of Japan's most famous department stores. We entered Wako, one of the
most elegant, and wandered over to the watch counter. A nice $27,000 Credor
wristwatch, made by Seiko, caught my eye. It had a bracelet of white gold, with
diamonds on the watch face. The salesman, as in all the Ginza stores, was a
paragon of courtesy and helpfulness -- in the morning when the stores open, all
the employees come to the door and bow to waiting customers -- but few sales
clerks speak much English.

"Daddy, I'm hungry," Gregory announced testily as we moved on, and I glanced at
the menu of L'Ecrin, a French restaurant. The special lunch menu was $150. So I
dragged Gregory a few stores on to Mikimoto, the legendary Japanese pearl
merchant. Mikimoto was bustling with customers, but we found a counter with a
nice pearl choker of huge pearls, one strand, that would have looked gorgeous on
my wife. It was $120,000.

Gregory needed a bathroom, and so we used Mikimoto's; no diamonds on the
faucets, but very clean and comfortable.

ACROSS the street, the Mitsukoshi Department Store beckoned. It was decorated
along its length with Christmas trees and bells and lights, and a six-story sign
complete with shooting stars welcomed me in English: "1995 Merry Christmas at
Mitsukoshi." The store's food area in the basement is a dream, with counters
offering Godiva chocolates, Harrod's teas (protected by $600 Paddington bears),
Maxim's cakes and oodles of traditional Japanese pastries, or okashi. I admired
some perfect apples, at $15 each, and gazed at two musk melons boxed like a work
of art. The pair were $300.

Gregory was impatient. "Daddy, I'm very hungry," he announced. "Very, very
hungry." I looked around in desperation.

Ginza Street does offer some reasonably priced items. I've quoted some of the
most outlandish prices, but I had also seen and been tempted to buy a $5 toy car
in the Familia children's store. A Peter Rabbit key chain that doubles as a
flashlight was $7, and the Sapporo Beer Hall a few doors down offers a bowl of
noodles with two pieces of sushi for $10. Just in time to redeem myself as a
father, I spotted a representative of the more reasonable side of Ginza Street:
a Haagen Dazs ice cream shop. Gregory pointed to an ice cream sandwich, and it
was his for $2.50. So that is how I shopped on Ginza Street and spent a total of
$2.50.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Out-of-this-world fruit: A pair of musk melons can cost $300.
(Kaku Kurita for The New York Times) (pg. 12); Mitsukoshi Department Store,
decorated for Christmas. (Kaku Kurita for The New York Times) (pg. 35)

Map of Tokyo. (pg. 12)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE THINGS THEY LEAVE BEHIND

SECTION: Section 6;   Page 26;   Column 4;   Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 77 words


The experience of seeing the artifacts left at the Vietnam Memorial is almost as
moving as seeing the Wall itself ("The Things They Leave Behind," Nov. 12). In
1992, I also had the experience of seeing an exhibition of many of these
artifacts at the Smithsonian. However, the most heartbreaking thing I ever saw
at the Wall was a note that said it all in three short lines:

To Hobie Baldwin
Killed, 1968
Died, 1984

RICHARD H. ROSICHAN
Miami Beach

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Welcome Mat Is Wearing Thin for G.I.'s in Asia

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 14;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2075 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Dec. 2


Half a century after American troops waded ashore on Japan and liberated Korea,
a growing number of people are suggesting that it is time they left.

There appears to be the beginning of a broad debate about whether the United
States still needs nearly 100,000 troops based in Japan and South Korea.

It is not that college students are marching about chanting "Yankee imperialists
go home," as they did in the 1960's. Rather, people are simply asking aloud who
the enemy is in the post-cold-war world. And they are chafing at the crimes by
American soldiers, the cost of their presence, even the noise of the fighter
jets zooming overhead.

Some Japanese, Koreans and Americans alike worry that a far-reaching dynamic is
under way that may lead to a dramatic reduction in the United States troop
presence in Asia. They fear that this would be a disaster for the region,
setting off an arms race and major new wars that might ultimately involve the
United States.

The starting point for a growing number of Japanese and South Koreans is that in
security relations the United States has too good a deal.

"We've been yes-men, a yes-country," said Lee Chul, a member of the opposition
in the National Assembly in South Korea. "It's about time that the U.S. listened
to the voices of the South Korean Government and the South Korean people."

In Japan, the irritations were evident in a recent magazine headline that said
the recent rape of an Okinawa schoolgirl, in which three American servicemen
were charged, proved "Japan Is Still a Colony." The magazine added that "in the
face of such humiliation" Japan should not increase its payments for the
American troop presence.

American critics of the bases agree that security relations are unfair, but in a
different way. They protest that it is unjust that the United States not only
provides troops who risk their lives for Japan and South Korea, but also pays
tens of billions of dollars for the privilege.

To be sure, most Japanese, South Korean and American officials alike want to
keep a presence by American troops. The United States now has 37,000 troops in
South Korea and nearly 47,000 in Japan, plus 13,000 sailors whose home port is
in Japan.

"The importance to East Asia, to the Asia-Pacific region, and to the entire
world of a continued U.S. presence here, and the continuation of the strong
security relationship between the United States and Japan, can scarcely be
overstated," Vice President Al Gore said during a visit to Japan last month.

Yet a growing self-confidence and nationalism in Asia are leading to demands
that the United States adjust its presence in ways that it may find difficult to
accept. Some South Koreans are demanding that American military personnel pay
Korean taxes. Americans, however, have trouble understanding why they should
send their soldiers to Korea, pay most of the bill and then pay again in the
form of taxes.

Lessons of Manila Haunt Seoul and Tokyo

In the back of everyone's mind is the memory of what happened in the Philippines
a few years ago.

The United States wanted to keep Subic Naval Base and Clark Air Field. But
negotiations between the United States and the Philippines broke into bickering
over minor matters, and rising nationalism led to a vote in the Philippines'
Senate to evict the American bases. So in 1992, the United States closed Subic
and Clark.

Very few people expect that to happen in Japan or South Korea, but many will not
rule out the possibility either.

"There is a trend, both within Japan and in the United States, with the end of
the cold war, with budget cutbacks, with a younger generation of Americans and
Japanese, that the necessity of having 47,000 troops stationed in Japan is
seeming less and less viable in both countries," said Glen S. Fukushima, a
former American trade official who is now a business executive in Tokyo.

Mr. Fukushima said that the most likely scenario is that public support will
decline but that elites in both countries will continue to support the
Japanese-American security alliance and that most American troops will remain in
Japan.

Concerns about criticism of the American bases was one of the reasons that
President Clinton planned a state visit to Japan -- now postponed until sometime
next year -- to reaffirm the security relationship.

Japanese and South Korean leaders have been reluctant to come out in the same
way and build support for American bases, perhaps because they do not want to be
seen as being on the wrong side of a delicate nationalistic issue. As a result,
the perception among ordinary Japanese and South Koreans is that it is really
the United States that is pushing for the military presence.

"Japanese leaders have not really explained things to the people," said Yukio
Okamoto, a former diplomat who runs a consulting firm in Tokyo. He noted that
President Clinton had urged support for the security alliance in a television
interview broadcast to Japan a few days ago, and he added, referring to Prime
Minister Tomiichi Murayama, "President Clinton was doing the job that Murayama
should have been doing, and that's a shame."

A recent poll in the Sankei Shimbun, a Japanese newspaper, found that only 5
percent of those surveyed said they believed that the American bases are
primarily for Japan's benefit. About 46 percent said they are in Japan primarily
for the benefit of the United States. Most of the rest say the bases benefit
both countries.

<HB >An Old Refrain: Yankees Go Home

The irritation at the American bases is not ideological as it was in the 1960's,
when university students dabbled in Marxism and waved their fists at American
troops and their involvement in the Vietnam War. Now the opposition is less
deep, but polls suggest it is broader.

The Sankei Shimbun poll suggested that 44 percent of Japanese favored the
withdrawal of American troops. Only 31 percent favored a continued American
military presence.

A poll by another newspaper, the Asahi Shimbun, found that 76 percent of
Japanese say they believe that American bases on the island of Okinawa should be
reduced gradually.

When the Liberal Democratic Party, Japan's largest party, was choosing a leader
in September, one of the two candidates even said in a television debate that
American bases were no longer essential. That candidate, Junichiro Koizumi, said
the problem was that the United States was asking Japan to pay more of the costs
of maintaining the troops.

"Japan has been paying as much as it can," Mr. Koizumi said. "If the United
States cannot bear the stationing costs of the U.S. forces in Japan, then we
will have to ask them to reduce military personnel and bases."

Mr. Koizumi lost the race, but the winner -- Ryutaro Hashimoto, the Trade
Minister and a strong contender to become the next Prime Minister -- also has a
reputation as a nationalistic and assertive leader. Mr. Hashimoto has endorsed
the American troop presence, but not in ringing terms.

In both South Korea and Japan, part of the yearning for change is the result of
a generational shift and a desire for greater national dignity.

"The Korean War generation is dying out, and 70 percent of Koreans were born
after the war," said Lee Young Duk, an editor at Chosun Ilbo, a major Seoul
newspaper. "We have a more stable economy as well, and so we're talking about
matters of pride. There are more voices calling for an increasingly equal
relationship with America."

Shin Myung Soon, a professor of political science at Yonsei University in Seoul,
said: "Koreans are beginning to think that we can do what we want. People don't
see North Korea as such a lethal threat, so they don't feel so dependent on the
U.S. presence."

Rape Has Become A Foreign Policy Issue

The demands for adjusting the American military presence take many forms. There
are periodic calls to move American bases out of populated areas -- one base is
in Seoul, and Naha, the Okinawa capital, is an American military port.

In addition, South Koreans and Japanese complain about crimes by American
military personnel. The latest outcry in Japan against the bases was set off by
the rape of a 12-year-old girl, in which three American servicemen are charged.

All three servicemen have pleaded guilty to conspiracy to abduct and rape the
girl, although only one has admitted to forcibly having sex with her.

Many Japanese and Koreans demand that Americans suspected of crimes be handed
over immediately to face local justice. But to Americans, local justice
sometimes seems like an oxymoron.

There are no jury trials in either Japan or South Korea, and police
interrogators are often accused of using harsh methods of questioning to induce
confessions. Nonetheless, the United States agreed recently to consider handing
over troops suspected of rape or murder in Japan, and a similar agreement --
with some procedural protections for Americans -- is being negotiated in South
Korea.

At present, American military personnel are handed over to local authorities in
Japan upon indictment of a crime and in South Korean upon conviction.

Resentment at the PX: Cheap Cars and TV's

Some South Koreans complain that American military people can import duty-free
household goods, and that the United States military does not pay rent for the
land it uses. But any changes in those policies would add to the American cost
of keeping soldiers in South Korea.

By official calculations the United States already pays 88 percent of the costs
of the American presence in Korea. As for Japan, Tokyo claims to pay 70 percent
of the costs of the American forces in Japan, but that calculation excludes the
troops' salaries; when salaries are included, Japan's share drops to half.

The Pentagon justifies the bases in Japan by saying it is cheaper to base troops
here than to keep them in the United States. But much depends on how the figures
are calculated, and the Cato Institute in Washington figures that the United
States pays vast amounts -- about $40 billion a year -- to keep troops in Asia.

Americans sometimes complain that Japan is cutting its own armed forces at the
same time that it is asking the United States to keep troops in the region. Just
a few days ago, the Japanese Cabinet approved a far-reaching plan calling for a
20 percent cut in the ceiling of troops in the Japanese military.

Congress has supported the cost of maintaining 100,000 American troops in the
region. But there are some rumblings of discontent from the United States, based
in part on the expense involved.

"The existing U.S.-Japanese security relationship is simply not sustainable in
the long term," declares a report issued last month by the Cato Institute.

In the United States, a recent poll found that 7 percent of those surveyed
favored an immediate withdrawal from American bases in Japan, while another 49
percent supported a gradual withdrawal.

American Troops As Cops of Asia

Yet the Pentagon and almost all countries in Asia fervently want the American
bases to remain. One danger of an American pullout they cite is that North Korea
or China might become militarily adventurous -- an invasion by China of Taiwan,
for example, would send shock waves through all of Asia.

Walter F. Mondale, the American Ambassador in Tokyo, was anything but hawkish as
a politician. But now he argues vigorously for maintaining American bases in
Asia.

"Asia does not have a NATO-type security alliance, and none seems to be possible
for some time," Mr. Mondale said. "So the real basis for stability in this
crucial and historically unstable region is the U.S.-Japan alliance, which
provides for the defense of Japan and permits us to forward deploy our forces."

Mr. Mondale says the bases are so widely viewed as essential that ways will be
found to maintain them. He sees little chance of a scenario like the one that
unfolded in the Philippines, leading to a major cutback.

The other argument often made for the bases is that they not only protect Japan,
but also protect against Japan. The idea is that if the United States withdrew
its troops, Japan would rearm and perhaps even acquire nuclear weapons.

Such a development would horrify almost everybody in Asia. The former Singapore
leader, Lee Kuan Yew, expressed the concern when he warned that allowing Japan
to send troops abroad would be "like giving a chocolate liqueur to an
alcoholic."

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: U.S. helicopters and transport planes are parked in the back
yard of this residential neighborhood in Ginowan City, Okinawa. Japan and South
Korea are debating the presence of American troops in their countries. (Asahi
Shimbun for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NEDDIEST CASES;
Government Safety Net Cut, Charities Turn to the Public

BYLINE: By SARAH JAY

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 49;  Column 4;  Metropolitan Desk;  Second Front

LENGTH: 1831 words


A meals-on-wheels program has lost a New York City grant that paid for nursing
visits to the homebound elderly. A social service program has lost city and
state money that paid a social worker to visit six day-care centers, looking for
signs of child abuse and neglect. A rent assistance program whose Federal
financing ran out in September is able to help those who face eviction within 72
hours, but no one else.

Government efforts to overhaul poverty programs and balance budgets have eroded
the resources of the charities whose programs provide a safety net for needy
people, heads of New York City charities say.

"The amount of money coming into those programs is down, and down
significantly," said the Rev. Kevin Sullivan, chief executive of Catholic
Charities of the Archdiocese of New York, which supports a network of
social-welfare agencies and services throughout the region, from hospitals to
food pantries. He predicted further cutbacks.

"All the people we see, we help," said Norma Martin, assistant director of the
Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service. "But when we try to put together a package
of services for them, they may have to wait a long time or they don't get the
service, because of the funding cuts."

From Father Sullivan's organization, which receives 15 percent of its revenue
from government sources, to the Brooklyn Bureau, which depends on government
grants and fees for 80 percent of revenues, private charities and the government
are locked in a tango of financial give-and-take. Government aid to charities is
a kind of contracting out for services the government is unable or unwilling to
do itself. As government support dries up, the charities must devise new ways to
fulfill their missions.

The bureau and Catholic Charities are among the seven nonprofit organizations
supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, whose 84th appeal began
last Sunday.

The Independent Sector, a coalition of nonprofit foundations and charities,
estimates that charitable organizations nationwide depend on the government for
about 29 percent of their income. An additional 18 percent comes from private
contributions, and the remainder from endowment funds and fees charged for their
services.

The city's charities have been coping by reducing some services, eliminating
others and searching for new sources of money. They are retrenching across the
city:

*The Community Service Society had to revise its criteria for accepting people
into its eviction counseling program in October, after $21,880 in financing from
the Federal Emergency Management Agency ran out. The program, which helps about
nine people a month, once had a "first-come, first-served" policy, but now
accepts only people within 72 hours of eviction. The program subsists on
endowment funds from the society and Neediest Cases donations.

*A program that provided nursing visits and hot meals to homebound elderly
Hispanic residents of Jackson Heights, Queens, lost a city grant of $40,000. The
hot meals part of the program, administered through the Catholic Charities,
Diocese of Brooklyn and Queens, was saved by creative budgeting -- money was
borrowed from a Department for the Aging grant. But the nurse has been let go.
And the 40 elderly people served earlier this year will be winnowed down to 25
by June. For now, Bernardo Lopez, a 78-year-old with diabetes and Parkinson's
disease who has received the visits for the last several months, can count on a
hot meal, though he no longer receives blood pressure checks and medical advice.

*The Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service has lost a $50,000 grant that included
money for one social worker to make regular visits to six day-care centers for
low-income families. The money came from the city and the state and provided for
the social worker to watch for signs of abuse or neglect and coach the day-care
staff on how to counsel and support troubled parents.

*The Settling In program, another service of the Brooklyn Bureau, closed when
the city's Department of Homeless Services eliminated its $325,000 grant. Since
1989, the program has helped 471 formerly homeless families adjust to new
housing arrangements. Few families, if any, have returned to the streets.

*A homemaker service run by the Children's Aid Society lost city, state and
Federal money and had to drop one social worker, forcing the two who remain to
double their caseloads to 30 families each.

Even as charities are losing support and scrambling just to keep the same level
of service to the poor, officials predict that the number of people seeking help
will swell.

This is partly because they expect a grueling winter. Cold weather has begun
early -- city shelters are already near capacity -- and charities expect greater
demand for basic necessities.

"We are prepared to buy more food, buy more winter coats, give out more
certificates for shoes, because we know that people are going to need the
basics," said Philip Coltoff, executive director of the Children's Aid Society.

Some people, like Albert M., a 53-year-old Vietnam veteran who lives in Harlem,
will lose benefits through bureaucratic snags as the welfare system is
overhauled and turn to charities for temporary help.

Albert M. picked up a $176 assistance check in October and discovered that the
city was cutting him off from Home Relief, the welfare program for single
adults, because he had not yet been electronically fingerprinted, a new city
requirement aimed at reducing fraud. Mr. M. said he had never been informed of
the new rule. When he lost his benefits, he could not pay his rent and had to
move to a shelter.

"I'm all mixed up," said Mr. M., a food pantry volunteer. "I got laid off. I'm
looking for a job, and they told me they would assist me. But they're cutting me
off."

Mr. M. got advice and financial aid from a benefits counseling service run by
the Community Service Society. Last week, he won his appeal and should soon
regain his benefits. "And in the interim, we'll be helping him," said his social
worker at the Community Service Society, Jacqueline Pitts.

Agencies like the Community Service Society are counting on increased individual
and corporate giving. Mr. Coltoff of the Children's Aid Society said that as
this year's season of giving approached, donations seemed to be picking up.
"People are understanding that agencies such as ours are going to be the front
line of defense," he said. But some smaller organizations like Catholic
Charities in Brooklyn and Queens said they had not seen a notable increase.

"Nonprofits feel somewhat beleaguered," said Ann Kaplan, research director at
the American Association for Fund-Raising Counsel. "If nonprofits lose other
sources of revenue, their capacity to function could be challenged."

While some charity officials said they were emphasizing fund raising more than
in years past, others were doubtful that they could make up for lost government
support.

"As public funds get reduced more and more each year, it's going to be harder
and harder to make up for those funds," Mr. Coltoff said. "It's very, very hard
to find new dollars, and to establish new programs, when you're constantly
trying to fill these gaps."

OVERVIEW

The Neediest Cases
Every winter since 1912, The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund has raised money
from readers of The Times on behalf of the city's poor, sick, aging and
disabled. It distributes all money raised to seven of the city's oldest and
largest charities. Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund
should be sent to P.O. Box 5193, General Post Office, New York, N.Y. 10087, or
any of these organizations:

BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE
285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217
Founded: 1866
A nonsectarian agency serving families, children and disabled adults in Brooklyn
with an emphasis on rehabilitation, job training and prevention of child abuse
and neglect. A typical program, Work Stations in Industry, provides disabled
adults with supervised job training at private businesses.

CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK
1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022
Founded: 1917
An agency that coordinates and supervises all charitable activities of the Roman
Catholic Archdiocese of New York through its own programs and its support of a
network of hospitals, homes for the elderly, child-care agencies, community
centers, mental-health centers, immigrant and refugee centers and other
services.

CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS
191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201
Founded: 1899
An agency that coordinates and supervises charitable activities for the Roman
Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn, which comprises Brooklyn and Queens. Priorities
include services for children, the mentally ill, the aging and the disabled.
Among its many programs are job training for teen-agers, prison ministry and
day-care centers.

CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY
105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010
Founded: 1853
Organized to care for New York City's orphans, the society now helps more than
100,000 children a year. Its services include foster care and adoption programs,
health care clinics, after-school programs, transitional housing for homeless
families and classes to teach single mothers how to be better parents.

COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK
105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010
Founded: 1939
An organization that provides housing, health care, education and emergency help
to needy New Yorkers. It also emphasizes social research and education,
preparing and disseminating reports on the state of poverty in the city. It
offers training and support to community groups and registers thousands of new
voters each year.

FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES
281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010
Founded: 1922
An umbrella organization for about 250 health and welfare agencies and churches
in the New York metropolitan area. It helps member agencies improve and expand
their services, and develops and implements public-policy initiatives at the
national, state and local levels on behalf of the poor.

UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK
130 East 59th Street, Room 427, New York, N.Y. 10022
Founded: 1986
An organization formed by the merger of two older agencies, the Federation of
Jewish Philanthropies and United Jewish Appeal. It provides many services,
particularly for immigrant Jews, including child care, job training, and medical
and geriatric care. It supports educational programs, summer camps and youth
trips to Israel.

No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York
Times Neediest Cases Fund. The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all
contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services
and cash assistance to the poor. Contributions to the fund are deductible on
Federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A man with one of his three children at a shelter run by the
Children's Aid Society in the Pelham Fritz Apartments in East Harlem. The
society has lost city, state and Federal aid.; Albert M., center, who was left
homeless when he lost his relief check to bureaucracy, helps at a food pantry at
the Church of St. Paul and St. Andrew on West 86th Street. (Suzanne DeChillo/The
New York Times); A nurse no longer visits Bernardo Lopez, 78, in Jackson
Heights, Queens, who has diabetes and Parkinson's disease. The Catholic
Charities program had to cut its nurse. (Monica Almeida/The New York Times)

Chart: "THE TOTALS: Decade of Giving" lists donations to Neediest Cases Fund and
Number of donors.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Notable Books of the Year 1995

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 64;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 10243 words


This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas Books issue
of December 1994. The list suggests only high points in the main fields of
reader interest, and does not include titles chosen by the editors of the Book
Review as the Best Books of 1995. Books are arranged alphabetically under
subject headings. Biographies and memoirs of people known for their
contributions in fields other than literature and history are listed in
appropriate categories.

Art, Music & Popular Culture

ALFRED STIEGLIZ: A Biography. By Richard Whelan. (Little, Brown, $29.95.) A
meticulously documented life of the pioneering American art photographer, who
campaigned to bring culture to the philistine public.

*THE ART AND ARCHITECTURE OF ISLAM, 1250-1800. By Sheila S. Blair and Jonathan
M. Bloom. (Yale University, $65.) A bold, competent and fresh attempt to rewrite
the history of later Islamic art from scratch, with plenty of splendid color
illustrations and other useful graphics.

THE ART OF THE NEW YORKER, 1925-1995. By Lee Lorenz. (Knopf, $40.) Seventy years
of art, especially cartoons, at the fount of sophisticated magazine humor in the
United States.

BEAUTIFUL LOOT: The Soviet Plunder of Europe's Art treasures. By Konstantin
Akinsha and Grigorii Kozlov with Sylvia Hochfield. (Random House, $26.) The
story of how 2.5 million cultural objects were confiscated by the Russians at
the end of World War II and what happened to them told by two former Soviet
museum curators and an editor for Art news magazine.

BILLIE HOLIDAY. By Stuart Nicholson. (Northeastern University, $29.95.) A study
of the jazz singer's life and art that seeks to restore primacy of place to her
singing rather than the tragic persona that has enveloped her memory.

BUSTER KEATON: Cut to the Chase. By Marion Meade. (HarperCollins, $30.) A
attempt to find the humanity behind the Great Stone Face.

OSTUMES BY KARINSKA. By Toni Bentley. (Abrams, $60.) A lavishly illustrated
biography of Barbara Karinska, the master costumer of opera, drama, film and
most importantly, ballet, where she was a long-time collaborator with George
Balanchine.

EDWARD HOPPER: An Intimate Biography. By Gail Levin. (Knopf, $35.) Ms. Levin's
sixth book on Hopper only peripherally concerns Hopper's art; it's a nearly
flawless account of the life of a great American painter whose temperament,
especially in respect of his weirdly long-suffering and combative wife, was
simply abominable.

EMBLEMS OF MIND: The Inner Life of Music and Mathematics. By Edward Rothstein.
(Times Books/Random House, $25.) Sure they are alike, as everybody knows;
however, they are totally different! A New York Times critic schooled in both
explores paradoxes as old as Pythagoras.

FOLLOWING BALANCHINE. By Robert Garis. (Yale University, $30.) The author, a
dance and literary critic, reports on his obsession of a half-century: the
performances of Balanchine's dances, most at the New York City Ballet.

GARDENS OF REVELATION: Environments by Visionary Artists. By John Beardsley.
(Abbeville, $60.) An irresistible excursion by an art historian into the small
worlds created by (usually) untutored eccentrics, using junk, found objects,
concrete and their own obsessions to render things nobody has ever seen except
themselves.

I, FELLINI. By Charlotte Chandler. (Random House, $26.50.) The life and spirit
of the Italian film-maker come through vividly in a book created from the
transcripts of tape-recorded conversations held with the author over the last 13
years of his life.

IN AND OUT OF VOGUE. By Grace Mirabella with Judith Warner. (Doubleday, $25.)
The former editor of Vogue mixes high fashion and low dish is describing the
businesses of clothes and publishing over the last two decades.

IN THE ARENA: An Autobiography. By Charleton Heston. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.)
The actor reveals what it was like to be Moses, Ben-Hur, et. al.

JOHN SLOAN: Painter and Rebel. By John Loughery. (John Macrae/Holt, $37.50.) A
thoughtful, absorbing life of an illustrious member of "The Eight," artists who
rebelled against the stodgy academic standards of American art at the beginning
of this century.

*LES DEMOISELLES D'AVIGNON. By William Rubin, Helene Secket and Judith Cousins.
(Museum of Modern Art/ Abrams, $40.) A jargon-free study of Picasso's
masterpiece, the starting point for 20th-century art.

MASSINE: A Biography. By Vicente Garcia-Marquez. (Knopf, $35.) The first
biography of a choreographer who has unjustly fallen into obscurity.

*MOZART: A Life. By Maynard Solomon. (HarperCollins, $35.) A psychologically
informed and often brilliant analysis of Mozart (and his father) that
complicates rather than simplifies our understanding of Mozart. As it should

*NEW YORK 1960: Architecture and Urbanism Between the Second World War and the
Bicentennial. By Robert A. M. Stern, Thomas Mellins and David Fishman.
(Monacelli/ Penguin, $125.) A huge book that examines the city's development as
the world capital of finance and art, and the disputes and decisions that
directed it; with extensive local descriptions.

PLAYING WITH THE EDGE: The Photographic Achievement of Robert Mapplethorpe. By
Arthur C. Danto. (University of California, $24.95.) Mr. Danto, an art critic
and philosopher, cuts through sensationalism, to discuss the themes of sexuality
and revelation in Mapplethorpe's photographs.

PSYCHO: Behind the Scenes of the Classic Thriller. By Janet Leigh with
Christopher Nickens. (Harmony, $22.) The actress relates the background to the
most famous shower in movie history.

*THE RANSOM OF RUSSIAN ART. By John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) The
story of a Maryland economics professor who amassed the world's largest
collection of artworks by nonconformist Soviet artists.

*REVELATIONS: The Autobiography of Alvin Alley. By Alvin Ailey with A. Peter
Bailey. (Birch Lane/Carol, $18.95.) Completed from tapes made bef'ore the
choreographer's death, this frustratingly allusive memoir suggests the sources
for Ailey's dances.

*THE ROMANTIC GENERATION, by Charles Rosen. (Harvard University, $39.95.) A
professor and pianist offers a fond, accessible analysis of the works of
Schumann, Mendelssohn, Chopin and others during the period from 1827 to 1849.
Mr. Rosen furnishes musical illustrations on the accompanying compact disk.

*SEEING THE UNSEEN: Dr. Harold E. Edgerton and the Wonders of Strobe Alley.
Edited by Roger R. Bruce. (George Eastman House/MIT, $39.95.) Edgerton's amazing
work in high-speed photography; a CD-ROM comes with it.

*SHAKER BUILT: The Form and Function of Shaker Architecture. By Paul Rocheleau
and June Sprigg, edited and designed by David Larkin. (David Larkin/Monacelli
Press/ Penguin,. $50.) Sumptuous color photographs of Shaker buildings, taken
with care and devotion.

SINATRA! THE SONG IS YOU: A Singer's Art. By Will Friedwald. (Scribner, $30.) A
musical biography whose subject is not the life but the recordings, with
perceptive commentary from the author and enlightening reminiscences from
musicians who worked with Frank Sinatra.

A SONG IN THE DARK: The Birth of the Musical Film. By Richard Barrios. (Oxford
University, cloth, $45, paper, $21.95.) In a lively and well-researched survey
of the genre, the author documents how Hollywood stumbled its way to developing
some of its most successful movies.

WALKER EVANS: A Biography. By Belinda Rathbone. (Houghton Mifflin, $27.50.) The
first biography of the photographer whose pictures of sharecroppers became the
national image of the Depression.

*WHISTLER AND MONTESQUIOU: The Butterfly and the Bat. By Edgar Munhall. (Frick
Collection/Flammarion/ Abbeville, $45.) A profusely illustrated biographical
account of the encounter between the eccentric American painter and the foppish
French nobleman that resulted in one of Whistler's masterpieces.

WILLIAM MORRIS: A Life for Our Time. By Fiona MacCarthy. (Knopf, $45.) A witty,
shrewd, learned full-scale biography of the great 19th-century English designer
whose amazing versatility (propaganda was one of his skills) has always made his
center hard to find.


Biography, Autobiography & Memoir

A.D.: A Memoir. By Kate Millett. (Norton, $25.) The feminist writer and artist
recalls her beloved Aunt Dorothy, and the estrangement that lasted until the
older woman's death.

*ANAIS NIN: A Biography. By Deirdre Bair. (Putnam, $39.95.) An engaging account
that presents the diarist as even more self-absorbed than her work suggests.

AND WHEN DID YOU LAST SEE YOUR FATHER? By Blake Morrison. (Picador USA, $21.) An
English poet's perfectly persuasive memoir of his father, a man both overbearing
and engagingly quirky, whose death comes to the reader as a surprise.

*ANNA AKHMATOVA: Poet and Prophet. By Roberta Reeder. (St. Martin's, $35.) An
ambitious effort to synthesize the facts of the life and works of one of
Russia's greatest poets.

BARRY GOLDWATER. By Robert Alan Goldberg. (Yale University, $27.50.) A brisk and
admirable biography of the man who, three decades ago, sounded the themes echoed
by today's Republican Presidential candidates.

*BATTLING FOR PEACE: A Memoir. By Shimon Peres. (Random House, $25.) The Israeli
politican and leader reviews his long career, which parallels the history of the
nation.

*BEATRIX: The Gardening Life of Beatrix Jones Farrand, 1872-1959. By Jane Brown.
(Viking, $50.) A lavishly illustrated account of how a niece of Edith Wharton
became a great garden designer.

THE BLUE SUIT. By Richard Rayner. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A confessional,
chilling criminal memoir by a Cambridge-educated Englishman who says he swiped
12,000 books and much, much more, made invulnerable by his blue suit; at present
he lives in this country, so watch out.

THE BRONTES. By Juliet Barker. (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $35.) A whopping
compilation that aims to do justice to the whole family, dispelling its myth as
a caldron of cranks and loonies that squeezed out the occasional great novel
whenever the pressure got too high to bear.

*CAITLIN: The Life of Caftlin Thomas. By Paul Ferris. (Pimlico/Trafalgar Square,
paper, $16.95.) A biographer of Dylan Thomas now succeeds in bringing to
tempestous life a portrait of the poet's wife.

*CHARLOTTE BRONTE: A Passionate Life. By Lyndall Gordon. (Norton, $27.50.) An
engaging biography that connects the life and fiction persuasively, in
particular the relationship between Bronte and her publisher that gave rise to
"Villette," her other masterpiece.

CHURCHILL: The Unruly Giant. By Norman Rose. (Free Press, $25.) A biography that
looks for the feet of clay on the statesman and succeeds in finding them.

CHURCHILL'S GRAND ALLIANCE: The Anglo-American Special Relationship, 1940-57. By
John Charmley. (Harcourt Brace, $26.) Continuing the argument of his previous
book, "Churchill: The End of Glory," Mr. Charmley contends that Churchill made a
critical error in believing that Britain's ties to the United States would
protect its interests in the post-World War II world.

CITIZEN SHERMAN: A Life of William Tecumseh Sherman. By Michael Fellman. (Random
House, $30.) A psychological examination of the Civil War general finds the
origins of the ruthless martinet in his unhappy upbringing.

THE CITY OF FLORENCE: Historical Vistas and Personal Sightings. By R. W. B.
Lewis. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $27.50.) An autobiographical, anecdotal,
historical memoir, filled with love and learning, about a distinguished
scholar's affair with a miraculous city.

*CLOSEST COMPANION: The Unknown Story of the Intimate Friendship Between
Franklin Roosevelt and Margaret Suckley. Edited by Geoffrey C. Ward. (Houghton
Mifflin, $24.95.) Margaret Suckley's diary shows F.D.R. finding comfort in a
distant cousin who could relax, however worshipfully, in his presence.

*CONFESSIONS OF A BARBARIAN: Selections From the Journals of Edward Abbey,
1951-1989. Edited by David Petersen. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A selection from
the notebooks and journals of the novelist and naturalist shows his lifelong
focus on his familiar themes: anarchy, sex, defense of the natural world and how
best to die.

*THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL: The Definitive Edition. By Anne Frank. Edited by
Otto H. Frank and Mirjam Pressler. (Doubleday, $25.) An expanded version,
restoring entries from the original diary, gives more texture and nuance to this
renowned personal account of the Holocaust.

* DR. SEUSS & MR. GEISEL: A Biography. By Judith Morgan and Neil Morgan. (Random
House, $25.) The authorized biography of the beloved children's author who gave
the world the Cat in the Hat.

*DOSTOEVSKY: The Miraculous Years, 1865-1871. By Joseph Frank. (Princeton
University, $35.) Volume 4 of this planned five-part biography excels in
providing a cultural, literary, social and biographical context for
Dostoyevsky's works.

*DREAMING: Hard Luck and Good Times in America. By Carolyn See. (Random House,
$23.) The novelist's memoir of her family revels in a woman's point of view as
it paints a portrait of drugs, drink and zany freedom in California.

*EDMUND WILSON: A Biography. By Jeffrey Meyers. (Peter Davison/Houghton Mifflin,
$35.) Lively, shapely and evocative, this book offers insights into Wilson's
public and private lives that Wilson, despite his own autobiographical writings,
lacked the introspection to achieve.

EMERSON: The Mind on Fire. By Robert D. Richardson Jr. (University of
California, $35.) A skilfull accounting of how Emerson transformed personal
difficulties into intellectual achievement.

*EVELYN WAUGH: A Biography. By Selina Hastings. (Houghton Mifflin, $40.) A
readable one-volume life of the English satirist who was famous as a splendid
stylist and a monstrous man.

FIREBRAND: The Life of Horace Liveright. By Tom Dardis. (Random House, $27.50.)
A brisk, concise, unpedantic biography of the salesman turned publisher who
created the modern style of aggressive book promotion and advertising.

FLORENCE KELLEY AND THE NATION'S WORK: The Rise of Women's Political Culture,
1830-1900. By Kathryn Kish Sklar. (Yale University, $35.) The first of two
projected volumes about the Philadelphia reformer and socialist whose work at
Hull House resulted in a ban on child labor and enactment of the eight-hour day
in Illinois.

*FRANCO: A Biography. By Paul Preston. (Basic Books, $37.50.) A huge,
all-inclusive life of the outright winner of Spain's civil war, the shrewd,
lucky dictator of his countryfor almost 40 years.

A GENIUS FOR LIVING: The Life of Freida Lawrence. By Janet Byrne.
(HarperCollins, $27.50.) A vivacious recounting the woman who was muse and
monster to D. H. Lawrence.

*GENIUS IN DISGUISE: Harold Ross of The New Yorker. By Thomas Kunkel. (Random
House, $25.) Forty-four years after Ross's death, this first full-scale
biography of the creator of The New Yorker tries to account for the formidable
editorial instincts, integrity and self-knowledge that underlay his success.

*GENTLEMAN SPY: The Life of Allen Dulles. By Peter Grose. (Richard Todd/Houghton
Mifflin, 30.) A biography, full of new information, of the irresistibly charming
(and manipulative) man who headed -- and embodied -- the Central Intelligence
Agency from 1953 to 1961.

GEORGE ELIOT, VOICE OF A CENTURY: A Biography. By Frederick R. Karl. (Norton,
$30.) A civilized, sensible biography of an author who, for all her insight into
women's mentality, hoped to see them develop the intellectual and social
attributes of the better sort of men.

*GIVING AWAY SIMONE: A Memoir. By Jan L, Waldron. (Times Books/Randorn House,
$22.) An absorbing personal history of the author and her family, women who for
five generations failed or declined to keep their children.

*HARDY. By Martin Seymour-Smith. (St. Martin's, $35.) An enjoyably pugnacious
biography of the English novelist and poet that does not suffer previous
biographies gladly.

*HARRY AND TEDDY: The Turbulent Relationship of Press Lord Henry R. Luce and His
Favorite Reporter, Theodore H. White. By Thomas Griffith. (Random House, $24.)
An affectionate but unsentimental dual biography of the founder of Time magazine
and of one of its legendary correspondents, written by a former editor at Time.

HIGHCASTLE: A Remembrance. By Stanislaw Lem. Translated by Michael Kandel.
(Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace, $22.) A delightful seriocomic memoir by
the Polish science fiction writer, written 20 years ago for a Polish audience,
that lovingly recreates the pre-war world of his youth.

*IN LOVE WITH DAYLIGHT: A Memoir of Recovery. By Wilfrid Sheed. (Simon &
Schuster, $23.) The writer's account of his battles with alcohol, drugs and
cancer is grim, but it's told with whimsical wisdom and good-natured resolve.

AN ITALIAN EDUCATION: The Further Adventures of an Expatriate in Verona. By Tim
Parks. (Grove, $22.) By sending his children to school in Italy and thoughtfully
watching them become Italians, Mr. Parks studies the rules that govern a society
other than his native England.

*JOHN STEINBECK: A Biography. By Jay Parini. (Holt, $30.) A clearly written and
sympathetic biography of the author of "The Grapes of Wrath" that argues for a
critical re-evaluation of Steinbeck.

*THE LAST GREAT FRENCHMAN: A Life of General de Gaulle. By Charles Williams.
(Wiley, $30.) The career of the much-taller-than-life soldier whose political
victories were based on a loathing for politicians and a willingness to chuck
his allies when he thought they were wrong.

LEWIS CARROLL: A Biography. By Morton N. Cohen. (Knopf, $35.) A charming,
intriguing, conscientious life of Charles Lutwidge Dodgson, a peculiar child
adult who became a peculiar adult child without much happening in between.

THE LIARS' CLUB: A Memoir. By Mary Karr. (Viking, $22.95.) A haunting memoir of
growing up in East Texas while trying to figure one's parents out, especially a
hugely enigmatic mother who says little, reads Camus and Sartre and tries to
throw herself from cars while drunk.

*LONG WALK TO FREEDOM: The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela. By Nelson Mandela.
(Little, Brown, $24.95.) On the evidence of his own version of his amazing life,
the President of South Africa is no moralist or messiah but a pragmatic
politician who always chose what might work over what was ideologically
agreeable.

LOST IN PLACE: Growing Up Absurd in Suburbia. By Mark Salzman. (Random House,
$22.) A refreshing memoir of a teen-ager's search for happiness through kung fu
in the 1970's; the jokes are mostly on the author, who is remarkably free from
the customarily licensed resentments.

LYTTON STRACHEY: The New Biography. By Michael Holroyd. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, $35.) A substantially reworked version of Mr. Holroyd's two-volume
biography of Strachey that appeared in the 1960's, this painstakingly researched
portrait contains new disclosures about the lives and loves of Strachey and his
Bloomsbury contemporaries.

MAN OF THE PEOPLE: A Life of Harry S. Truman. By Alonzo L. Hamby. (Oxford
University, $35.) More closely than other historians, Mr. Hamby pursues the
emotional and intellectual life of this provincial, accidental President who was
much loathed in office but died an American hero.

MANHATTAN, WHEN I WAS YOUNG. By Mary Cantwell. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) An
editorial writer for The Times is an acute witness to the professional, personal
and emotional lives of fashionable young New Yorkers in the 1950's.

*MURDERERS AND OTHER FRIENDS: Another Part of Life. By John Mortimer. (Viking,
$23.95.) The creator of Horace Rumpole continues the recollections begun in
"Clinging to the Wreckage" in a tone that will be familiar to viewers of
"Mystery!"

*NELSON: A Personal History. By Christopher Hibbert. (Addison-Wesley, $30.) A
biography that visits many familiar scenes but brings clarity, reliability,
convincing judgments and enthusiasm to Horatio Nelson, a unique British hero
whose personal defects could never tarnish his glory.

*1920 DIARY. By Isaac Babel. (Yale Universitv, $20.) The first English
translation of a journal kept by the great Russian short-story writer during his
service as a correspondent in the campaign against the Poles.

ON GOLD MOUNTAIN. By Lisa See. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) An engaging,
energetically researched account of Fong See, a shrewd immigrant who prospered
in 19th-century California, and the biracial family he left behind him (which
includes his great-granddaughter, the author).

*OUT OF EGYPT: A Memoir. By Andre Aciman..(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) A
splendid rendition of life over 50 years or so in the prosperous business class
in Alexandria, ending with the expulsion of the author's Jewish family.

PALIMPSEST: A Memoir. By Gore Vidal. (Random House, $27.50.) As Mr. Vidal
recalls his first 39 years (1925-64), his abundant self-admiration escapes
self-absorption, and many people he did not care for receive at least the
tribute of his keen attention. Too bad for them!

*PAULA. By Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The Chilean novelist's account
of three generations of her family's history, interwoven with an account of her
daughter's yearlong coma that ended in the young woman's death.

PRAIRIE REUNION. By Barbara J. Scot. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) This
engaging, thoughtful memoir of a return to the scene of the author's Iowa
childhood confirms that places and people have the power to change gracefully if
they try.

REVOLUTION OF THE MIND: The Life of Andre Breton. By Mark Polizzotti. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $35.) An impressively researched account of the founder of
Surrealism who ruled over the movement with a despotic hand until his death is
1966.

ROBERT E. LEE: A Biography. By Emory M. Thomas. (Norton, $30.) A
"post-revisionist" look at the Confederate general that finds neither a god nor
a devil but a man attempting to live honorably.

ROBERT GRAVES: Life on the Edge. By Miranda Seymour. (Holt, $37.50.) An
intelligent, absorbing rendering of the often awkward and miserable life of a
devoted, meticulous poet whose interest was too often otherwise occupied.

*ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON: A Biography. By Frank McLynn. (Random House, $30.) A
thoroughly detailed life, taking the most recent scholarship into account, of
the great Scottish writer of English prose who died at 44 in 1894.

*SAINT-EXUPERY: A Biography. By Stacy Schiff. (Knopf, $30.) A comprehensive
biography of the French aviator and author of "The Little Prince."

SAVAGE ART: A Biography of Jim Thompson. By Robert Polito. (Knopf, $30.)
Exhaustive research and critical acumen adorn this life of the wildly original
(some of his narrators are dead, e.g.) American crime novelist who died in 1977.

SECRET LIFE: An Autobiography. By Michael Ryan. (Pantheon, $25.) The biggest
secret was Mr. Ryan's sex addiction, from which he says he is recovering; this
disturbing, amazingly risky work of self-exposure by an accomplished poet is a
portrait of the artist as a young deviant.

THE SECRETS OF MARIKO: A Year in the Life of a Japanese Woman and Her Family. By
Elisabeth Bumiller. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) As a foreigner, Ms.
Bumiller (now a reporter at The New York Times) could be told what must be
hidden at home by a busy woman who feels most herself when everyday life is
interrupted.

*SLY AND ABLE: A Political Biography of James F. Byrnes. By David Robertson.
(Norton, $29.95.) A life of the powerful politician who at various times was a
United States Senator, Supreme Court Justice and Secretary of State.

THE SPIRIT OF PRAGUE: And Other Essays. By Ivan Klima. Translated by Paul
Wilson. (Granta, paper, $10.95.) The Czech novelists recalls his
"unconventional" childhood, spent under the successive tyrannies of Naziism and
Communism.

TOM: The Unknown Tennessee Williams. By Lyle Leverich. (Crown, $35.) A balanced,
responsible, candid reconstruction of Williams's early life, from whose endless
frustration, humiliation and depression he fashioned the suffering, desperate
self-representations of his mature work.

*TOM PAINE: A Political Life. By John Keane. (Little, Brown, $27.95.) A good
introduction to a difficult, often unlovable character, an effective
propagandist of revolution (and, on the whole, liberty) in America, France and
even England.

*TOULOUSE-LAUTREC: A Life. By Julia Frey. (Viking, $34.95.) A valuable life of
the only great painter of France's golden age who was an aristocrat,
incorporating much family correspondence recently made available.

TWO OR THREE THINGS I KNOW FOR SURE. By Dorothy Allison. (Dutton, $14.95.) The
author of the novel "Bastard Out of Carolina" puts her gifts as a storyteller to
an account of her upbringing, especially her molestation by her stepfather and
the incident's impact on her life as a writer, lesbian, sister and mother.

AN UNCOMMON WOMAN: The Empress Frederick, Daughter of Queen Victoria, Wife of
the Crown Prince of Prussia, Mother of Kaiser Wilhelm. By Hannah Pakula. (Simon
& Schuster, $35.) Lucky in birth, happy in marriage, severely disappointed in
her disastrous son.

VOICE FOR THE MAD: The Life of Dorothea Dix. By David Gollaher. (Free Press,
$28.) A superbly written biography, the first to make use of Dix's diaries and
letters, shows how psychological pressures led to well-born Boston woman
becoming an advocate for the mentally ill.

*WALTER PATER: Lover of Strange Souls. By Denis Donoghue. (Knopf, $27.50.) A
critical analysis of the life and work of the high priest of Victorian
estheticism in which Mr. Donoehue argues that Pater is the fountainhead of
modernism.

Business & Economics

THE END OF AFFLUENCE: The Causes and Consequences of America's Economic Dilemma.
By Jeffrey Madrick. (Random House, $22.) A journalist turned economic historian
argues that historical changes have killed the prosperity many Americans
remember, and that no economic or political nostrums can bring it back.

BEHIND THE WHEEL AT CHRYSLER: The Iacocca Legacy. By Doron P. Levin. (Harcourt
Brace, $25.) A Detroit reporter interprets Chrysler under Lee Iacocca's
management as a company far better at making sales and deals than cars.

THE BROTHERS: The Hidden World of Japan's Richest Family. By Lesley Downer.
(Random House, $25.) How a poor country boy, starting in 1947, accumulated many,
many billions of dollars, and how his reclusive offspring are doing; winkled out
by a tenacious British journalist.

BUFFETT: The Making of an American Capitalist. By Roger Lowenstein. (Random
House, $27.50.) A Wall Street Journal reporter tells how Warren E. Buffett
became one of the richest men in America.

COMPANY MAN: The Rise and Fall of Corporate Life. By Anthony Sampson. (Times
Books/Random House, $27.50.) An unpretentious, jargon-free social history of
corporations in the United States and Britain.

FIDELITY'S WORLD: The Secret Life and Public Power of the Mutual Fund Giant. By
Diana B. Henriques. (Lisa Drew/ Scribner, $26.) A history of Fidelity
Investments, the mutual fund that controls 20 percent of America's mutual fund
investments, and a critique of its practices written by a financial reporter at
The New York Times.

I SING THE BODY ELECTRONIC: A Year With Microsoft on the Multimedia Frontier. By
Fred Moody. (Viking, $23.95.) A Seattle reporter, granted unusual access,
observes the working conditions and emotional states -- often extreme -- of a
Microsoft team assigned to create a children's encyclopedia.

SERPENT ON THE ROCK. By Kurt Eichenwald. (Harper Business, $27.50.) With
cinematic storytelling and a command of complex detail, a financial reporter at
The New York Times relates how Prudential-Bache Securities perpetrated a fraud
that resulted in settlements of more than $1 billion in investors' claims.

Children's Books

THE GETTYSBURG ADDRESS. By Abraham Lincoln. Illustrated by Michael McCurdy.
(Houghton Mifflin. $14.95.) All Ages. The great speach that "gave the battle a
higher meaning" has been splendidly illustrated in black and white woodcuts that
show both the battle, its aftermath and something of the nation rebuiling.

THE LIBRARY. By Sarah Stewart. Illustrated by David Small. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux. $15.) All Ages. The story of Elizabeth Brown, a book collector and
community benefactor is told in verse and illustrated with charm, elegance and
amusing cats.

THE LION'S WHISKERS: An Ethiopian Folktale. By Nancy Raines Day. Illustrated by
Ann Grifalconi. (Scholastic. $14.95.) Ages 5 to 8. This grave and touching story
of a good stepmother who learns how to love the child she is given and how to
enable him to love her is issustrated with stunning collages.

MATH CURSE. By Jon Scieszka. Illustrated by Lane Smith. (Viking. $16.99.) All
Ages. Not a lot of math, but the genuine intellectual phenomenon that can strike
a youngster as systems of thought spring into three dimensions.

THE MORNING CHAIR. By Barbara M. Joosee. Illustrated by Marcia Sewall. (Clarion
Books. $14.95.) Ages 5 to 8. Bram and his parents moved from the Netherlands to
the United States shortly after World War II. The story of their arrival is
optimistic and soothing, a family story smoothed by repeated telling. The rich,
calm illustrations, in a Dutch palatte, are a quiet joy.

MY MAMA HAD A DANCING HEART. By Libba Moore Gray. Illustrated by Raul Colon.
(Orchard Books. $15.95.) Ages 4 to 8. The narrator remembers her mother
throughout the seasons of the year with "wonderfully tactile images" that are
perfectly captured in the joyous illustrations.

MY OWN TWO FEET: A Memoir. By Beverly Cleary. (Morrow Junior Books. $15.) Ages
10 and up. During the Depression Beverly Bunn left home in Oregon for college in
California, went to library school, married, worked as a librarian on an army
base and, at the end of the book, sat down to imagine Henry Huggins. A fine,
emotionally intense memoir.

THE WATSONS GO TO BIRMINGHAM -- 1963. By Christopher PaulCurtis. (Delacorte
Press. 14.95.) Ages 10 and up. A fine first novel about the Watson family of
Flint, Mich., that brings historical fact into domestic fiction in a plausible,
affecting way.

WHY THE SUN & MOON LIVE IN THE SKY. Written and illustrated by Niki Daly.
(Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. $15.) Ages 5 to 9. A Nigerian creation myth has been
retold as illustrated with 18th century Italianate whimsey. The result is an
enchanting, and satisfying book.

Crime

BLUE LONESOME. By Bill Pronzini. (Walker, $21.95.) A solitary San Francisco
accountant investigates the suicide of an equally alienated woman.

BONE IN THE THROAT. By Anthony Bourdain. (Villard, $20.) A trendy restaurant in
SoHo is the setting for a clever, satirical mystery in which the good guys face
the bad guys over an order of squid; written by a New York chef.

*THE BOOKMAN'S WAKE. By John Dunning. (Scribner, $21.) A luxuriantly written
mystery about a limited edition of "The Raven" whose owners have the
disconcerting habit of winding up dead.

*CRANKS AND SHADOWS. By K.  C. Constantine. (Mysterious Press/Warner, $19.95.)
In this 11th novel of a series, the "generally crazy" but compassionate police
chief of a dying Pennsylvania steel town is told to shrink his already tiny
force at the same time a paramilitary group shows up.

DEAD LAGOON. By Michael Dibdin. (Pantheon, $21.) In the fifth Aurelio Zen novel,
the ministry officer returns to his native Venice to investigate the kidnapping
of an American businessman and discovers a city stagnating between economic
depression and incipient fascism.

*THE EDGE OF THE CRAZIES. By Jamie Harrison. (Hyperion, $20.95.) The eccentric
inhabitants and festering animosities of a small town in Montana result in
murder in this debut novel, told in a brash, animated voice.

FINDING MOON. By Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins $24.) In a one-novel detour from
the Navajo reservation, Mr. Hillerman relates the adventures of a newspaperman
who goes in Southeast Asia to discover the fate of his brother at the end of the
Vietnam War.

A MAIDEN'S GRAVE. Jeffrey Deaver. (Viking, $22.95.) An F.B.I. agent negotiates
with three psychotic killers with the lives of eight schoolgirls in the balance
in this edge-of-the-chair thriller.

MURDER IN GRUB STREET. By Bruce Alexander. (Putnam, $21.95.) In the sequel to
"Blind Justice," a 13-year-old boy serves as the eyes for a blind 18-th century
London magistrate investigating the murder of a printer and his family.

MURDER ON A KIBBUTZ. By Batya Gur. (HarperCollins, $20.) Inspector Michael
Ohayon faces a dual mystery when he attempts to understand the arcane ways of an
Israeli kibbutz in order to catch the murderer of its administrative secretary.

NO NIGHT IS TOO LONG. By Ruth Rendell writing as Barbara Vine. (Harmony, $23.) A
psychological thriller in which a murderer thinks he is being pursued by the
ghost of his victim.

*ORIGINAL SIN. By P. D. James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Daigliesh investigates a case
involving intrigue, malice and murder in a prestigious London publishing house.

*PIGTOWN. By William J. Caunitz. (Crown, $23.) In a savvy police procedural, the
investigation of the killing of a lowly foot soldier in the Brooklyn mob leads
to the exposure of police corruption and the beginning of gangland war.

RAYMOND CHANDLER: Stories and Early Novels; Later Novels and Other Writings.
(Library of America, two volumes, each $35.) All seven novels, 13 short stories,
essays and the screenplay of "Double Indemnity," by the creator of Philip
Marlowe.

SIMISOLA. By Ruth Rendell. (Crown, $23.) Chief Inspector Wexford confronts
racism in society and in himself when he investigates the death of a young black
woman.

SMOKE. By Donald E. Westlake. (Mysterious Press/Warner Books, $21.95.) A caper
novel in which a burglar discovers that being invisible is a good career move.

*STILL WATERS. By Margaret Woodward. (Putnam, $22.95.) A sensationalistic story
is told with a delicate style in this debut novel about the murder of a rich
socialite and her daughter in Mobile, Ala.

TRUE CRIME. By Andrew Klavan. (Crown, $21.) A beat-the-clock thriller about an
innocent man scheduled to be executed and the newspaper reporter who has six
hours to avert a miscarriage of justice.

Essays, Criticism & Letters

*ANNOYING THE VICTORIANS. By James R. Kincaid. (Routledge, cloth, $49.95, paper,
$ 15,95.) A series of essays that take a fresh and often irreverent view of
Victorian literature.

*BETWEEN FRIENDS: The Correspondence of Hannah Arendt and Mary McCarthy,
1949-1975. Edited by Carol Brightman. (Harcourt Brace, $34.95.) The 26-year
correspondence of two extraordinarily bright, active, articulate women who
thought a lot and gossiped no little.

FROM THE BEAST TO THE BLONDE: On Fairy Tales and Their Tellers. By Marina
Warner. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) An agile, learned, eloquent
investigation of this influential literary form, more anthropological than
Freudian.

A GENTLE MADNESS: Bibliophiles, Bibliomanes, and the Eternal Passion for Books.
By Nicholas A. Basbanes. (Holt, $35.) A colorful account of book collecting that
gives a Who's Who of some devotees -- the splendid, the squalid, the brilliant,
the modest, and the just plain loony.

*THE GUTENBERG ELEGIES: The Fate of Reading in an Electronic Age. By Sven
Birkerts. (Faber & Faber, $22.95.) A meditation by the literary critic on the
danger of extinction for books and the bookish as the world goes CD-ROM.

*JACK KEROUAC: SELECTED LETTERS, 1940-1956. Edited by Ann Charters. (Viking,
$29.95.) The first of two projected volumes of the correspondence of the Beat
chronicler.

THE MAGICIAN'S DOUBTS: Nabokov and the Risks of Fiction. By Michael Wood.
(Princeton University, $24.95.) A study of the fiction of the great Russian
modernist that pleasurably teases the puzzles and paradoxes in Nabokov's
manipulation of the authorial persona.

*MODERN JAPANESE DIARIES: The Japanese at Home and Abroad as Revealed Through
Their Diaries. By Donald Keane. (Holt, $50.) A collection of essays by the great
scholar of Japan that paints a picture of the country's history from the
mid-19th century to the 1920's.

AN OBSESSION WITH ANNE FRANK: Meyer Levin and the Diary. By Lawrence Graver.
(University of California, $28.) A scholar investigates the case of a writer who
wrecked his life in the conviction that a conspiracy stole Anne Frank's story,
which belonged to him above all others.

*THE PORTABLE JACK KEROUAC. Edited by Ann Charters. (Viking, $27.95.) An
anthology by a lifelong scholar of the Beats that shows the autobiographical
unity of Kerouac's writings.

*SIX MYTHS OF OUR TIME: Little Angels, Little Monsters, Beautiful Beasts, and
More. By Marina Warner. (Vintage, paper, $10.) Humorous, urgent essays on how
myth and fiction enshrine and fix categories like the moral condition of
children.

TESTAMENTS BETRAYED: An Essay in Nine Parts. By Milan Kundera. Translated by
Linda Asher. (HarperCollins, $24.) A defense of fiction and a lesson in the art
of reading, the Czech novelist ponders matters like the invention of humor, the
hazards of translation and the orality of irony.

WRITING HOME. By Alan Bennett. (Random House, $25.) Notes, prefaces, diary
entries and fugitive pieces, charming and insightful, by the slyest of
contemporary British playwrights.

WRITING WAS EVERYTHING. By Alfred Kazin. (Harvard University, $17.95.) A grand
old man's brief, passionate argument, stored with anecdote, against the
supersession of books by texts and interpretation by deconstruction.

Fiction

 THE AGE OF CONSENT. By Geoffrey Wolff. (Knopf, $22.) In Mr. Wolff's sixth novel
Teddy Jenks, a 13-year-old child of the children of the 1960's, is transformed
by his sister's near suicide into the historian of his family's emotional life.

ALL SOULS' RISING. By Madison Smartt Bell. (Pantheon, $25.95.) Ghastly detail,
political and anatomical, abounds in this broad-gauge historical novel about the
slave rebellion in Haiti.

ALL THE DAYS AND NIGHTS: The Collected Stories of William Maxwell. (Knopf, $25.)
Stories, balanced, gentle and humane, concerned above all with reconciliation,
from six decades of work by a master writer and editor.

THE ANATOMY LESSON. By John David Morley. (St. Martin's, $21.95.) Seeking refuge
from a brother's death in urban nihilism, this novel's hero works Rembrandt's
famous painting into a harrowing meditation on mortality, mixed motives and the
mystery of character.

ANOTHER YOU. By Ann Beattie. (Knopf, $24.) An epistolary tale from the past and
the story of the fraying relationship of a childless New England couple
intertwine in this exploration of the vagaries of love.

ANTARCTIC NAVIGATION. By Elizabeth Arthur. (Knopf, $25.) A first-person novel,
alive with feeling and animated energy, whose heroine's aim is to vindicate by
imitation the vision and morals of Scott of the Antarctic.

ATHENA. By John Banville. (Knopf, $22.) In this wickedly mannerist novel, a
murderer turned "art expert" runs smack into his own past when he has to
catalogue a batch of stolen Old Masters.

THE BLUE AFTERNOON. By William Boyd. (Knopf, $23.) A story of amoral obsessive
love in the Philippines at the turn of the century, told with the author's
characteristic vigor and inventiveness.

THE CHESS GARDEN: Or, The Twilight Letters of Gustav Uyterhoeven. By Brooks
Hansen. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) An improbable, brilliant novel about a
19th-century Dutch physician who embodies many spiritual and scientific
disturbances of then and now; he's a vitalist, a mystic and an enemy of
determinism.

COLD SNAP: Stories. By Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A collection that
turns a merciless, ironic gaze on the organic trap called life, in which
spiritual beings -- humans -- are forever in jeopardy of mere chemical accidents
or biological insults.

THE COLLECTED SHORT FICTION OF BRUCE JAY FRIEDMAN. (Donald I. Fine, $25.)
Forty-seven stories about psychiatrists, Jewish mothers, Hollywood, death, guilt
and other cosmic forces that make Mr. Friedman's comic world go round.

THE CUNNING MAN. By Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) The hero of this wise
and entertaining novel, a chronicle of personal and social change in Toronto, is
a doctor whose superb diagnostic skills rest on shamanism and Platonism as well
as scientific medicine.

DEAD MAN'S WALK. By Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $26.) The adventures of
the Texas Rangers before they get to the action described in the author's
previous novel "Lonesome Dove."

DEEP RIVER. By Shusaku Endo. (New Directions, $19.95.) Mr. Endo's novel follows
soulless modern Japanese travelers to the Ganges, where they encounter the
humanity and suffering of a few who have found faith.

EAST, WEST: Stories. By Salman Rushdie. (Pantheon, $21.) Nine stories by the
fugitive author of "The Satanic Verses," some boisterous, some provocative, all
taking some advantage of Mr. Rushdie's difficult dual heritage.

FELICIA'S JOURNEY. By William Trevor. (Viking, $21.95.) Mr. Trevor's latest
novel concerns an unmarried, pregnant, vulnerable Irish girl, wandering
England's industrial Midlands until she encounters an awesomely predatory
Englishman whose monstrosity is all the scarier for remaining long undefined.

THE FIRST MAN. By Albert Camus. (Knopf, $23.) Camus's autobiographical novel,
long suppressed by his family for fear of offending bloody-minded intellectuals,
renders his deep attachment for the Algeria he grew up in and his refusal to
choose violence; it appeared in France only last year.

FLESH AND BLOOD. By Michael Cunningham. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) An
enjoyably sprawling, old-fashioned novel explores the simmering tensions of a
suburban family whose overbearing patriarch inspires murderous passions.

FROM TIME TO TIME. By Jack Finney. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) Simon Morley, hero
of Mr. Finney's idiosyncratic novel "Time and Again," returns to scramble the
pages of history by trying to prevent World War I.

GALATEA 2.2. By Richard Powers. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) Ingenious,
ambitious and cerebral, this novel concerns a novelist (same name as the
author's) who works to perfect a machine intelligence that can learn literature
and sustain belief in purpose and meaning.

HIGH FIDELITY. By Nick Hornby. (Riverhead, $21.95.) Mr. Hornby's charming,
lively second book and first novel concerns Rob, a London record store owner who
understands the world only as it fits the categories of pop culture.

IN THE CUT. By Susanna Moore. (Knopf, $21.) A ferociously uninhibited erotic
thriller whose savagery is rendered in a prose that shimmers with wit and
erudition, as fastidious as the deeds it contemplates are unnerving.

KONFIDENZ. By Ariel Dorfman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.) This novel in
dialogue reveals only gradually that its frightening political developments are
taking place in 1939, suggesting that fear is always appropriate.

LADDER OF YEARS. By Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) Delia Grinstead, the heroine of
Ms. Tyler's 13th novel (a fairy tale of sorts), decides at 40 that she'd rather
be somebody else -- so she simply walks out of her old life.

THE LOVE LETTER. By Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42,
capable and loves Edith Wharton. Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like,
excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan. In this comic novel, they fall in love.

THE LOVES OF FAUSTYNA. By Nina FitzPatrick. (Penguin, paper, $9.95.) At a sign
from heaven, the Polish heroine of this frolicky picaresque novel abandons her
virginity; when martial law arrives in 1981, she opens serious negotiations with
the powers of political darkness.

LOVING WANDA BEAVER: Novella and Stories. By Alison Baker. (Chronicle, $16.95.)
Fine and sturdy Southern Gothic humor for the New Age, where every fate is worse
than death and folks put ancho chili on the lime Jell-O and pears.

THE MAN WITHOUT QUALITIES. By Robert Musil. Translated by Sophie Wilkins and
Burton Pike. (Knopf, two volumes, boxed, $60.) A magnificent new version of the
unfinished and unfinish able novel by an Austrian contemporary of Proust and
Joyce whose acknowledged greatness has always exceeded his acknowledged
readership.

THE MATISSE STORIES. By A. S. Byatt. (Random House, $17.) A trio of short
stories, each featuring the work of Henri Matisse and each containing sharp
insights into female sensibilities.

MEMOIR FROM ANTPROOF CASE. By Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace, $24.) The slowly
unfolding self-revelation of Oscar Progresso, the thoughtful, aged eccentric who
narrates this novel while planning a fantastical crime.

MEN IN BLACK. By Scott Spencer. (Knopf, $23.) A smart, affectionate, comic novel
in which an honorable but unsuccessful novelist's life is overturned when his
pseudonymous potboiler about extraterrestials becomes a best seller.

MORALITY PLAY. By Barry Unsworth. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.50.) Medieval
English players re-enact a child's murder in order to solve it in this bravura
novel that shines period sensibilities on current (and timeless) issues.

MRS. TED BLISS. By Stanley Elkin. (Hyperion, $22.95.) The title character of the
prodigious Elkin's final novel, an elderly widow in Miami, is occupied with
death, disability and a million other subjects that fill her life with activity
but not action; as for plot, don't ask.

THE MULCHING OF AMERICA. By Harry Crews. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A savage
satire of American business in which the boss wants to be Jehovah and the sales
force wants to be mindless sheep.

NUMBERS IN THE DARK: And Other Stories. By Italo Calvino. Translated by Tim
Parks. (Pantheon, $24.) A collection of early works by the Italian writer who
died in 1985 shows his social engagement and political concerns.

OBJECTS IN MIRROR ARE CLOSER THAN THEY APPEAR. By Katharine Weber. (Crown, $23.)
In an engaging, elegantly written first novel, the ghosts of a young woman's
past inhibit her efforts to help her best friend escape from a destructive love
affair.

OF LOVE AND OTHER DEMONS. By Gabriel Garcia Marquez. (Knopf, $21.) An exorcist
becomes infatuated with the possessed 12-year-old daughter of an 18th-century
marquess in this magical, fatalistic novel.

PAINTED DESERT. By Frederick Barthelme. (Viking, $22.95.) Mr. Barthelme takes
two characters from his previous novel, "The Brothers," and sets them on a wacky
tour of modern, media-obsessed America.

PANAMA. By Eric Zencey. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $24.) Henry Adams (yes, the
Henry Adams) turns private investigator in this complex, ambitious detective
novel, which starts in Panama but moves to the Paris of the 1890's.

THE PAPERBOY. By Pete Dexter. (Random House, $23.) An eerie and beautiful novel
whose emotionally alienated title character, a reporter in quest of facts only,
is outmaneuvered by violent half-wits who know what they want.

THE PEOPLE'S CHOICE. By Jeff Greenfield. (Putnam, $22.95.) A rich and hilarious
political novel by a journalist who has actually done politics; most things that
happen are accidental, much as they are in the real world.

THE POINT: Stories. By Charles D'Ambrosio. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) An
impressive collection, mixing the exotic and the familiar, precise as to prose,
various as to tone, emotionally generous.

PRACTICAL MAGIC. By Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $22.95.) In the author's
characteristic world of incantations and Formica, two teen-age girls learn what
it means to be raised by a pair of witches.

THE PROMISE OF REST. By Reynolds Price. (Scribner, $24.) The third and
presumably final chapter of the chronicle of the Mayfield-Kendal family, in
which contemporary woes overtake the clan.

REDEYE: A Western. By Clyde Edgerton. (Algonquin, $17.95.) An elaborate,
unbelievable plot, chock-full of believable characters, sustains this woolly
western by an admirable Southern novelist.

RIDING THE RAP. By Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $22.95.) A dandy re-readable
thriller set in post-modern America, land of wised-up rabble and zero
authenticity; its crooks intend a whole new crime, never perpetrated before.

A RIVER TOWN. By Thomas Keneally. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $24.) It's 1899 in
Mr. Keneally's impassioned 21st novel, and Tim Shea, an outsider in an Australia
with no insiders, inexorably digs himself into deeper and deeper trouble by
always trying to do the right thing.

RL'S DREAM, by Walter Mosley. (Norton, $22.) This emphatic modern-day fable of
nurturance and dying is a Deep South tale set in New York, inhabited by a black
musician, his white lover and the ghost of a mythic blues singer.

RULE OF THE BONE. By Russell Banks. (HarperCollins, $22.) A novel that
reinvigorates the Huck Finn myth in the person of Chappie, a mall rat from
upstate New York who lights out for Jamaica with a runaway farm worker.

SIGHTS UNSEEN. By Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) A story of a dangerously
manic-depressive woman, told by her daughter, in which victims and victimizers
are not synonymous with the good and the bad.

SKINNED ALIVE: Stories. By Edmund White. (Knopf, $23.) Lovely, casually
unfolding stories, edited from fugitive memories pulled together under the
author's sense of mortality and of gay relationships as inherently impermanent.

A SOUTHERN EXPOSURE. By Alice Adams. (Knopf, $23.) In the 1930's a family flees
Connecticut for North Carolina in search of lost innocence.

THERAPY. By David Lodge. (Viking, $22.95.) An exceedingly funny novel (the
author's 10th) of midlife crisis, whose 58-year-old hero, Tubby, is an awfully
nice guy but unhappy in a vague way that none of his many therapies seem to
help.

THE TORTILLA CURTAIN. By T. Coraghessan Boyle. (Viking, $23.95.) An undocumented
Mexican couple struggle for survival in contemporary Los Angeles while a yuppie
Anglo pair live a selfish, fearful existence in a walled development.

THE TRIAL OF ELIZABETH CREE: A Novel of the Limehouse Murders. By Peter Ackroyd.
(Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.) A claustrophobic, agitated novel of London in
1880; everyone (including a clutch of famous contemporary reformers) is
connected to everyone else.

THE TUNNEL. By William H. Gass. (Knopf, $30.) This great big novel (652 pages)
by an American master is all spun out of the head of its monstrous protagonist,
a language-driven professor of fascist views who is as dreadful as he is
plausible.

THE UNCONSOLED. By Kazuo Ishiguro. (Knopf, $25.) This successor to "The Remains
of the Day" concerns a pianist who is called to visit a land whose citizens
yearn for validation of their culture, which depends on shared understandings of
modern musical composition. He can't help.

THE UNUSUAL LIFE OF TRISTAN SMITH. By Peter Carey. (Knopf, $24.) Its tough,
spare, considered language sustains this big and thoughtful novel, whose hero
learns that imperialism is universal, bad for weak and strong alike.

WAITING FOR THE DARK, WAITING FOR THE LIGHT. By Ivan Klima. (Grove, $21.) A
fine, skeptical novel, published in Prague in 1993; its hero, a cameraman and
would-be film maker, fears that the corruption of spirit induced under the old
regime may be permanent.

WONDER BOYS. By Michael Chabon. (Villard, $23.) An intelligent, lyrical book
whose graceful melancholy and good humor save it from being just a novel about a
novelist making a novel.

ZOMBIE. By Joyce Carol Oates. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $19.95.) In diary form,
this novel explores the monstrous consciousness of a serial killer.

History

THE AGE OF EXTREMES: A History of the World, 1914-1991. By Eric Hobsbawm.
(Pantheon, $30.) The Marxist historian's account of the modern world as the
battleground between socialism and capitalism.

THE AGE OF HIROHITO: In Search of Modern Japan. By Daikichi Irokawa. Translated
by Mikiso Hane and John K. Urda. (Free Press, $25.) A marvelously insightful and
concisely written account of the turbulent reign of Hirohito, by a distinguished
Japanese social historian.

ALBERT SPEER: HIS BATTLE WITH TRUTH. By Gitta Sereny. (Knopf, $35.) The author,
a lifelong student of the Nazi bosses and for years a friend of Speer, who
served Hitler as Minister of Armaments, examines his stratagems to avoid knowing
exactly what it was that he knew.

THE BLACK DIASPORA. By Ronald Segal. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $27.50.) In an
encyclopedic study, a historian traces the passage of 12 million Africans to the
Western Hemisphere and the fate of their descendants.

BLACK LIBERATION: A Comparative History of Black Ideologies in the United States
and South Africa. By George M. Fredrickson. (Oxford University, $30.) The
distinguished historian continues his study of race in South Africa and the
United States, this time examining the black struggle for equality in each
country.

BLACK LONDON: Life Before Emancipation. By Gretchen Gerzina. (Rutgers
University, $29.95.) A historian at Vassar tells the story of the more than
10,000 blacks who lived in Georgian London.

BLOOD AND IRON: From Bismarck to Hitler, the von Moltke Family's Impact on
German History. By Otto Friedrich. (HarperCollins, $30.) Brisk and entertaining,
this history of a family that was influential in the German military for
centuries was the last book written by Otto Friedrich, a journalist and
historian who died this year.

COMING OF AGE: The Story of Our Century by Those Who've Lived It. By Studs
Terkel. (New Press, $25.) Mr. Terkel, the octogenarian master of oral history,
assembles the life histories of his contemporaries to provide a portrait of a
country growing old.

DARK SUN: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb. By Richard Rhodes. (Simon & Schuster,
$32.50.) Mr. Rhodes's lucid exposition of technical issues combines fruitfully
with his sharp eye for character, anecdote and political context in this history
of the creation of the biggest bomb ever.

DEMOCRACY ON TRIAL: The Japanese American Evacuation and Relocation in World War
II. By Page Smith. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) A master of narrative history
looks at a dark chapter of American history and credibly displays its many
shades of gray.

EXCELLENT CADAVERS: The Mafia and the Death of the First Italian Republic. By
Alexander Stille. (Pantheon, $27.50.) This fascinating and horrifying
examination, based on immense piles of documents, shows how in the last 25 years
the Mafia has terrorized Sicilian society and perverted Italian politics.

THE FIRST WORLD WAR: A Complete History. By Martin Gilbert. (Holt, $35.) Mr.
Gilbert's enormous breadth of view seeks to render this dreadful conflict as
soldiers lived it on many fronts, often relying on the poetry and prose of the
many gifted writers who saw action.

THE GENERALS' WAR: The Inside Story of the Conflict in the Gulf. By Michael R.
Gordon and Bernard E. Trainor. (Little, Brown, $27.95.) A lucid, meticulously
researched report by the chief Pentagon correspondent of The New York Times and
a retired general who is director of national security programs at Harvard's
John F. Kennedy School of Government.

IN RETROSPECT: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam. By Robert S. McNamara with
Brian VanDeMark. (Times Books/ Random House, $27.50.) The former Secretary of
Defense explains, regretfully, how he and his can-do colleagues got stuck fast
in the Vietnam War.

IN THE TIME OF THE AMERICANS: FDR, Truman, Eisenhower, Marshall, MacArthur --
The Generation That Changed America's Role in the World. By David Fromkin.
(Knopf, $30.) F.D.R. stars in a historian's incisive account of the men who made
the 20th century what it is.

KILLING CUSTER: The Battle of the Little Bighorn and the Fate of the Plains
Indians. By James Welch with Paul Stekler. (Norton, $25.) A meditation on the
ways Custer and Sitting Bull have reverberated through historical memory, white
and American Indian.

KONIN: A Quest. By Theo Richmond. (Pantheon, $27.50.) A British film maker's
tactful, thoughtful re-creation, through documents and interviews, of his
ancestors' town in Poland as it was before 1939, when German troops changed it
forever.

LANDSCAPE AND MEMORY. By Simon Schama. (Knopf, $40.) A learned and perceptive
survey of Western attitudes toward nature in the last five centuries; Mr.
Schama's starting point is the Renaissance fascination with river, forest and
mountain as signs of a revered prototypal world.

LONDON: A Social History. By Roy Porter. (Harvard University, $29.95.) The
development of the Great Wen over 400 years, examined as a quasi-biological
explosion that everyone feared and no one could curtail.

MILLENNIUM: A History of the Last Thousand Years. By Felipe Fernandez-Armesto.
(Scribner, $35.) The history of the world since the year 1000, in a volume that
is a pleasure to read and to hold.

THE NAKED HEART. The Bourgeois Experience: Victoria to Freud. Volume 4. By Peter
Gay. (Norton, $29.95.) The paradoxical development of a need for inwardness and
a need to express it, by an indefatigable historian of human sensibility.

ONCE UPON A DISTANT WAR. By William Prochnau. (Times Books/Random House,
$27.50.) Mr. Prochnau's research revives the real colors of the faded years
1961-63, when a band of young, soon-to-be-famous reporters began checking
official statements about the war in Vietnam against the facts in the field.

OSWALD'S TALE: An American Mystery. By Norman Mailer. (Random House, $30.)
Stoked by a passion to believe J. F. K.'s death was more than a meaningless
absurdity, Mr. Mailer pursues and delivers the assassin's very slightly
significant soul, using his own research and that of others.

THE POLITICS OF RAGE: George Wallace, the Origins of the New Conservatism and
the Transformation of American Politics. By Dan T. Carter. (Simon & Schuster,
$30.) A study of the Alabama Governor, "the most influential loser in
20th-century American politics," whose Presidential campaigns had a
disproportionate effect upon contemporary politics.

THE ROMANOVS: The Final Chapter. By Robert K. Massie. (Random House, $25.) The
author of "Nicholas and Alexandra" brings it up to date with an admirable
scientific thriller about the identification of the imperial remains.

THE SECRET WORLD OF AMERICAN COMMUNISM. Edited by Harvey Klehr, John Earl Haynes
and Fridrikh Igorevich Firsov. (Yale University, $25.) A collection of newly
released Soviet documents shows that the Communist Party in the United States
received financial support from the Kremlin and that the party established an
espionage apparatus.

SPEAK NOW AGAINST THE DAY: The Generation Before the Civil Rights Movement in
the South. By John Egerton. (Knopf, $35.) A masterly account of the generation
of Southerners, white and black, who fought segregation from 1932 to 1954.

TELLTALE HEARTS: The Origins and Impact of the Vietnam Antiwar Movement. By Adam
Garfinkle. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) The movement was typically American, with
many precedents since abolitionism, a scholar contends; yet it did lengthen the
war, and reaction against it set up the anti-elitist critiques so influential
now.

TERRIBLE HONESTY: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s. By Ann Douglas. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $25.) The great big city in the great good time, analyzed with
broad scope and minute complexity as the locus of the national psyche when
Americans attacked the conditioned responses of the pre-1914 world.

TOMORROW IS ANOTHER COUNTRY: The Inside Story of South Africa's Road to Change.
By Allister Sparks. (Hill & Wang, $22.) A South African journalist's fast-paced,
gripping account of the long, slow and often clandestine process that led to the
end of apartheid.

UNITED NATIONS: The First Fifty Years. By Stanley Meisler. (Atlantic Monthly,
$24.) A straightforward accounting by a foreign affairs reporter at The Los
Angeles Times, sprinkled with anecdote and portraiture and steering clear of
ideological contentiousness.

THE VERY BEST MEN. Four Who Dared: The Early Years of the CIA. By Evan Thomas.
(Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) It took a lot of nerve and a lot of money to create
the Central Intelligence Agency and bring it as far as the Bay of Pigs; but a
good time was had, as this account by Newsweek's Washington bureau chief shows.

WILLIAM COOPER'S TOWN: Power and Persuasion on the Frontier of the Early
American Republic. By Alan Taylor. (Knopf, $35.) The story of the founder of
Cooperstown, N.Y., offers an unidealized, unconventional perspective on the
United States after the Revolution.

Medicine & Psychology

AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS: Seven Paradoxical Tales. By Oliver Sacks. (Knopf,
$24.) More tales of the engrossingly abnormal by a generous, humane neurologist
who explores the peculiar thinking of both physician and patient.

BOREDOM: The Literary History of a State of Mind. By Patricia Meyer Spacks.
(University of Chicago, $24.95.) A persuasive account of a concept invented in
the 18th century; its roots include a growing concentration on "inner
experience" as the locus of personal reality.

EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE. By Daniel Goleman. (Bantam, $23.95.) The author, who
writes for The Times on psychology, argues persuasively that self-control, zeal,
persistence and self-motivation -- qualities not measured by I.Q. tests or
college exams -- are in dangerously short supply in this country, but can and
should be taught.

IN THE SHADOW OF THE EPIDEMIC: Being HIV-Negative in the Age of AIDS. By Walt
Odets. (Duke University, cloth, $45.95; paper, $14.95.) The psychological hell
of homosexual men who are healthy while friends and loved ones are dying of AIDS
is sensitively explored by a clinical psychologist who himself is gay.

NIGHT: Night Life, Night Language, Sleep, and Dreams. By A. Alvarez. (Norton,
$23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

For Buoyed Clinton, Down to Business

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section A;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 908 words

DATELINE: MADRID, Dec. 3


The President who came to Europe to talk about peace went to the Prado on
Saturday night to look at pictures of war.

Bill Clinton, who first toured the museum as an Oxford student, asked
specifically to see a violent painting by Goya depicting a Frenchman shooting a
Spaniard in an uprising against Napoleon. He also sat on a bench for a moment to
gaze at an outsized Titian canvas of a Spanish emperor going to battle.

"I love that," he said of the Titian. "I've always admired that."

Today, after ordering the first American troops to the Balkans and meeting
briefly with European leaders here, the President headed back to his own looming
battles on Bosnia, the budget and his re-election campaign, tired and energized
at once and hoping that he has yet again reinvented himself.

From London to Londonderry, from Belfast to Baumholder, Mr. Clinton has
portrayed himself over the last week as a seeker of peace, a mature foreign
policy President, and as what The Irish Times called "The Patron Saint of
Hopeful Causes."

His aides wryly told Irish reporters that this was the first week of the 1996
campaign, and indeed it was possible in these five days to see the shape of the
next 12 months, both the landmarks and the land mines.

If they hold, the fragile peace agreements in Bosnia and Northern Ireland could
quell doubts about Mr. Clinton's interest and competence in foreign policy. But
they might crumble and backfire on the Arkansas traveler who this week got --
and sometimes proudly took -- so much credit for them. What is more, now that
Mr. Clinton has shown himself willing to intervene so actively in global hot
spots, will he get more requests than he can handle?

Questions about Bosnia popped up even as Mr. Clinton enjoyed the lustrous
reception in the land of his Scots-Irish ancestors, where he was heralded as the
heir to his idol, John F. Kennedy, and where he basked in the company of Kennedy
family members like the Ambassador to Ireland, Jean Kennedy Smith, her son
William Kennedy Smith and her niece, Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, the Maryland
Lieutenant Governor.

Received as "the most powerful man on earth," Mr. Clinton was suffused with a
ruddy euphoria not seen since the buscapades of his 1992 campaign. At one point,
he asked his press secretary, Michael D. McCurry, for reassurance that the
reception was as grand as it seemed.

"How do you think it's going?" the President asked in Northern Ireland on
Thursday, mistaking Mr. McCurry's midday droop for a lack of enthusiasm.

"I think it's great," Mr. McCurry replied. "What do you think?"

"It's great!" Mr. Clinton said glowingly, before wading into yet another
adoring, singing, swaying, jig-dancing crowd in Londonderry.

But there was no dancing at the American Army base in Baumholder, Germany, where
the President went to persuade skeptical young troops and their worried families
that they had a duty to help in Bosnia, just as European allies had helped the
United States in the Persian Gulf war. Mr. Clinton made his case again today,
after a meeting with leaders of the European Union.

"What we are seeing in Bosnia is an affront to the conscience of human beings
everywhere, right in the heart of Europe," he said. "All the things we need to
do, all the things we talked about today -- the need to build stronger economic
ties, the need to confront the other security problems we have -- none of that
is going to happen as it should unless we deal with this problem in Bosnia."

In language reminiscent of what he has used more often about domestic issues,
Mr. Clinton argued that the United States' role in Europe was not only related
to superpower status, but also a matter of preserving the essence of American
values.

"When those people turned out in the streets in Ireland -- all those young
people, Protestant and Catholic alike -- demanding the right to be heard on
behalf of peace and their future, responding to an American President, it was
because of everything America has stood for for over 200 years," he said. "Not
just the initiatives of our Administration and the things I have personally done
to promote peace there, but everything we represent.

"And I would hope that because we have the chance to do it in a way that
minimizes our risks and relies on our strengths, that the American people and
the Congress would respond."

Impatiently, he added: "What you saw in Ireland, for example, had not a whit to
do with military might; it was all about values. And we should do nothing at
home within our own borders that undermines our ability to project those values
to the rest of the world."

Mr. Clinton is a politician who cut his teeth on opposition to the Vietnam War
and who now leads a nation perpetually skittish about repeating the mistakes of
that war. So he is prepared for questions from worried wives about the justness
of the cause, and for close monitoring of any escalation of troops.

He went out of his way to say that he was not sending Americans to fight a war
but to police a peace. He told Irish and British audiences that it was worth
taking "risks for peace." At a Christmas tree lighting in Belfast, Mr. Clinton
borrowed from scripture to declare, "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall
inherit the earth."

Or, as a man who brought his small son to the tree lighting said, in a more
pragmatic assessment of the President's role as peacemaker, "Any port in a
storm."


LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

New Effort by U.S. and Vietnam to Return Boat People Home

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 734 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 3


Seeking to end a long epilogue of the Vietnam War, Washington is working quietly
with Hanoi to create a program that would persuade the remaining 40,000
Vietnamese boat people in Southeast Asian refugee camps to return home.

The initiative is being undertaken by the National Security Council and the
Departments of State and Justice in hopes of avoiding more public debate and
violent protests in the camps by detainees who do not want to return to Vietnam.

The plan comes in response to legislation sponsored by Representative
Christopher H. Smith, a New Jersey Republican, that would bar the United States
from providing about $25 million to the United Nations to help resettle the
Vietnamese. The migrants fled their homeland, many in rickety boats, after the
defeat of South Vietnam in 1975.

In talks that began one month ago in Hanoi, "we laid out an approach to the
Government of Vietnam, and they made clear that they shared our goals and would
try to come up with a workable way to do it," said a Clinton Administration
official working on the plan. A formal response from Hanoi is expected this
month.

Sergio Vieira de Mello, a senior official of the United Nations refugee-relief
agency, called the American initiative "most welcome."

Under the plan, the Vietnamese would be transported to Ho Chi Minh City under
the auspices of the United Nations. There, they would be guaranteed interviews
with United States immigration officials.

Those who qualify as political refugees -- like people who worked for the United
States or its allies during the war, or who were religious leaders, or who were
imprisoned in "re-education camps" after the war -- would be allowed to come to
this country. Others, like North Vietnamese fishermen who fled for economic
reasons after the war, would have no choice but to try to make a new life in
their old country.

Administration officials say as many as several thousand of the Vietnamese in
the camps worked for United States military and intelligence services during the
Vietnam War and have reason to believe that they will be allowed to resettle in
the United States.

Tens of thousands of others may be persuaded to return to Vietnam, if they can
be convinced that they will not be persecuted. The United Nations, which is
responsible for monitoring the treatment of the tens of thousands of Vietnamese
who have been returned home, says it has not documented any cases in which
returning migrants have been treated harshly.

In a statement this year, Representative Smith said he had proposed the
legislation because of concerns that many of the Vietnamese in the camps had
been unfairly denied refugee status, but the United Nations has denied this.

The Vietnamese are the last of the so-called boat people, more than one million
of whom fled their country in crowded vessels after the war's end. Most
resettled outside of Asia, mainly in the United States. Those still in detention
camps in Hong Kong, Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines eke out an
unhappy existence.

Their homeland, once a symbol of endless war and impoverished communism, now has
one of the world's fastest-growing economies. And the time has passed when the
United States and other wealthy nations willingly open their arms to immigrants.
Refugee officials say it is unlikely that new migrants will receive the
unconditional and generous welcome once accorded the Indochinese.

Rejected for resettlement after extensive interviews by United Nations refugee
officials, thousands of the boat people in the Hong Kong and Southeast Asian
camps had accepted the inevitable and were returning home voluntarily under
United Nations supervision until this summer.

Then word of the Smith legislation created a stir in the detention camps,
creating new hope among some Vietnamese there that they would not have to go
home. Some renewed violent protests, and others reconsidered their plans to
return voluntarily. Refugee officials worried that it could not only set off
another exodus of boat people but also could create false hopes among the
migrants that they would be allowed to come to the United States.

The House of Representatives passed the legislation, earmarking $30 million to
bring some of the Vietnamese to the United States. But the legislation, part of
a foreign affairs appropriations bill, is now languishing in the Senate.


LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Along a Missouri Highway, Worries and a Sense of Duty to Help Bosnians

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1086 words

DATELINE: SPRINGFIELD, Mo., Dec. 1,


The notion of sending American troops to risk their lives in Bosnia initially
struck Scott Nichols, a 26-year-old trucker in this rough-hewn Ozarks town, as
downright foolish.

Mr. Nichols, browsing in a gun shop for something to hunt rabbits and squirrels
with, ticked off the reasons he thought that President Clinton was wrong to
commit 20,000 troops to the peacekeeping effort: the lack of a clear national
interest in the Balkans, the odds against quelling deep-rooted hostilities, the
danger to American forces if guerrilla-style fighting erupts.

Then he drew a breath and shook his head.

"But you think of the pictures of those poor people, lying in the street, some
of them kids, raped, tortured, murdered," he said. "That's pretty hard to turn
away from. And you think, I don't know, maybe it is worth it to go in there."

The involvement of the United States military in Bosnia, a subject that once met
with overwhelming disapproval among Americans, seems to be gaining favor, to
judge from the talk in the cafes and bookstores, bowling alleys and strip malls,
along the stretch of Interstate 44 from Springfield to St. Louis. Nearly half of
the three dozen people interviewed this week in this bellwether state said they
believed the United States had a duty to restore peace in the Balkans.

"It reaches the point where your conscience won't allow you to do nothing," said
Mary Alice Hollander, 61, who works at a library in Manchester, a conservative
Republican suburb of St. Louis. "At night sometimes, I would sit and think of
how it must be for some of these poor Bosnian mothers, trapped in some darkened
hovel, waiting for children to come home, knowing they might never come home. I
don't even see it as a political issue, but rather a moral issue."

To be sure, plenty of Americans remain vehement in their opposition to United
States troops setting foot in Bosnia, even as part of a NATO force sent to help
keep the peace. They have scant hope that any peace will hold in Bosnia, and
fear that American troops would be pulled into a bloody conflict. On top of it
all, they complain that a Government that is debating cutbacks in social
services should not be spending $2 billion on a mission halfway around the
world.

"We've got no business in somebody else's wars," snapped Ron Todd, 40, who sat
in a cloud of cigarette smoke at Mitch's diner, near Fort Leonard Wood, an Army
base in a rural, working-class district represented in Congress by Ike Skelton,
a conservative Democrat. "Look, I feel bad for the people who have gone through
terrible things over there, I really do. But get realistic, we're not going to
be able to stop them.

"Why, we can't even stop bad things from happening in this country. You can't
walk down the street in St. Louis or Chicago without worrying about getting hit
over the head. We got little children that don't get enough to eat, don't have
shoes to wear. We got women getting raped and beaten regularly. And now we're
going to go over to Bosnia and clean things up? Give me a break!"

A waitress, D'Anne Klein, 51, came by the table to dispense some coffee and
opinions. "I'm all for it," she said. "Anything that might keep the peace over
there, it's worth a chance."

At the next table, a lanky military man, Sgt. Paul J. Treadway, 32, sat with his
wife, Michelle, and two little girls, Christina, 6, and Virginia, 4. Sergeant
Treadway, who served four months in the Persian Gulf war, said his engineering
unit at Fort Leonard Wood stands a good chance of being sent to Bosnia.

"I'm real worried about it," he said. "I don't even know what our mission would
be. There's no clear-cut good guys and bad guys. I just think it could be
another Vietnam. I know that's a cliche. But it has all the markings."

Lyndon Morgan, 28, a St. Louis firefighter, said he had been reluctant to
support any military action by the United States in Bosnia, because he felt the
fighting in Eastern Europe was irrelevant to Americans.

But as he has followed the Balkans more closely, he has started to worry that
future historians would find Americans guilty of shielding their eyes from
atrocities and genocide.

"Is it becoming another Germany?" he said he asked himself. "If it is, we can't
let it go on. You tell yourself, 'No, it can't possibly be like the Nazis,
nothing as terrible as all that.' But then, you see these pictures of these
innocent people, these civilians, getting killed. And you just can't ignore it."

In a bowling alley in the small town of St. Clair, some workers on the highway
crew were drinking beer and knocking down pins. "We should have gone into Bosnia
a long time ago," said Sam Ailleo, 40, "before so many lives were destroyed."

He had few kind words for President Clinton or the Republican-led Congress. The
conservatives like to talk tough and strike blows for virtue, he said, but when
it came to Bosnia, they were mostly silent. And Mr. Clinton, he said, likes to
talk about his compassion, but "sat back and watched for two years and didn't do
anything as the Serbs ruthlessly destroyed lives."

But Josie Johnson, 47, a nurse in St. Louis, said the United States could find
plenty of examples of inhumanity around the world. She wants a Government that
will tend to business at home.

"The Vietnam War should have taught us a lesson," Ms. Johnson said, as she
locked her steering wheel with a steel device in a high-crime neighborhood of
St. Louis. "If we've got troops looking for somewhere to help, send them in
here. "

And in the view of Henry Caesar, 40, a scrap dealer in St. Louis, the Bosnia
mission is destined for trouble. He warned that Americans would not support
President Clinton in a military action, since he never served himself.

"Clinton should have stayed out of this from jump street," he said. "He never
fought, and now he wants to send other boys. There's going to be a war over
there, and we're going to be stuck in the middle of it."

To Gail Melgren, 33, a furniture saleswoman in Springfield, the Americans-first
attitude seems a bit callous. "Isn't it enough to do something for humanitarian
reasons?" she asked. "Does a nation have to have some oil for us to justify
stepping in? I know that we can't step into every conflict. But there have been
so many women and children killed over there, people who did not sign up to
fight in any war. When we hear a crying child, I would hope that our instinct is
to go help that child, and not to first check and see what nationality the child
is."

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Henry Caesar, 40, a scrap dealer in St. Louis, doubts the
President has much support on Bosnia. "Clinton should have stayed out of this
from jump street. He never fought, and now he wants to send other boys."; Ron
Todd, 40, left, with John Zeigenbein at a diner near Fort Leonard Wood, Mo.,
thinks deploying American troops can be of little help. "Why, we can't even stop
bad things from happening in this country."; Gail Melgren, 33, a saleswoman in
Springfield, Mo., sees a moral reasons for involvement. "I know that we can't
step into every conflict. But there have been so many women and children killed
over there." (Andy Lavalley for The New York Times) (pg. A10)

Map of Missouri


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 809 words



International   A3-11

THE AMERICANS ARE COMING
The remote Hungarian town of Taszar, chosen as the staging ground for the
largest U.S. military operation in Europe since World War II, is bracing for
change.  A1
CLINTON MOVES U.S. TROOPS
President Clinton approved the deployment of advance troops to Bosnia and the
White House said some of the G.I.'s would start arriving in Hungary on Monday.
A10
In Missouri, people ponder American involvement in Bosnia.  A10
Clinton returned from Europe to face other problems.  A11
PANAMA CHANGES VIEW OF U.S.
Ever since they built the Panama Canal, Americans have contended with chants of
"Yankee Go Home!" But now, with the U.S. poised to leave, Panamanians are
suddenly having a change of heart.  A3
RABIN KILLER HINTS AT HELP
The confessed assassin of Yitzhak Rabin suggested that one of the slain Prime
Minister's bodyguards had been an accomplice and asserted that if he told
everything he knew, it "would turn the country upside down." A5
EX-KOREAN LEADER IS ARRESTED
Nearly 16 years after he seized power, Chun Doo Hwan, a former general who ruled
South Korea from 1980 to 1988, was ushered into one of the same prisons to which
he sent pro-democracy campaigners.  A8
NEW EFFORT ON VIETNAM REFUGEES
Washington is working quietly with Hanoi to create a program that would persuade
the remaining 40,000 Vietnamese boat people in Southeast Asian refugee camps to
return home.  A8

A planned visit by Al Gore shows South Africa's new status.  A7
Sri Lankan troops took control of most of a rebel stronghold.  A9
Mexican ex-President's brother faces new charges.  A4
Ciudad Juarez Journal: Poverty in a bustling border town.  A4

National   A12-15, A18, B5-8

MAJOR ISSUES AHEAD
The deadline for negotiators to reach an agreement on the Federal budget is less
than two weeks away, but two pivotal subjects, Medicare and Medicaid, have not
even been broached yet.  A1
Republicans comment on the prospects of another shutdown.  B8
THE PERILS OF DIALYSIS
The American dialysis industry uses equipment and procedures that cut costs and
raise profits, often at the expense of patients' health.  A1
OVERWHELMED BY DRUGS
An incident in Detroit in which a woman was suspected of trading her child to
pay a drug debt turned out to be less than it seemed, and more.  A12
THE MICHIGAN MESSAGE
In Michigan, whose Presidential preferences have often matched the national
mood, President Clinton is enjoying a new acceptability.  A1
REVIVING IDLE ACRES
Cities are beginning to redevelop thousands of acres that sat neglected for
years because of concerns about pollution and liability.  A1
THE LIGHTS OF TEXAS
Researchers in Texas think they have found a way to tame galloping traffic
lights.  A12
SENATOR SIMPSON JOINS EXODUS
With Senator Alan K. Simpson's announcement that he will retire, the Senate has
tied a turnover record, and lost another experienced member who was not afraid
to compromise.  B5


Metro Digest   B1
DEMISE OF A LIFELINE
When Aetna Life and Casualty Company said it would sell the heart of its
business, it was just one more blow to the business landscape of Hartford, which
still proudly boasts of being the "insurance capital of the world," even though
that claim is beginning to ring hollow.A1
NO STRIKE FOR METRO-NORTH
Riders of the Metro-North Commuter Railroad were assured that there would be no
walkout today, and there were strong indications that the labor dispute that has
plagued the railroad may be over.  A1
Sports C1-9
Basketball: Knicks beat Bullets.  C1
Both UConn squads win.  C7
Football: Jets lose to the Rams.  C1
Chiefs beat Raiders.  C6
Dolphins sneak by Falcons.  C4
Redskins shock Cowboys.  C6
Fiesta Bowl will decide college championship.  C3
Tennis: Pete Sampras wins the Davis Cup for the United States.  C1
Columns: Anderson on quarterback Chris Miller.  C4
Rhoden on the boxer Roy Jones Jr.  C9
Neediest Cases B2
Business Digest D1
Obituaries B9-10
Jurgen Wattenberg, German P.O.W. who made wily escape.  B9
Robertson Davies, author.  B9
James M. Yeargin, prosecutor and Criminal Court judge.  B10
Arts/Entertainment C11-16
Innovator in Paris music.  C11
Theater: "Holiday." C11
"A Christmas Carol." C12
Music: Alternate Jazz.  C11
Wayne Shorter.C14

Dance: Washington Square.  C14
Books: "Miss America," by Howard Stern.  C15
Television: War of images.  C16
Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17
Editorials
Retaliatory justice in Washington.
Governor Pataki's jobs shuffle.
Karl E. Meyer: China.
Letters
Anthony Lewis: It's who wins, stupid.
William Safire: Your new $100 bill.
Barry Diller: Give the F.C.C. back its bite.
Hafsat Abiola: Words aren't enough.
Bridge C12
Chronicle B7
Crossword C15

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK;
Horror vs. Hindsight: A War of TV Images

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 16;  Column 5;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 833 words


In television shorthand, the debate over sending troops to Bosnia is often
framed by two sets of images. On one side are the bombings of civilians, the
children in hospital beds, the refugees. On the other side are the body bags of
Americans from Vietnam, Lebanon, Somalia. But how much do these images explain
about Americans' feelings or lack of them, much less what Bosnia portends for
the United States role as solitary global superpower? Jim Lehrer's 15-minute
interview on Thursday evening with three historians was more illuminating about
that than the week's worth of image-mongering.

The images are being evoked as part of a contest for who can wrench the most
hearts. In his talk from the Oval Office last week, President Clinton spoke of
the bombings that "turned playgrounds into killing fields" being "seared into
our minds."

During a session of the Senate Armed Forces Committee, Senator Edward M. Kennedy
spoke of the atrocities that "all of us saw on television." But when George F.
Will reflected on "This Week With David Brinkley" that watching pictures of
genocide year after year without responding does something to the soul, Cokie
Roberts, his colleague, asked whether intervention in Bosnia could "meet the
mother test," which might also be called the body bag test.

"Nightline" began its Friday program on Bosnia with excruciating scenes from
Vietnam, Lebanon and Somalia. Legislators opposed to sending troops -- an
outcome that was ordained once the Commander-in-Chief said he would do it --
reminded one another and their C-Span audience of the pictures of the body of an
American soldier being dragged through the streets of Somalia in 1993.

Programs like yesterday's edition of "Face the Nation" have been doing a serious
and necessary, if repetitive, job of exploring the risks to American forces. But
they have been stingy with discussions of longer-range American policies. Pat
Buchanan, on "This Week" yesterday, was one of the few Sunday-morning
interviewees to press the subject.

The assumption of both sides in the public point-scoring match is that pictures
can help to drive or derail foreign policy. There is something to that notion,
but Bosnia is not the best place to demonstrate it.

More than three years of scenes of atrocities may not have enhanced Serbia's
reputation in the United States, but the response around the country has been
notable mainly for its lack of passion. There has been no surge of demands on
the White House to do something, which may account in part for its hesitancy.
When the march into Bosnia was finally decided on, the impulse came not from
below but from above, where big decisions are presumably not made as a reaction
to the atrocities that happen to be displayed on a small screen.

The polls indicate that in living rooms the peace negotiations were received
with something between a nod and a shrug. As for sending troops, many members of
Congress could cry amen to Senator Bob Kerrey's report on a news program that
"Nebraskans aren't buying it yet." And Senator Bob Dole's acquiescence to
Presidential prerogative was decorated with escape holes through which the
Presidential candidate could slip should the project turn messy.

Does that mean that the American deaths of years past are more mind-searing than
the recent slaughters? It is not at all clear to me, as a chronic image-watcher,
what part such images play in the evident reluctance to spill American blood and
treasure, as the orators used to put it, on behalf of abstractions like honor,
credibility, leadership and the other large concepts floated by present and
former officials.

Can it be that television reviewers have been overpromoting the power of the
image? Granted, a strong picture, seared or just lingering, can be more
persuasive than any speech: that's right, Tiananmen Square. And certainly
pictures can have an instant impact on the emotions of millions who know little
else about a subject. It might further be argued that the general perplexity
over Bosnia is due in part not to the weakness of the images but to the
unsettling clash of such powerful ones.

But if the images are not working on their own, exhuming them is not likely to
work either. It's like trying to rouse a secondhand reaction to a stunning
painting. Even television fans are not just blank servants of the tube, and the
uncertainty revealed in interviews around the country is not likely to be
resolved by remembrances of images past. By comparison with headaches at home,
many Americans seem to see Bosnia as a distant sort of problem, and somebody
else's problem at that.

That may be shortsightedness, which can only be improved by a clarifying
exposition of America's new, still undefined role in foreign conflicts. For this
season, however, the television image is largely a clutter of advocates calling
up frightful scenes in hopes of igniting some passion in a nation that can't
seem to get very passionate over what used to be Yugoslavia.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Simpson Joins Ranks of Pragmatists Leaving Senate

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section B;  Page 5;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1248 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 3


Senator Alan K. Simpson, the blunt Wyoming Republican, announced on Saturday
night that he would not run again, tying a 100-year-old record for voluntary
retirements that is stripping the Senate of experienced lawmakers comfortable
with compromise when it requires reaching across party lines.

Mr. Simpson's retirement is the 12th among Senators up for re-election next
year, the most since 1896, when state legislatures chose senators. Since 1913,
when senators were first directly elected, the most voluntary retirements came
in 1978, when Mr. Simpson and five more of this year's retirees won open seats.

Mr. Simpson, who was ousted as Republican deputy leader this year because
newcomers considered him insufficiently dedicated to conservative issues, is
known as an author of the 1986 immigration act, for work on environmental laws
and veterans benefits, and, most of all, for a folksy sense of humor that one
Democratic colleague, Edward M. Kennedy, said today could always defuse "the
most intense debate."

Appearing before the Chamber of Commerce in Cody, Wyo., on Saturday night, Mr.
Simpson, 64, said that "the old fire in the belly is not there" for another six
years. He said he had not decided what he would do next.

But Mr. Simpson spoke up for the give-and-take of politics in Washington. "The
definition of politics is this: In politics, there are no right answers, only a
continuing flow of compromises between groups, resulting in a changing, cloudy
and ambiguous series of public decisions, where appetite and ambition compete
openly with knowledge and wisdom."

Many departing senators share that attitude, among them certainly Mr. Simpson's
fellow Republicans Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon and Nancy Landon Kassebaum of
Colorado and Democrats like Bill Bradley of New Jersey, Sam Nunn of Georgia and
David Pryor of Arkansas.

They are among the most experienced of the relatively small number of senators
who command respect for their dedication to the legislative process and for
their ability to round up majorities -- or sometimes influential minorities --
on big issues with little regard for party.

Mr. Hatfield worked against the Vietnam War with Senator George McGovern of
South Dakota, against nuclear weapons with Mr. Kennedy and against chemical
weapons with Mr. Pryor. As chairman of the Appropriations Committee, he worked
closely with its former chairman, Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia. Mrs.
Kassebaum worked with Mr. Kennedy on the issue of sanctions against South Africa
and collaborated with him this year on a major job-training bill.

Mr. Bradley's greatest success came with the 1986 tax bill, which he worked on
with a departed Senator, Bob Packwood of Oregon, who left to avoid expulsion.
Mr. Nunn has always worked across party lines on defense issues, and he joined
with Senator Pete V. Domenici of New Mexico in a major tax study that urged a
tax on consumption. In addition to forming an alliance with Mr. Hatfield against
chemical weapons, Mr. Pryor has worked closely with Senator William S. Cohen of
Maine to press for lower prescription drug prices.

Mr. Simpson's own commitment to that approach was underscored when, in a
telephone interview today, he cited the three bills of which he was most proud
and gave vast credit for help with those bills to three Democrats: former
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, for legislation on clean air, former
Representative Romano L. Mazzoli of Kentucky, for immigration legislation, and
former Senator Gary Hart of Colorado, for high-level nuclear waste legislation.

Senator John H. Chafee of Rhode Island said that the "Senate is a poorer place"
because of the departures of senators who were always "willing to look at what
the other side has proposed." One of the 1994 retirees, former Senator John C.
Danforth of Missouri, was even more direct, saying, "The center is falling out."

Thomas E. Mann, a Congressional scholar at the Brookings Institution, said the
issue the retirements raised for the Senate was not one of political philosophy.
"It's about one's modus operandi," he said. "You begin somewhere on the
ideological spectrum, but if you really believe in the process, you understand
that everything is a series of approximations and compromises and negotiations."

Several freshmen Republicans, he said, reject that approach because they "really
adhere to the notion that 'there is a right answer, and our objective is to
figure out how to achieve it.' "

Mr. Kennedy said Mr. Simpson "has been a constructive force" and understood that
"whether you are left, right or center, the genius of the Senate is that people
of widely differing views can work together."

Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, said Mr. Simpson exemplified
the idea that "we can have our differences, but it doesn't mean we have to
differ all the time." But he said some of this year's freshmen were also
beginning to understand that principle.

He said Mr. Simpson "was a very decent, loyal, honest lieutenant" when he served
as whip, adding that he "enjoyed what he did but was willing to make the tough
choices," whether that involved challenging the American Association of Retired
Persons or cutting entitlements.

Mr. Simpson said in the interview that he and some of the other retiring
Senators have talked among themselves and plan to get together soon to set out
an agenda for those who remain; they will "lay down some positive markers,"
saying what must be done with Social Security and other entitlement programs.
Mr. Simpson said he would hold Finance Committee hearings early next year on
Social Security to focus on the long-range threat to the program's solvency --
no one over 50 will testify.

While most of his votes satisfy conservative organizations, they have been
unhappy with his support for abortion rights. He has been known for harsh
language in the heat of battle, as during the questioning of Anita Hill in the
Clarence Thomas hearings or when he attacked Peter Arnett of CNN for reporting
from Baghdad during the war in the Persian Gulf.

In an hourlong speech on Saturday night, which Mr. Simpson said today was the
longest he had ever given, he reflected about his friends and relatives and his
life in Cody, saying, "I do thank you all for a magical and wondrous life in
politics."

But he also fulfilled his role as the Senate's leading news media critic.  "The
media has an awesome responsibility in our land -- and that is the word
'responsibility,' " he said. "And they do not meet it well." He said that while
the media "were everlastingly babbling of 'gridlock,' " Congress was passing
laws dealing with unfunded mandates, lobbying and gift rules, environmental
laws, education, transportation and trade measures, and the Americans with
Disabilities Act, and "all by large bipartisan votes."

"The media," he said, "is the only unaccountable branch of society. All the rest
of us are held accountable." He continued, "Yet any challenge to or criticism of
them is eternally met by drawing the now-tattered cloak of the First Amendment
about their hunched shoulders, or crying into the wind about 'the chilling
effect.' "

But in today's interview, Mr. Simpson also said he was saddened by seeing that
reporters and politicians now confront and "try to fool each other," in contrast
with his 13 years in the Wyoming Legislature, when he could have a drink with a
reporter, voice a salty opinion and not be embarrassed by seeing it printed.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 15, 1995, Friday

CORRECTION:

An article on Dec. 4 about the retirements of 12 United States senators
misstated the previous record for voluntary retirements. Ten senators retired in
1896, not 12, as stated by the Senate Historian's Office. Ten also retired in
1904.


GRAPHIC: Photo: After Senator Alan K. Simpson announced in Cody, Wyo., on
Saturday that he would not run again, a friend, Glenn Fales, at right, suggested
that Mr. Simpson consider reviving his family's dude ranch. (Associated Press)


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NYC;
Recruiting In Shadow Of Bosnia

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN

SECTION: Section B;    Page 1;    Column 1;    Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 780 words


UNLESS you know exactly where it is, you can walk past the United States Army
recruiting station near Lincoln Center without giving it so much as a glance. It
blends into the background at Amsterdam Avenue and 66th Street, dwarfed by
Martin Luther King Jr. High School across the street and no more conspicuous
than the hairdresser's shop next door.

No sir, said Sgt. First Class Abelito Solis, the station commander, young men
and women are not in the habit of dropping in to sign up. He and his three
fellow recruiters really have to pursue them at the 12 high schools and 2
colleges in their district.

It is a difficult task, requiring endless patience, especially when they come up
against principals and guidance counselors who make clear that the only green
uniforms they can tolerate are on the Jets.

"A lot of them are old-timers -- from the Vietnam era," said Sergeant Solis, 32,
a polite fellow who might have chosen different words had he known he was
talking to a Vietnam-era geezer who left his bottle of Geritol home.

"Those are people," he said, "who don't have a good impression of the Army."

Principals notwithstanding, the military has worked hard since the Vietnam era
to improve its image, and with fair success. Recruiters had a fairly easy time
after the 1991 gulf war. But they are suddenly back in troubled waters as United
States peacekeeping troops get ready to pour into Bosnia.

Sergeant Solis, who earned his Combat Infantryman Badge in Iraq four years ago,
is well aware that if American casualties pile up, his own job could become
painful.

There is just no way now to predict. But to play it safe, the sergeant doesn't
let the word Bosnia cross his lips when he talks to young New Yorkers and their
parents.

"I'm in the business of putting people in the Army," he said candidly. "I'm not
looking for reasons for them not to join. If it comes up, it comes up. We'll
deal with it."

Thus far, even in Lincoln Center, recruiters are doing surprisingly well in a
town where military tradition for many does not go beyond guessing who is buried
in Grant's Tomb.

The New York City Recruiting Battalion, which includes suburban counties, met
its quota and then some, ending the last Federal fiscal year tied for first with
its counterpart in Jackson, Miss. Its "mission" -- the professionals do not like
"quota" -- was to put 3,546 men and women in the regular Army and the Reserves.
It signed up 3,843.

THIS year should also turn out well, said Lieut. Col. Anthony Parker, the
battalion commander since last June, and Maj. Gregory Penczak, the chief Marine
recruiter in the region, is similarly confident. "Young people are receptive to
what the Army has to offer," Colonel Parker said yesterday in his spare office
at Fort Hamilton in Brooklyn. "It offers career development and a way out of New
York, if they want that."

Many apparently do.

No doubt, the New York battalion benefits from its own hard work. But as its
recruiters acknowledge, it helps to be in a city with an unemployment rate of
around 9 percent, well above the national average. The Army tends to look better
to civilians when the economy goes flat. And given the prevailing corporate
ethic, which to some seems to hold that success is measured by how many people
you toss out of work, there is no local shortage of volunteers, even if
recruiters elsewhere in the country have seen their numbers drop.

TO many young people, a big draw is the offer of up to $30,000 in college
tuition. It was good enough to lure Arundel Hunte, 18, of Bedford-Stuyvesant --
Private Hunte since his high-school graduation last summer. "I thought I'd go
into the Army, straighten myself out, earn the tuition but also get some
discipline," he said. "If you don't have discipline, you can't do anything."

In a way, recruiting stations provide a snapshot of New York.

The school system's failings are reflected in the large numbers of young
volunteers who wash out after they are screened for basic verbal and math
skills. And poor neighborhoods, which in theory should produce an ample supply
of recruits, struggle with high percentages of teen-agers having criminal
records that disqualify them.

"A lot of people have the wrong idea about us," said Sergeant Solis, who was
born in the Philippines. "If they can't make it on the outside, they're not
going to in the Army."

Of course, financial incentives cannot outweigh the potential harm of a military
nightmare in the Balkans. The coming months in Bosnia, Colonel Parker said, may
determine Fort Hamilton's success for years. "If it doesn't go well," he said,
"if it starts looking like Vietnam, we could have a hard time."

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
The Clinton Gamble

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section A;  Page 23;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 737 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In the wake of President Clinton's vigorous diplomatic efforts to bring the war
in Bosnia to a close, his foreign policy is getting a second look, with a lot of
analysts concluding about the Clinton foreign policy what Mark Twain once said
of the music of Wagner: It's not as bad as it sounds.

In the midst of this revisionist mood, the journal Foreign Affairs will publish
next month a provocative analysis by Prof. Michael Mandelbaum, who teaches at
the Johns Hopkins school of international studies and argues that the Clinton
foreign policy really is as bad as it sounds. His thesis is that the Clinton
policy is congenitally flawed because it never identified U.S. national
interests abroad after the cold war, but instead tried to conduct foreign policy
by "the standards of Mother Teresa," trying to "turn American foreign policy
into a branch of social work."

Whereas previous Administrations were preoccupied with the dangerous and
powerful nations at the core of the international community -- Russia, Japan,
China and Germany -- the Clinton team, he contends, preoccupied itself with
relieving suffering and oppression in nations on the periphery: Bosnia, Somalia
and Haiti. In each case the Administration's objective was not to pursue U.S.
national interests -- traditionally defined as those issues that could affect
American lives -- but rather to promote American values.

The problem the Administration ran into in Somalia, Haiti and Bosnia, writes Mr.
Mandelbaum, was that to end their misery required deep, costly engagements in
their tangled internal politics. The Clintonites assumed, wrongly, he argues,
that "they could take the political capital the public had furnished for 40
years to oppose the Soviets and put it to uses they deemed more virtuous." But
when faced with the real costs of healing Somalia, Haiti and Bosnia, the
Administration found it didn't have the public's support, so it balked, leaving
it with three fiascoes.

After these initial disasters, the Administration ended up using force in Haiti
and Bosnia, but the motivation was not just social work, he says, but "to
bolster the Administration's political standing, which was suffering from the
failure to resolve these problems." Both the Haiti and Bosnia interventions
achieved a measure of success, but it was provisional and easily reversible.
Because these interventions lacked the support of a majority of Americans, the
Administration could not stay in Haiti -- and won't be able to stay in Bosnia --
long enough to really get the job done and secure a stable new order. The reason
for that lack of support is because in neither Haiti nor Bosnia are vital U.S.
national interests at stake, Mr. Mandelbaum argues.

"As in Haiti, the chief purpose of an American expeditionary force in Bosnia
will be to leave as soon as possible, with as few casualties as possible, rather
than to do whatever is necessary, for as long as necessary, to keep (or make)
peace," Mr. Mandelbaum writes. In Haiti and Bosnia, he adds, the exit strategy
is the mission. That is, the mission is to show up and leave, not to stay until
the goals are fully achieved.

This argument is important because it reminds us of something we've forgotten:
During the cold war there was no distinction between international social work
and the national interest. Social work was nation-building and nation-building
was the national interest. We engaged in nation-building -- from the Marshall
Plan in Europe to Vietnam -- because it was deemed essential for halting the
spread of Communism, which could hurt us all.

By both accident and design, Mr. Clinton is testing a new thesis -- that after
the cold war he can pursue an ambitious social-work agenda abroad, even though
it doesn't affect the nation's vital interests. That is why so many Americans
feel ambivalent about Haiti and Bosnia: They want to do good works, like Mother
Teresa, but won't sacrifice their blood without the threat of Stalin on the
other side.

Mr. Clinton's gamble is that he can split the difference: get enough public
support to do a little good, for enough time, to make a reasonable difference in
a place that's not really that important. If the price of the Clinton policy in
Bosnia is just money, he has a chance to succeed. If it turns out to be blood,
the underlying contradictions and public ambivalence will destroy his policy and
possibly his Presidency.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 7, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Dmitri Volkogonov, 67, Historian Who Debunked Heroes, Dies

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section B;    Page 18;    Column 1;    Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 612 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Dec. 6


Col. Gen. Dmitri A. Volkogonov, a Soviet Army historian who lost his illusions
about Communism and helped strip his countrymen of theirs, died today in Moscow
of stomach cancer. He was 67.

General Volkogonov's biographies of Stalin, Trotsky and Lenin, based on secret
documents that he had unique access to in the 1970's and 1980's as chief of the
military's psychological warfare department, forced Russians to face the harsh
truth about their leaders.

General Volkogonov began his career as a loyal party member, teaching
Marxist-Leninist propaganda, and ended it as a ferocious anti-Communist.

A liberal member of Parliament and a military adviser to President Boris N.
Yeltsin of Russia, General Volkogonov lost favor in the Kremlin by opposing the
war in Chechnya.

Even after Communism collapsed, Russian military men never forgave him for what
they saw as his treachery. But today, the lower house of Parliament stood in
silence to pay a final tribute to the man who called himself "the black sheep"
of Soviet generals.

General Volkogonov's biography of Stalin, which was banned by the Communist
Party Central Committee when he completed it in 1983, created a furor when it
was published in 1988 under Mikhail S. Gorbachev's policy of glasnost. His
expose of Lenin, based on 3,724 top secret documents and published in 1991, was
almost as as controversial because it painted the Bolshevik leader, whom many
still revered, as ruthless and immoral. "Lenin was the antichrist," General
Volkogonov once said. All Russia's great troubles stemmed from Lenin."

Passionately outspoken about Russian history, General Volkogonov occasionally
caused a stir in the United States as well.

In 1992, he wrote a letter saying there was no evidence in K.G.B. archives that
Alger Hiss was a spy, which was read as an exoneration by the defenders of Mr.
Hiss. The attendant furor in the United States forced the historian to retract
his statement and concede that he had not examined all the files.

Appointed the Russian chairman of the U.S.-Russia Joint Commission on Prisoners
of Wars and Missing in Action in 1992, General Volkogonov was often in American
newspaper headlines with tantalizing scraps of information about United States
servicemen either missing in Vietnam or held prisoner in Russia during the cold
war. None were ever found.

In 1937, when he was 8, General Volkogonov's father was shot in Stalin's purges
and his mother was sent to a labor camp. He embraced the Soviet Army as his
family when he was 18 and traveled to Angola, Ethiopia, the Middle East and
Afghanistan as head of the department of psychological warfare. But even as he
was indoctrinating troops in Communist orthodoxy, General Volkogonov was
struggling with private doubts based on the horrors he discovered hidden in the
archives.

As director of the Military History Institute, he oversaw the writing of a
planned 10-volume official Soviet history of World War II. But he was dismissed
in 1991 when the first volume blamed Stalin for almost losing the war against
Hitler. He then joined forces with Mr. Yeltsin, who was then President of Russia
and leader of the anti-Communist movement.

Throughout his illness, General Volkogonov contined to work furiously to
complete his last angry look at the past, a biography of the seven leaders who
ran the Soviet Union for 74 years, entitled "Seven Portraits," which will be
published in Russia later this month.

In an interview with The New York Times last July, General Volkogonov said, "The
only thing I can be proud of -- the greatest merit of my life -- is that I was
able to fundamentally alter my views."

NAME: Dmitri A. Volkogonov

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 7, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Pataki Offers Details on Lilco Breakup

BYLINE: By DOREEN CARVAJAL

SECTION: Section B;    Page 6;    Column 1;    Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1030 words

DATELINE: GARDEN CITY, L.I., Dec. 6


Gov. George E. Pataki and a small army of state officials and investment
advisers delivered more details of a plan to break up the Long Island Lighting
Company today, but they remained vague about financial relief for Suffolk
County.

The plan, drafted by the Long Island Power Authority at Mr. Pataki's request,
promises to cut electricity rates on Long Island by 12 percent through a partial
state takeover of Lilco and the sale of the utility's gas operations and power
plants to private companies.

James F. Gill, the LIPA chairman, said flatly today that the authority would not
forgive $80 million that Suffolk County owes Lilco as repayment for excess
property taxes on the defunct Shoreham nuclear power plant. The county is also
facing a pending lawsuit for another tax refund that could exceed $400 million.

"If we take over Lilco in time," said Mr. Gill, "and the second suit is still
pending, then we will be able to provide some modicum of relief. But to simply
say 'I absolve you' would be an injustice."

Three months ago, when the Governor commissioned the plan, the Suffolk County
Executive, Robert Gaffney, a Pataki ally, was campaigning hard for re-election
on a platform of his opposition to Lilco. While members of the Suffolk County
Legislature said today that they were disappointed that the county's debt to the
utility was not addressed, Mr. Gaffney said he was still evaluating the plan.

"Clearly I supported the Governor's involvement," he said. "I expect the
solution that has been proposed by the Governor works for the Long Island
region. We need to see how the tax situation plays out."

At a news conference this morning at Adelphi University here, Mr. Pataki
described the proposal as a "very good, real plan" and raised the possibility
that if Lilco's executives spurned the offer, the state could start condemnation
proceedings to take over the company.

Under the plan, the power authority would issue more than $4.5 billion in
tax-exempt bonds to pay Lilco shareholders for the utility's transmission and
distribution network, essentially its wires and its links to customers, which
would be managed by another energy company. The authority would also assume more
than $2 billion of the company's debt. In addition, Lilco's gas operations and
power plants would be sold to separate companies. The plan must be accepted not
only by Lilco but also by oversight agencies including the State Public
Authorities Control Board.

Negotiations have already begun with Lilco executives, who have been providing
the authority's investment advisers with confidential information about the
company. Mr. Gill said Lilco's chairman, William J. Catacosinos, clearly does
not like the proposal because it would leave Lilco essentially a shell
corporation with no energy assets.

But Lilco released a muted statement today, saying only, "We will seek to obtain
the details of the plan so that we can properly and carefully analyze its effect
on our customers, our employees and our investors."

Today, Lilco common stock closed at 16 5/8 on the New York Stock Exchange, up
one-eighth from yesterday. At least one ratings agency, Duff & Phelps Credit
Rating Co., placed the company on a credit watch pending the outcome of debate
over the plan to dismantle it.

The Governor, noting that Long Island electric rates are among the highest in
the country, urged the Republicans and Democrats on the power authority to set
aside ego and political differences in pressing forward with the plan.

When Richard M. Kessel, a Democratic member of the authority, asked Mr. Pataki
to take questions from members, the Governor refused, shouting: "Your policies
are those of the past. Let's let the board do its work."

The tensions reflect the tortuous history of attempts to reduce Long Island's
high electricity rates.

During last year's election campaign, Gov. Mario M. Cuomo proposed a plan to
take over Lilco by buying its stock. In June, Mr. Kessel, then chairman of LIPA,
also proposed a takeover plan, which would have forgiven Suffolk County its tax
obligations to Lilco.

Mr. Kessel and a fellow Democrat on the authority, Deborah Pfeiffer, were both
critical of the latest plan because it did not directly address Suffolk's tax
refund. The Governor said the state would try to resolve the issue, but he did
not elaborate.

"How do we deal with that? How do we explain that?" said Ms. Pfeiffer in a
meeting of the authority after the Governor's departure.

One of the major complaints today about the LIPA plan is that it does not
provide specific information about who would run the utility for the authority
and how much Lilco's transmission and distribution systems would cost.

The complaints came not only from Democrats, but from utility analysts who said
it was difficult to assess the proposals without more precise information.

One LIPA member, Patrick Foye, said the plan was not more explicit because the
authority members did not want to "tip their hand" in tough negotiations with
Lilco.

Desmond Ryan, executive director of the Association for a Better Long Island, a
developers' lobbying group, said the process was reminiscent of the sensitive
negotiations for the United States' withdrawal from Vietnam. "We've got to give
them peace with honor to leave," he said.

Mr. Ryan said the Governor's comments about condemnation essentially amounted to
genteel saber-rattling, since such a procedure would take years. More likely, he
said, is that the Governor could threaten to control rates through the State
Public Service Commission.

Peter A. Bradford, the former chairman of the commission, agreed: "From Lilco's
standpoint, eminent domain is the least of their worries. They're likely to be
more worried about the state's leverage through the rate-setting and regulatory
process."

In a recent mailing to its customers, Lilco said that it had just asked the
commission to freeze its electricity rates for the second year in a row, and it
was hoping to extend the rate freeze for a third year as well.

The letter points out that "taxes account for 21 cents of every dollar you pay
Lilco and are twice the national average."


LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. George E. Pataki presenting a plan yesterday for a partial
state takeover of the Long Island Lighting Company, with James F. Gill, chairman
of the power authority that drew up the plan, at his right. (Vic DeLucia/The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 7, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Army Stress Control Unit Mobilizes, Too, to Seek Out Peacekeeping's Hidden Toll

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE

SECTION: Section A;     Page 6;     Column 1;     Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 649 words

DATELINE: FORT CARSON, Colo., Dec. 5


A freezing wind whistled down from Pikes Peak, pistol shots crackled at a firing
range, and Maj. Kathryn Gaylord recited the Army's recipe for coping with stress
during a Bosnia winter: "Three hots and a cot."

Three hot meals, plenty of bed rest, counseling and, if possible, immediate
return to duty prescribed Major Gaylord, a psychiatric nurse who expects to go
to Bosnia next week with a 24-member Army Combat Stress Control unit based here.

While the 20,000 American soldiers destined to go to Bosnia are not expected to
experience heavy combat, the Army fears the hidden toll of what some here call
"peacekeeping stress."

Separated from their families during the Christmas season, American soldiers are
to go to a foreign land strewn with millions of land mines and divided by
murderous ethnic hatreds.

"If soldiers' families are not well, then they will not perform well," said Maj.
Simon H. Pincus, commander of the anti-stress unit here, as an assistant packed
boxes of antidepressants, including Prozac. "In the Yom Kippur war, the biggest
stress determinant was the family problem."

With a freshly unfolded map of Bosnia pinned to his office wall here, Major
Pincus, an Army psychiatrist from the Bronx, unfolded his plan to fight
peacekeeping stress.

Drawing on experience gained during the Persian Gulf war and in peacekeeping
missions in Somalia and Haiti, the Army believes that stress must be fought at
two ends: in the field and at home. Worries over domestic problems can cause
more stress for soldiers than worries over a foreign environment.

To ease soldiers' worries, the Army encourages spouse support groups, pays
family medical bills and offers emergency short-term loans to families.
Commanding officers are to explain to their soldiers' spouses the importance of
overseas missions.

"Families go through a lot more stress than soldiers," said Major Pincus, who
ran a support group during the gulf war for pregnant wives of soldiers. "I feel
a sense of purpose and importance. My wife feels, 'I'm just taking care of you,
so you can leave me.' "

On the ground in Bosnia, the major plans to monitor daily operations for
traumatic events -- road accidents, combat injuries and deaths. From a base at a
field hospital, he will dispatch mobile units throughout the American-controlled
sector. Traveling by a Humvee all-terrain vehicle, each unit is to consist of a
driver, a psychiatrist and a social worker.

Soldiers showing signs of stress -- anxiety, anger, trembling hands, sleep
deprivation -- will be evacuated for 72 hours of "three hots and a cot." For
Americans, Hungary could be a rest and recuperation area.

Rather than "looking for patients," the teams hope to prevent lasting
psychological damage by quick intervention, the major said. For soldiers, a key
part of overcoming stress is to return quickly to their original units and to
continue with original missions.

For skeptics who think the Army has gone soft with pyschiatric handholding,
Major Pincus rattled off statistics to highlight concrete damage caused by what
past generations variously called shell shock, battle fatigue or combat stress.
In the Korean and Vietnam Wars, he said, American fighting units lost about
one-quarter of their soldiers to stress.

No one expects such widespread traumas from the Bosnia peacekeeping operation.
But here at Colorado's largest military base, members of the 84th Medical
Detachment (Combat Stress Control) are already experiencing the pre-deployment
emotions that they are trained to watch for in others.

At the unit's office, Major Pincus prepared for a family support meeting at his
house. Asked about how he felt about leaving his 5-year-old son, the commanding
officer, Combat Stress Control, averted his eyes to gaze out a window at the
Rocky Mountains horizon. He said simply, "The idea of leaving him is very
upsetting."

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 7, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Assign Docudramas Ratings for Accuracy

SECTION: Section A;  Page 30;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 178 words


To the Editor:

William Safire's Nov. 27 column, which assails docudramas, illustrates that as
increasing numbers of directors feel entitled to use cheap tricks and devices to
spike their dramas, the news media must challenge not only a quirky celluloid
establishment but also a passive viewing audience.

As cinema introduces young people to the past, the Motion Picture Association of
America needs to create an HC (historically correct) rating that would put our
mental gears into place.

Until then our children may confuse Beethoven with "Immortal Beloved"; the
Vietnam War with "The Deer Hunter"; the Kennedy assassination with "J.F.K."

As the daughter of a harassed and bombed Mississippi rabbi who, along with
hundreds of others, put his life on the line for civil rights workers, I find it
inconceivable that the inherent drama of "Mississippi Burning" needed to be
diluted with spicy fiction. We need constant reminders that in history, truth is
not only stranger than fiction, it is better.

LESLIE RUBINSTEIN
New York, Nov. 30, 1995

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 7, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

James Reston, a Giant of Journalism, Dies at 86

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 3836 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 6


James Reston, former columnist, Washington correspondent and executive editor of
The New York Times, died tonight at his home here. He was 86.

The cause was cancer, said his son Thomas.

First as a reporter and then, beginning in 1953, as a columnist, Mr. Reston was
perhaps the most influential journalist of his generation. In Washington, where
he was based, and also in other capitals around the world, he had unrivaled
access to the high and the mighty. Yet he retained a wry, self-deprecating
personality, free of bombast, and always sought to reduce political complexity
to plain language.

"What I try to do," he said, "is write a letter to a friend who doesn't have
time to find out all the goofy things that go on in Washington."

Interested in China and the Soviet Union as well as the United States, a student
of diplomacy as well as domestic politics, he won two Pulitzer Prizes and dozens
of other awards.

Mr. Reston was forgiving of the frailties of soldiers, statesmen and party hacks
-- too forgiving, some of his critics later said, because he was too close to
them. But his stern moral standards, rooted in the Victorian values of his
youth, never wavered. He remained an idealist in a world of cynics.

From his strong-minded mother he inherited a Presbyterian conscience and an
abiding sense of duty and responsibility. Work hard, he was taught. Work for
large goals that transcend self-interest. Be cooperative. Be modest.

A talent scout of prodigious capacity, Mr. Reston hired and trained many of The
Times's best-known journalists, and served as mentor to many more. To each of
them, he passed along a lifetime's lessons about craft and country.

Mr. Reston's 50-year association with The Times began when he joined its London
bureau on Sept. 1, 1939, the day Hitler's armies marched into Poland, igniting
World War II. It was a fitting day on which to start his career at the paper,
much of which would be spent recording and reflecting upon the aftermath of that
fateful day.

His nationally syndicated column appeared regularly until 1987, when he became
senior columnist. He retired from The Times in 1989, without ceremony, on his
80th birthday.

In an interview marking the occasion, he said the two greatest political
triumphs in his lifetime had been the common defense system developed by the
West after World War II and the improvement in the lot of black people in
America since 1960.

Mr. Reston, who was born in Scotland, described the men who met in Philadelphia
in 1787 to draft the Constitution as the great heroes in his adopted country's
history. The document that they produced, he said, made possible "the triumph of
the moderates" over the next two centuries.

A moderate himself, hostile to both fascism and communism, he described
journalism's role in their eclipse as "one of the great pleasures of my life."

Asked whom he had most admired, he cited Franklin D. Roosevelt as the finest
President he had known and Dean Acheson, Secretary of State in the Truman
Administration, as "the key man" who "came to the fork in the road" and
concluded that containing the Soviet Union would require a new alliance.

But he chose Jean Monnet, the French visionary who conceived the European
Community, as the greatest man he had ever known as well as the person who had
most deeply influenced his own thinking. Monnet proved, Mr. Reston often said,
that "if you don't demand credit for things, you can push them through."

Mr. Reston thought of himself primarily as a reporter, and he often beat his
competitors to be the first to write about major news events. His coverage of
the Dumbarton Oaks Conference in Washington in 1944, which laid the groundwork
for the United Nations, was one of the era's most important exclusives and won
him his first Pulitzer, in 1945. Those articles disclosed the substance of
secret documents that were then being circulated among delegations from the
United States, the Soviet Union, Britain and China on the structure of the
proposed international organization.

Mr. Reston won his second Pulitzer in 1957 for distinguished reporting from
Washington. The articles cited were written in June 1956 and analyzed the
effects of President Dwight D. Eisenhower's illness on the functioning of the
executive branch.

He was also responsible for The Times's publication in 1955 of the documents of
the 1945 Yalta Conference. And in 1954 he disclosed that J. Robert Oppenheimer,
who had directed the making of the first atomic bomb, had subsequently been
denied access to secret documents by the Atomic Energy Commission because of
suspicion that he was passing information to the Soviet Union, a charge of which
Oppenheimer was later cleared.

One exclusive dispatch came by accident. In 1971, as one of the first American
reporters allowed into China, Mr. Reston developed appendicitis. His report,
filed from his bed in the Anti-Imperialist Hospital in the capital, ran on the
front page under the headline "Now, About My Operation in Peking."

'My Own Opinions Aren't That Good'

From the 1950's on, Mr. Reston interviewed most of the world's leaders, often
producing major news accounts that were scrutinized at the State Department for
their every nuance. The interviews often bore the special Reston stamp: He
sought to reveal not only the policies and the politics of the people he
interviewed, but also their vision of life and their view of history.

Mr. Reston, who was called Scotty by virtually everyone who knew him, was 5 feet
8 inches tall and had a round and ruddy face, gray-green eyes, an ever-present
pipe and an invariably pleasant manner. He was courteous not only to high-level
officials but also to the young people who worked for him.

"He believes in hard work, in thrift, honor your parents, woman's place is in
the home, play by the rules and live clean," his colleague Russell Baker once
said.

Mr. Reston was credited by competitors with having more high-level news sources
in Washington than almost any other reporter, although some critics felt that he
was too kind in print to some of them. The economist John Kenneth Galbraith,
reviewing Mr. Reston's "The Artillery of the Press," a 1967 collection of his
talks before the Council on Foreign Relations, suggested that Mr. Reston had
learned to his disadvantage "to treat all people in the manner of a newspaperman
who must one day go back and see them again."

But in a 1980 article in The New Republic, Mr. Reston was quoted as saying: "If
you spend your life as a hatchet man -- and there's something to be said for
that -- then eventually you find that everybody's out to lunch when you call.
You're left with only your own opinion. I wouldn't like that because my own
opinions aren't that good."

Writing his column three times a week, Mr. Reston was a procrastinator, often
filing right on deadline, to the dismay of night editors at The Times. A
two-finger typist, he regularly wore out typewriters because he banged so hard
on the keys, and his desk was a litter of papers, many of which bore tiny black
marks where a stream of smoldering matches had landed in the course of a
never-ending pipe-lighting ritual.

His columns, laced with quotations from Walter Lippmann, H. G. Wells, Matthew
Arnold and Churchill, were a combination of high moral tone, detailed reporting,
allusions to sports, impish humor and evocative descriptions of seasonal changes
along the Potomac. They seldom offered absolute judgments about people or
events; he used the word "maybe" more than most pundits.

His first column, on Oct. 18, 1953, established the Reston style.

"This town is still full of echoes from the days of America's isolation," he
wrote of Washington. "It has changed in policy and personnel, more than any
other world capital in the last generation. No nation has taken on so much or
moved so far in such a hurry. Yet the habits of the past, like the bent figures
of homeless former senators, still haunt the capital."

Press and Politics: 'Like Cats and Dogs'

He often returned to certain themes, such as the role of the press. In his
column of Oct. 30, 1968, when Spiro T. Agnew, soon to be elected Vice President,
was denouncing news organizations, Mr. Reston wrote:

"The candidates and the press are fussing at each other again, and this is the
way it should be. They have different jobs, and in many ways they are natural
enemies, like cats and dogs. The first job of the candidate is to win, and he
usually says what he thinks will help him win. The job of the reporter is to
report what happens and decontaminate as much of the political poison as he can.
The conflict is obvious."

In addition to his two Pulitzer Prizes, Mr. Reston was awarded the Presidential
Medal of Freedom in 1986 and the Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Award in
1991.  He received the Overseas Press Club award for interpretation of
international news three times, the George Polk Memorial Award for national
reporting and the French Legion of Honor, and was named Commander, Order of the
British Empire. He also received 28 honorary degrees.

After retiring, he fulfilled a longtime promise to his wife, Sally, by writing
his memoirs. Titled "Deadline," they were published by Random House in 1991.

Reviewing the book for The New York Times, Ronald Steel, author of "Walter
Lippmann and the American Century," called Mr. Reston "the quintessential
Washington insider."

"Officials used him to test out new ideas on the public or to drop leaks for
which they did not want to be held accountable," Mr. Steel wrote. "Because of
his high position at The Times and his personal integrity, he was trusted both
by those who provided the news and by those who read it.

"But what he did so well and so usefully for so long could not be done today.
Journalism and the political world have changed too much."

Born in Scotland To Years of Poverty

James Barrett Reston began life about as far from the Washington power center as
one could get.

He was born in Clydebank, Scotland, on Nov. 3, 1909, the son of James, a
machinist, and Johanna Irving Reston. The Restons migrated to the United States
when he was an infant, but Mrs. Reston became ill, and the family returned to
Scotland.

There followed years of harsh poverty, of life in a brick tenement where young
James and his sister slept crosswise at the foot of their parents' bed. In 1920
the family returned to the United States and settled in Dayton, Ohio. His father
worked for the Delco Remy Division of General Motors.

When his parents were naturalized, young James automatically became an American
citizen. In 1932, he graduated from the University of Illinois with an
undistinguished academic record. He had majored in journalism, skipping the
course in governmental reporting but getting an A in sportswriting.

During his high school years he caddied at the Dayton Country Club golf course.
His own game became so good that he twice won the Ohio state public links
championship and at Illinois was captain of the Big Ten championship golf team
in 1932. His father wanted him to become a golf pro. His mother wanted him to be
a preacher, which, he was to say later, is really what he became.

In the winters during his school days, he hung around The Dayton Daily News.
"When the phone rang, I'd pick it up and take down the scores," he later
recalled. "And from that I just moved into newspapering. I never thought of
anything else."

From the Cincinnati Reds To the London Blitz

Another link to the world of newspapers was Gov. James M. Cox, the Ohio
publisher and 1920 Democratic Presidential candidate, for whom young Reston had
caddied. Mr. Cox gave him his first job after college on one of the Cox
newspapers in Ohio, The Springfield Daily News, where he earned $10 a week as
the sports editor.

Later he was hired as traveling secretary and publicity director for the
Cincinnati Reds baseball team. In 1934 he moved to New York as a sportswriter
for the Associated Press Feature Service.

The next year he married Sally Jane Fulton, a former college classmate who had
been president of her sorority, an A student and a Phi Beta Kappa in her junior
year. Named Sara but always called Sally, she was the daughter of a judge from
Sycamore, Ill., a small town near Chicago.

Mr. Reston once told a University of Illinois graduating class, "I should say in
passing that I myself married a recklessly beautiful girl whom I first saw on
Wright Street wearing a scarlet coat."

"My Gal Sal," as he called her in the dedication of "Sketches in the Sand," a
collection of his columns published in 1967, became his closest confidante,
frequent collaborator and steadiest supporter.

They had three sons, Richard, James Jr. and Thomas. Mr. Reston's own happy
situation made him a champion of marriage, and he was forever asking his young
bachelor colleagues when they were going to wed.

In 1937 The Associated Press sent Mr. Reston to London on a rather loose dual
assignment: in summer covering sports events, in winter the British Foreign
Office.

In 1939 he joined The Times and became low man on the totem pole in the London
bureau, with a salary of $85 a week. He was so little known on the foreign desk
in New York that his first byline in The Times had his name wrong -- John
instead of James.

Then came the London blitz. The Times's office for much of the war was on the
seventh floor of the Reuters Building on Fleet Street, which offered a view of
the dome of St. Paul's Cathedral. He described this view of the battle in his
first book, "Prelude to Victory."

"Before we got better sense, we used to put the lights off in the Times office
every night and watch this effort," he wrote. "With uncanny regularity, the
German bombers would come over just about 10 minutes after blackout and start
dropping incendiary bombs all over this section. About an hour before we could
see the flames, we would begin to hear the steady throb of scores of engines
along the banks of the Thames; these were the pumps, driving the muddy water
from the river up through miles of new hose. . . .

"A little later the sky would begin to change in color from midnight blue to a
reddish glow, and soon the great dome of the cathedral would stand out in
silhouette against the flames of perhaps a dozen raging fires. Night after night
we watched this incredible scene, and morning after morning we marveled at the
fact that the fires were somehow put out."

In December 1940 he was reassigned to Washington, and in 1942 published "Prelude
to Victory," a call to action to the American people that was acclaimed here and
abroad. Its theme was pure Reston: Unless Americans put aside personal aims and
materialistic thinking and made sacrifices in a crusade for their country, the
war would not be won.

In late 1942, Elmer Davis, head of the Office of War Information, obtained a
leave of absence from The Times for Mr. Reston and sent him to London to set up
the agency's effort there.

John G. Winant, the United States Ambassador to Britain, recommended him to
Arthur Hays Sulzberger, then president and publisher of The Times, who was
looking for an assistant. It was the beginning of Mr. Reston's close friendship
with the Sulzberger family.

After the War Years, Washington for Good

Mr. Reston returned to Washington and was named national correspondent in 1945.
He made his mark with his coverage of Dumbarton Oaks, which illustrated a Reston
maxim: Seek out the disgruntled party. His theory was that people who were
disenchanted were more likely to talk candidly.

In this case, it was the Chinese representatives to the conference who were
disenchanted. In his memoirs, Mr. Reston told of having met Chen Yi, one of the
Chinese delegates, some years before the war through Iphigene Ochs Sulzberger,
wife of The Times's publisher. At Mr. Reston's urging, Chen Yi slipped him the
complete texts of the proposals.

Instead of writing one long article, Mr. Reston doled out the information,
producing an exclusive a day. The Russians thought Washington had leaked the
material; Washington suspected the British, and the F.B.I. started an
investigation of Mr. Reston.

In 1948 Mr. Reston became diplomatic correspondent for The Times, and in 1953 he
became Washington bureau chief, succeeding Arthur Krock.

Mr. Reston continued as bureau chief until 1964, when he voluntarily
relinquished the post to concentrate on his column.

In 1968 he was summoned to New York by Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, who had become
publisher, to succeed Turner Catledge as executive editor, in charge of the
entire news operation. The internal politics of the news department had received
publicity after an unsuccessful effort by editors in New York to exert more
control over the Washington bureau. Mr. Reston's mandate was to re-establish
peace.

For 13 months he ran the news department while commuting to Washington a few
times a week to write his column. It was an almost impossible job. In 1969,
knowing that his column was suffering and that he had to choose between it and
the editor's post, he gladly chose the column.

Mr. Reston was eminently a Washington man. He loved and understood the capital.
Moreover, he had helped shape the Washington bureau. These were his people, and
many of them regarded him as a father figure. The New York office, on the other
hand, seemed a vast, impersonal beehive, and Mr. Reston never felt totally
comfortable there.

During these years the Restons lived in a pleasant red brick house on Woodley
Road in leafy northwest Washington and spent weekends at their log cabin in
Fiery Run, Va. Mr. Reston often used Fiery Run as the dateline on his
Thoreau-like columns about the restorative life in the country.

In 1968 the Restons purchased The Vineyard Gazette, a 122-year-old weekly on
Martha's Vineyard, Mass., where they vacationed in the summer. The paper has
remained in the family; their son Richard is editor and publisher, and his wife,
Mary Jo, is publisher and general manager.

Two Cuba Episodes And the Pentagon Papers

Mr. Reston played a part in the publication of the Pentagon Papers in 1971 and
in two other major news events involving The Times in questions of national
security. The others were the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 and the Cuban missile
crisis of 1962.

In the spring of 1961, The Times was preparing to publish an article by Tad
Szulc reporting that 5,000 or 6,000 Cuban exiles who had been training in the
United States and in Central America for nine months were about to launch an
invasion of Cuba to overthrow the regime of Fidel Castro.

The article was planned for page 1 on April 7, under a four-column headline. But
Orvil Dryfoos, then the publisher, was troubled by the security implications of
the report. On April 6, he and Mr. Catledge, then managing editor, telephoned
Mr. Reston, who advised them not to publish the article and cautioned against
giving away the proposed timing of the landing as "imminent."

The article was published on April 7 under a one-column headline and with no
mention of the invasion's date. The Bay of Pigs invasion took place 10 days
later and ended in debacle. President John F. Kennedy, who took full
responsibility, said that if The Times had published more about the operation,
it might have saved the Administration from making such a colossal mistake.

"If I had it to do over, I would do exactly what we did at the time," Mr. Reston
said later. "It is ridiculous to think that publishing the fact that the
invasion was imminent would have avoided this disaster."

In 1962 Mr. Reston was apparently the only reporter who had found out that the
Soviet Union, then under the leadership of Nikita S. Khrushchev, had secreted
nuclear missiles in Cuba, only 90 miles from Florida. When Kennedy realized that
Mr. Reston had the information, he telephoned him directly.

Four years later, Mr. Reston recounted the incident to E. Clifton Daniel, then
managing editor of The Times.

"The President told me that he was going on television on Monday evening to
report to the American people," Mr. Reston recalled. "He said that if we
published the news about the missiles, Khrushchev could actually give him an
ultimatum before he went on the air.

"I told the President I would report to my office in New York," Mr. Reston
continued. "And if my advice was asked, I would recommend that we not publish.
It was not my duty to decide."

Kennedy then called Mr. Dryfoos, the publisher, and asked him not to print Mr.
Reston's article. Mr. Dryfoos left the matter up to Mr. Reston and his staff,
and the article was withheld.

It was a different story, however, in 1971 when The Times obtained and published
what became known as the Pentagon Papers, the Government's top-secret documents
on the Vietnam War. Seeing this at once as "the story of the century," Mr.
Reston was one of the editors who felt that the documents should be published
because they were history and that therefore no question of national security
was involved.

One of Mr. Reston's contributions to journalism was the corps of young reporters
he discovered and developed.

In 1961 he instituted a program of internships for young would-be reporters,
modeled on the clerkships at the United States Supreme Court and suggested to
him by the late Justice Felix Frankfurter. Each year he would recruit a new
college graduate as his clerk and researcher. He paid a price for this program,
as time and again the young clerks with lofty journalistic thoughts would mix up
his airline reservations or keep the Secretary of State waiting because they had
failed to cancel a scheduled appointment.

Linda Greenhouse, who went on to report on the Supreme Court for The Times,
recalled that on her first day as a clerk, Mr. Reston asked her to get Ted
Sorensen on the phone and suggested she try Paul Weiss in New York. After
unsuccessfully calling every Weiss-comma-Paul in the Manhattan phone book, she
reported back to Mr. Reston.

"He didn't groan, tear his hair or -- more important, and the reason for my
undying gratitude -- laugh at me," Ms. Greenhouse said. "He gently explained
that Paul, Weiss was a New York law firm where Ted Sorensen was working, looked
up the number and gave it to me."

It was perhaps this quality, this unfailing kindliness, that constituted his
special attractiveness. It enabled him to view the faults and frailties of the
world with compassion and to carry on in the belief that the best in mankind
would eventually win out over the worst.

"Stick with the optimists, Niftie," he wrote in a column in February 1980,
welcoming his new grandson, Devin Fitzgerald Reston, to the human race. "It's
going to be tough enough even if they're right."

Mr. Reston is survived by his wife; his sons, Richard F. Reston of Martha's
Vineyard, James B. Reston Jr. of Chevy Chase, Md., and Thomas B. Reston of
Washington; his sister, Joanna Richey of Santa Cruz, Calif., and five
grandchildren.


NAME: James Reston

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: James Reston. (Philip Perkis, 1979) (pg. A1); 1940 -- James
Reston, right, began his Times career in wartime London. His colleagues included
Raymond Daniell, left, and James MacDonald. (World Wide Photos); 1971 -- His
bout with appendicitis led to an exclusive dispatch from the Anti-imperialist
Hospital in Peking. (Sally Reston/The New York Times); 1964 -- He was known for
his ever-present pipe and pleasant manner; 1964 -- He was the quintessential
Washington insider; some critics suggested he was too kind to his subjects.
President Lyndon B. Johnson attended a party in his honor. (George Tames/The New
York Times)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 7, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

To Confront the Call-In Critics, U.S. Aides Take to the Airwaves

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1199 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 6


In the free-flowing realm of talk radio, it is perfectly natural for Jim from
Washington State and Jay from his car on a Los Angeles freeway to sound off
against the President for sending soldiers to Bosnia.

But it is downright peculiar when people like Jim and Jay get to sound off
directly to President Clinton's top policy makers: people like Madeleine K.
Albright, the chief representative to the United Nations, and Deputy Secretary
of State Strobe Talbott.

As part of its campaign to sell Americans on Mr. Clinton's decision to send
20,000 troops to Bosnia and Herzegovina, the White House for the first time has
taken on the very forum that has relentlessly attacked the Administration and
cheered on the Republican-led Congress.

Talk radio is cost-free, travel-free and time-efficient, and reaches millions of
Americans who do not normally keep Foreign Affairs Quarterly by their bedsides.

In this got-to-have-a-gimmick era, when Secretary of State Warren Christopher
goes on "Larry King Live" and Senator Bob Dole regularly mixes it up on the
radio with Don Imus, almost anything goes. And in the past two weeks,
Administration policy makers have called more than 100 hosts to talk to America.

Administration officials argue -- to almost anyone who will listen -- that
global leadership is the reason Americans have to go to Bosnia.

But for Jim from Washington State, it is all about President Clinton's manhood.
"He had to learn how to salute the military back in Washington, D.C.," he said
on a Los Angeles-based show the other day, just minutes after James P. Rubin,
Ms. Albright's spokesman, made his pitch. "Now he's trying to sell the American
people on something he wouldn't do himself."

Jay was similarly unmoved by Brian Cullen, a White House spokesman, who appealed
to listeners on a show by Oliver L. North, the retired Marine lieutenant colonel
who was caught up in the Reagan Administration's arms-for hostages scandal

"If Chelsea Clinton were to die there," Jay said, "what would Bill Clinton have
to say about that?"

Mr. Talbott argues that for a policy to succeed, the Administration needs to
have answers to the most elementary questions, "and people who call in to a talk
radio show are more likely to ask those questions." He adds, "I often feel as if
I've really been out with my shirt sleeves rolled up, mixing with real people."

The policy discussions between the advertisements for extra-thick copper tubing
and breath sweeteners made from parsley seed are neither particularly focused,
nor polite.

"Bill Clinton doesn't even know how to read a map," Mr. North said on his
syndicated talk show, which he calls "commonsense radio -- for all America." Mr.
North decided to give Mr. Clinton a personal lesson in geography and anatomy.

"Clinton says Bosnia is in the heart of Europe," Mr. North said. "Well, if
Europe is a man pointing to the West, it's the derriere."

Both the questions and the answers can be quite basic -- and that is the point.

"Why is the United States supplying one-third of the troops?" a woman asked Ms.
Albright during a Los Angeles call-in show.

"We think one-third is the fair amount," she replied. "If there were any problem
they could totally take care of themselves."

For the vast minority of radio listeners, what the United States is doing seems
to be just right.

"Too many people forget we are the only superpower left on the planet," a caller
named John told Ms. Albright on Monday on the Michael Jackson show from Los
Angeles.

More often than not, the striped-pants set and the radio listeners end up
sounding as if they are on, well, different wave lengths. The Administration
officials say the troops will be wearing American uniforms, carrying American
weapons and serving under American NATO commanders. The mission will be to keep
the former foes apart and leave the messy jobs of rebuilding to others.

But callers and hosts alike have different concerns. They want to know how many
Americans will be raped or killed. They blame the United States and Europe for
ignoring genocide in Rwanda. They complain that the United States is too poor to
rebuild Bosnia. They see Bosnia as Vietnam. They quote from the Bible.

One listener offered to send in color photographs of the bodies of Serbs that he
claimed had been "barbecued" by other Bosnians.

More than any other single criticism, the callers recall how as a graduate
student at Oxford, Mr. Clinton wrote an Army officer thanking him for "saving"
him from the draft and describing his "loathing" of the American military.

"He's a hypocrite," said caller named Dave. "It's a fact that he fought so hard
against Vietnam. He wrote to his R.O.T.C. commander that he loathed the
military. Now for him to put young folks in harm's way -- it galls me! It galls
me!"

The draft-dodging theme is particularly popular on the conservative shows.
Michael Reagan (son of Ronald) said in a telephone interview that before Mr.
Clinton traveled to England and Ireland last week, Mr. Reagan had reminded
listeners on his radio show that Mr. Clinton went to Oxford University to avoid
the draft.

"I do promos every day," Mr. Reagan said. "And I sent out one saying, 'The
military is heading to the European continent and and our President is headed
once again to England.' Can he make it any easier for talk radio?"

So when Mr. Reagan invited Mr. Rubin, the spokesman for Ms. Albright, to chat,
it was not surprising that the issue of credibility arose.

"In his speech to the nation, Mr. Clinton seemed to be endorsing the Korean War
and the Vietnam War," Mr. Reagan said. "But this is a President who refused to
go to Vietnam. Doesn't that work on his credibility?"

Mr. Rubin replied tartly: "I know it's quite fashionable to address this to the
President personally. But the President was elected by the American people as
President and Commander in Chief. That's what the Constitution says."

Despite his best efforts, Mr. Rubin did not convince all the listeners.

"I was biting my lip," said Linda of Salt Lake City. "And I was thinking,
'Michael, how could you let him get away with it? You weren't hard enough on
him.' "

No amount of explaining can educate some listeners that the NATO-led operation
is not a United Nations-led operation. And for Linda, it is also a violation of
Bosnia's sovereignty, pure and simple.

"I would ask the American people who want us to go into Bosnia, if we were
having a civil war, would we want the United Nations to come into our country
and split us in half?" she asked. "I certainly wouldn't like anyone coming into
Utah and splitting us in half and patrolling us and saying we couldn't fight
anymore."

Just as troubling for the Administration is that with the polls going against
them, many listeners are tuning out.

When Peter Tarnoff, the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, appeared
on the Jim Bohannan show on Mutual Broadcasting, there were no callers, even
though Mr. Bohannan pitched the call-in number over and over.

Nicholas Pileggi, who wrote the book on which the movie "Casino" is based, had
the good fortune to follow Mr. Tarnoff. There were too many calls to handle.


LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 7, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

POP MUSIC;
Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 34; Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 223 words


IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as
lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving. This year the
companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some
of the last of the holdouts among their top artists. There are also sets from
lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed
for a second or third time. Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find
noteworthy. Prices are suggested retail.

'THE MUSIC OF VIETNAM'
Celestial Harmonies, Box 30122, Tucson, Ariz. 85751; three CD's ($48)

Professional ensembles in Hanoi and Hue perform this sampler of Vietnamese
music. Two CD's feature small ensembles of traditional instruments -- flutes,
zithers, lutes, percussion and an indigenous combination of jaw-harp and
one-stringed fiddle -- playing catchy, finely nuanced melodies. Some have the
jaunty bounce and pentatonic scales of Chinese music; some use delicate twangs
and slides distantly akin to Indian music. The third CD, of dance and ceremonial
music from the court of Hue, often has a processional tone, with marchlike drums
and fierce, nasal, oboelike instruments moderated by zithers and gongs. The
music is enthralling, especially in these sumptuous digital recordings.   JON
PARELES

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 8, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

James Reston, for Many Years a Nonpareil Among American Journalists, Dies at 86

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.;     Reprinted from yesterday's late editions.

SECTION: Section B;    Page 17;    Column 1;    National Desk

LENGTH: 3806 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 6


James Reston, former columnist, Washington correspondent and executive editor of
The New York Times, died on Wednesday night at his home here. He was 86.

The cause was cancer, said his son Thomas.

First as a reporter and then, beginning in 1953, as a columnist, Mr. Reston was
perhaps the most influential journalist of his generation. In Washington, where
he was based, and also in other capitals around the world, he had unrivaled
access to the high and the mighty. Yet he retained a wry, self-deprecating
personality, free of bombast, and always sought to reduce political complexity
to plain language.

"What I try to do," he said, "is write a letter to a friend who doesn't have
time to find out all the goofy things that go on in Washington."

Interested in China and the Soviet Union as well as the United States, a student
of diplomacy as well as domestic politics, he won two Pulitzer Prizes and dozens
of other awards.

Mr. Reston was forgiving of the frailties of soldiers, statesmen and party hacks
-- too forgiving, some of his critics later said, because he was too close to
them. But his stern moral standards, rooted in the Victorian values of his
youth, never wavered. He remained an idealist in a world of cynics.

From his strong-minded mother he inherited a Presbyterian conscience and an
abiding sense of duty and responsibility. Work hard, he was taught. Work for
large goals that transcend self-interest.

A talent scout of prodigious capacity, Mr. Reston hired and trained many of The
Times's best-known journalists, and served as mentor to many more. To each of
them, he passed along a lifetime's lessons about craft and country.

Mr. Reston's 50-year association with The Times began when he joined its London
bureau on Sept. 1, 1939, the day Hitler's armies marched into Poland, igniting
World War II. It was a fitting day on which to start his career at the paper,
much of which would be spent recording and reflecting upon the aftermath of that
fateful day.

His nationally syndicated column appeared regularly until 1987, when he became
senior columnist. He retired from The Times in 1989, without ceremony, on his
80th birthday.

In an interview marking the occasion, he said the two greatest political
triumphs in his lifetime had been the common defense system developed by the
West after World War II and the improvement in the lot of black people in
America since 1960.

Mr. Reston, who was born in Scotland, described the men who met in Philadelphia
in 1787 to draft the Constitution as the great heroes in his adopted country's
history. The document that they produced, he said, made possible "the triumph of
the moderates" over the next two centuries.

A moderate himself, hostile to both fascism and communism, he described
journalism's role in their eclipse as "one of the great pleasures of my life."

Asked whom he had most admired, he cited Franklin D. Roosevelt as the finest
President he had known and Dean Acheson, Secretary of State in the Truman
Administration, as "the key man" who "came to the fork in the road" and
concluded that containing the Soviet Union would require a new alliance.

But he chose Jean Monnet, the French visionary who conceived the European
Community, as the greatest man he had ever known as well as the person who had
most deeply influenced his own thinking. Monnet proved, Mr. Reston often said,
that "if you don't demand credit for things, you can push them through."

First and Foremost, A Dogged Reporter

Mr. Reston thought of himself primarily as a reporter, and he often beat his
competitors to be the first to write about major news events. His coverage of
the Dumbarton Oaks Conference in Washington in 1944, which laid the groundwork
for the United Nations, was one of the era's most important exclusives and won
him his first Pulitzer, in 1945. Those articles disclosed the substance of
secret documents that were then being circulated among delegations from the
United States, the Soviet Union, Britain and China on the structure of the
proposed international organization.

Mr. Reston won his second Pulitzer in 1957 for distinguished reporting from
Washington. The articles cited were written in June 1956 and analyzed the
effects of President Dwight D. Eisenhower's illness on the functioning of the
executive branch.

He was also responsible for The Times's publication in 1955 of the documents of
the 1945 Yalta Conference. And in 1954 he disclosed that J. Robert Oppenheimer,
who had directed the making of the first atomic bomb, had subsequently been
denied access to secret documents by the Atomic Energy Commission because of
suspicion that he was passing information to the Soviet Union, a charge of which
Oppenheimer was later cleared.

One exclusive dispatch came by accident. In 1971, as one of the first American
reporters allowed into China, Mr. Reston developed appendicitis. His report
about his surgery and postoperative acupuncture treatment, filed from his bed in
the Anti-Imperialist Hospital in the capital, ran on the front page under the
headline "Now, About My Operation in Peking."

'My Own Opinions Aren't That Good'

From the 1950's on, Mr. Reston interviewed most of the world's leaders, often
producing major news accounts that were scrutinized at the State Department for
their every nuance. The interviews often bore the special Reston stamp: He
sought to reveal not only the policies and the politics of the people he
interviewed, but also their vision of life and their view of history.

Mr. Reston, who was called Scotty by virtually everyone who knew him, was 5 feet
8 inches tall and had a round and ruddy face, gray-green eyes, an ever-present
pipe and an invariably pleasant manner. He was courteous not only to officials
but also to the young people who worked for him.

"He believes in hard work, in thrift, honor your parents, woman's place is in
the home, play by the rules and live clean," his colleague Russell Baker once
said.

Mr. Reston was credited by competitors with having more high-level news sources
in Washington than almost any other reporter, although some critics felt that he
was too kind in print to some of them. The economist John Kenneth Galbraith,
reviewing Mr. Reston's "The Artillery of the Press," a 1967 collection of his
talks before the Council on Foreign Relations, suggested that Mr. Reston had
learned to his disadvantage "to treat all people in the manner of a newspaperman
who must one day go back and see them again."

But in a 1980 article in The New Republic, Mr. Reston was quoted as saying: "If
you spend your life as a hatchet man -- and there's something to be said for
that -- then eventually you find that everybody's out to lunch when you call.
You're left with only your own opinion. I wouldn't like that because my own
opinions aren't that good."

Writing his column three times a week, Mr. Reston was a procrastinator, often
filing right on deadline. A two-finger typist, he regularly wore out typewriters
because he banged so hard on the keys, and his desk was a litter of papers, many
of which bore tiny black marks where a stream of smoldering matches had landed
in the course of a never-ending pipe-lighting ritual.

His columns, laced with quotations from Walter Lippmann, H. G. Wells, Matthew
Arnold and Churchill, were a combination of high moral tone, detailed reporting,
allusions to sports, impish humor and evocative descriptions of seasonal changes
along the Potomac. They seldom offered absolute judgments about people or
events; he used the word "maybe" more than most pundits.

His first column, on Oct. 18, 1953, established the Reston style.

"This town is still full of echoes from the days of America's isolation," he
wrote of Washington. "It has changed in policy and personnel, more than any
other world capital in the last generation. No nation has taken on so much or
moved so far in such a hurry. Yet the habits of the past, like the bent figures
of homeless former senators, still haunt the capital."

Press and Politics: 'Like Cats and Dogs'

He often returned to certain themes, such as the role of the press. In his
column of Oct. 30, 1968, when Spiro T. Agnew, soon to be elected Vice President,
was denouncing news organizations, Mr. Reston wrote:

"The candidates and the press are fussing at each other again, and this is the
way it should be. They have different jobs, and in many ways they are natural
enemies, like cats and dogs. The first job of the candidate is to win, and he
usually says what he thinks will help him win. The job of the reporter is to
report what happens and decontaminate as much of the political poison as he can.
The conflict is obvious."

In addition to his two Pulitzer Prizes, Mr. Reston was awarded the Presidential
Medal of Freedom in 1986 and the Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Award in
1991.  He received the Overseas Press Club award for interpretation of
international news three times, the George Polk Memorial Award for national
reporting and the French Legion of Honor, and was named Commander, Order of the
British Empire. He also received 28 honorary degrees.

After retiring, he fulfilled a longtime promise to his wife, Sally, by writing
his memoirs. Titled "Deadline," they were published by Random House in 1991.

Reviewing the book for The New York Times, Ronald Steel, author of "Walter
Lippmann and the American Century," called Mr. Reston "the quintessential
Washington insider."

"Officials used him to test out new ideas on the public or to drop leaks for
which they did not want to be held accountable," Mr. Steel wrote. "Because of
his high position at The Times and his personal integrity, he was trusted both
by those who provided the news and by those who read it. "But what he did so
well and so usefully for so long could not be done today. Journalism and the
political world have changed too much."

Mr. Reston is survived by his wife; his sons, Richard F. Reston of Edgartown,
Mass., James B. Reston Jr. of Chevy Chase, Md., and Thomas B. Reston of
Washington; his sister, Joanna Richey of Santa Cruz, Calif., and five
grandchildren.

Funeral services will be held at 10 A.M. on Saturday at Saint Albans Church on
the grounds of the Washington National Cathedral.

Born in Scotland To Years of Poverty

James Barrett Reston began life about as far from the Washington power center as
one could get.

He was born in Clydebank, Scotland, on Nov. 3, 1909, the son of James, a
machinist, and Johanna Irving Reston. The Restons migrated to the United States
when he was an infant, but Mrs. Reston became ill, and the family returned to
Scotland.

There followed years of harsh poverty, of life in a brick tenement where young
James and his sister slept crosswise at the foot of their parents' bed. In 1920
the family returned to the United States and settled in Dayton, Ohio. His father
worked for the Delco Remy Division of General Motors.

When his parents were naturalized, young James automatically became an American
citizen. In 1932, he graduated from the University of Illinois with an
undistinguished academic record. He had majored in journalism, skipping the
course in governmental reporting but getting an A in sportswriting.

During his high school years he caddied at the Dayton Country Club golf course.
His own game became so good that he twice won the Ohio state public links
championship and at Illinois was captain of the Big Ten championship golf team
in 1932. His father wanted him to become a golf pro. His mother wanted him to be
a preacher, which, he was to say later, is really what he became.

In the winters during his school days, he hung around The Dayton Daily News.
"When the phone rang, I'd pick it up and take down the scores," he later
recalled. "And from that I just moved into newspapering. I never thought of
anything else."

Another link to the world of newspapers was Gov. James M. Cox, the Ohio
publisher and 1920 Democratic Presidential candidate, for whom young Reston had
caddied. Mr. Cox gave him his first job after college on one of the Cox
newspapers in Ohio, The Springfield Daily News, where he earned $10 a week as
the sports editor.

Later he was hired as traveling secretary and publicity director for the
Cincinnati Reds baseball team. In 1934 he moved to New York as a sportswriter
for the Associated Press Feature Service.

The next year he married Sally Jane Fulton, a former college classmate who had
been president of her sorority, an A student and a Phi Beta Kappa in her junior
year. Named Sara but always called Sally, she was the daughter of a judge from
Sycamore, Ill., a small town near Chicago.

Mr. Reston once told a University of Illinois graduating class, "I should say in
passing that I myself married a recklessly beautiful girl whom I first saw on
Wright Street wearing a scarlet coat."

"My gal Sal," as he called her in the dedication of "Sketches in the Sand," a
collection of his columns published in 1967, became his closest confidante,
frequent collaborator and steadiest supporter.

They had three sons, and Mr. Reston's own happy situation made him a champion of
marriage. He was forever asking his young bachelor colleagues when they were
going to wed.

In 1937 The Associated Press sent Mr. Reston to London on a rather loose dual
assignment: in summer covering sports events, in winter the British Foreign
Office.

In 1939 he joined The Times's London bureau, with a salary of $85 a week. He was
so little known on the foreign desk in New York that his first byline in The
Times had his name wrong -- John instead of James.

Then came the London blitz. The Times's office for much of the war was on the
seventh floor of the Reuters Building on Fleet Street, which offered a view of
the dome of St. Paul's Cathedral. He described this view of the battle in his
first book, "Prelude to Victory."

"Before we got better sense, we used to put the lights off in the Times office
every night and watch this effort," he wrote. "With uncanny regularity, the
German bombers would come over just about 10 minutes after blackout and start
dropping incendiary bombs all over this section. About an hour before we could
see the flames, we would begin to hear the steady throb of scores of engines
along the banks of the Thames; these were the pumps, driving the muddy water
from the river up through miles of new hose. . . .

"A little later the sky would begin to change in color from midnight blue to a
reddish glow, and soon the great dome of the cathedral would stand out in
silhouette against the flames of perhaps a dozen raging fires. Night after night
we watched this incredible scene, and morning after morning we marveled at the
fact that the fires were somehow put out."

In December 1940 he was reassigned to Washington, and in 1942 published "Prelude
to Victory," a call to action that was acclaimed here and abroad. Its theme was
pure Reston: Unless Americans put aside personal aims and materialistic thinking
and made sacrifices in a crusade for their country, the war would not be won.

In late 1942, Elmer Davis, head of the Office of War Information, obtained a
leave of absence from The Times for Mr. Reston and sent him to London to set up
the agency's effort there.

John G. Winant, the United States Ambassador to Britain, recommended him to
Arthur Hays Sulzberger, then president and publisher of The Times, who was
looking for an assistant. It was the beginning of Mr. Reston's close friendship
with the Sulzberger family.

After the War Years, Washington for Good

Mr. Reston returned to Washington and was named national correspondent in 1945.
He made his mark with his coverage of Dumbarton Oaks, which illustrated a Reston
maxim: Seek out the disgruntled party. His theory was that people who were
disenchanted were more likely to talk candidly.

In this case, it was the Chinese representatives to the conference who were
disenchanted. In his memoirs, Mr. Reston told of having met Chen Yi, one of the
Chinese delegates, before the war through Iphigene Ochs Sulzberger, wife of The
Times's publisher. At Mr. Reston's urging, Chen Yi slipped him the texts of the
proposals.

Instead of writing one long article, Mr. Reston doled out the information,
producing an exclusive a day. The Russians thought Washington had leaked the
material; Washington suspected the British, and the F.B.I.  started an
investigation of Mr. Reston.

In 1948 Mr. Reston became diplomatic correspondent for The Times, and in 1953 he
became Washington bureau chief, succeeding Arthur Krock. He continued as bureau
chief until 1964, when he elected to step down to concentrate on his column.

In 1968 he was summoned to New York by Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, who had become
publisher, to succeed Turner Catledge as executive editor, in charge of the
entire news operation. The internal politics of the news department had received
publicity after an unsuccessful effort by editors in New York to exert more
control over the Washington bureau. Mr. Reston's mandate was to re-establish
peace.

For 13 months he ran the news department while commuting to Washington a few
times a week to write his column. It was an almost impossible job. In 1969,
knowing that he had to choose between his column and the editor's post, he
gladly chose the column.

Mr. Reston was eminently a Washington man. He loved and understood the capital.
Moreover, he had helped shape the Washington bureau. These were his people, and
many of them regarded him as a father figure. The New York office seemed to him
a vast, impersonal beehive.

During these years the Restons lived in a pleasant red brick house on Woodley
Road in leafy northwest Washington and spent weekends at their log cabin in
Fiery Run, Va. Mr. Reston often used Fiery Run as the dateline on his
Thoreau-like columns about the restorative life in the country.

In 1968 the Restons purchased The Vineyard Gazette, a 122-year-old weekly on
Martha's Vineyard, Mass., where they vacationed in the summer. Their son Richard
is now editor and publisher, and his wife, Mary Jo, is publisher and general
manager.

Two Cuba Episodes And the Pentagon Papers

Mr. Reston played a part in the publication of the Pentagon Papers in 1971 and
in two other major news events involving The Times in questions of national
security. The others were the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 and the Cuban missile
crisis of 1962.

In the spring of 1961, The Times was preparing to publish an article by Tad
Szulc reporting that 5,000 or 6,000 Cuban exiles who had been training in the
United States and in Central America for nine months were about to launch an
invasion of Cuba to overthrow the regime of Fidel Castro.

The article was planned for page 1 on April 7, under a four-column headline. But
Orvil Dryfoos, then the publisher, was troubled by the security implications of
the report. On April 6, he and Mr. Catledge, then managing editor, telephoned
Mr. Reston, who advised them not to publish the article and cautioned against
giving away the proposed timing of the landing as "imminent."

The article was published on April 7 under a one-column headline and with no
mention of the invasion's date. The Bay of Pigs invasion took place 10 days
later and ended in debacle. President John F. Kennedy, who took full
responsibility, said that if The Times had published more about the operation,
it might have saved the Administration from making such a colossal mistake.

"If I had it to do over, I would do exactly what we did at the time," Mr. Reston
said later. "It is ridiculous to think that publishing the fact that the
invasion was imminent would have avoided this disaster."

In 1962 Mr. Reston was apparently the only reporter who had found out that the
Soviet Union, then under the leadership of Nikita S. Khrushchev, had secreted
nuclear missiles in Cuba, only 90 miles from Florida. When Kennedy realized that
Mr. Reston had the information, he telephoned him directly.

Four years later, Mr. Reston recounted the incident to Clifton Daniel, then
managing editor of The Times.

"The President told me that he was going on television on Monday evening to
report to the American people," Mr. Reston recalled. "He said that if we
published the news about the missiles, Khrushchev could actually give him an
ultimatum before he went on the air.

"I told the President I would report to my office in New York," Mr. Reston
continued. "And if my advice was asked, I would recommend that we not publish.
It was not my duty to decide."

Kennedy then called Mr. Dryfoos, the publisher, and asked him not to print Mr.
Reston's article. Mr. Dryfoos left the matter up to Mr. Reston and his staff,
and the article was withheld.

It was a different story, however, in 1971 when The Times obtained and published
what became known as the Pentagon Papers, the Government's top-secret documents
on the Vietnam War. Seeing this at once as "the story of the century," Mr.
Reston was one of the editors who felt that the documents should be published
because they were history and therefore no question of national security was
involved.

One of Mr. Reston's contributions to journalism was the corps of young reporters
he discovered and developed.

In 1961 he instituted a program of internships for young would-be reporters,
modeled on the clerkships at the United States Supreme Court and suggested to
him by the late Justice Felix Frankfurter. Each year he would recruit a new
college graduate as his clerk and researcher. He paid a price for this program,
as time and again the young clerks with lofty journalistic thoughts would mix up
his airline reservations or keep the Secretary of State waiting because they had
failed to cancel a scheduled appointment.

Linda Greenhouse, who went on to report on the Supreme Court for The Times,
recalled that on her first day as a clerk, Mr. Reston asked her to get Ted
Sorensen on the phone and suggested she try Paul Weiss in New York. After trying
every Weiss-comma-Paul in the Manhattan phone book, she reported back to Mr.
Reston.

"He didn't groan, tear his hair or -- more important, and the reason for my
undying gratitude -- laugh at me," Ms. Greenhouse said. "He gently explained
that Paul, Weiss was a New York law firm where Ted Sorensen was working, looked
up the number and gave it to me."

It was perhaps this quality, this unfailing kindliness, that constituted his
special attractiveness. It enabled him to view the faults and frailties of the
world with compassion and to carry on in the belief that the best in mankind
would eventually win out over the worst.

"Stick with the optimists, Niftie," he wrote in a column in February 1980,
welcoming his new grandson, Devin Fitzgerald Reston, to the human race. "It's
going to be tough enough even if they're right."

NAME: James Reston

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: 1940 -- Mr. Reston, right, and colleagues like James MacDonald
worked in wartime London. (World Wide Photos); 1964 -- Mr. Reston was a
quintessential Washington insider who, critics said, was too kind to his
subjects. One, President Lyndon B. Johnson, attended a party in his honor.
(George Tames/The New York Times); James Reston (Philip Perkis, 1979); 1971 --
Among the first American reporters allowed into China after its revolution, he
came down with appendicitis there and filed from a hospital. (Sally Reston/The
New York Times)


TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 9, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

First Lady Officially Sets Off Clinton Race

BYLINE: By ALISON MITCHELL

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 11;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 929 words

DATELINE: CONCORD, N.H., Dec. 8


Stepping back onto the campaign trail and abandoning her self-imposed lower
profile, Hillary Rodham Clinton officially registered her husband as a candidate
in the nation's first primary state today. She lost no time in accusing
Republicans of making budget proposals that would "knock down the ladder of
opportunity after they themselves have reached the top."

With scores of reporters and camera people shoving each other to catch a glimpse
of her, Mrs. Clinton stood at an antique desk in the office of the New Hampshire
Secretary of State to submit the papers that officially begin President
Clinton's re-election campaign.

"There weren't very many other people here when I was here before," she said,
remembering what little notice she had received when she submitted the same
forms in 1991.

Mrs. Clinton quickly put to rest any idea that her departure from the spotlight
after the Republican sweep of Congress in 1994 and her focus on more traditional
activities for a First Lady, like receiving the White House Christmas tree,
meant that she would not be a force on the campaign trail in 1996.

"I'm going to continue to do what I've done for more than 20 years of marriage,
which is support my husband," she said, when asked what her role would be in
1996. "I believe very strongly in what he's doing."

Mrs. Clinton crisscrossed the state in her first full campaign day, speaking at
a Portsmouth apartment complex for the elderly, the University of New Hampshire
in Durham and at a fund-raising reception for the State Democratic Party in
Manchester.

Shortly after Mrs. Clinton left the Secretary of State's office, Senator Bob
Dole, the Republican front-runner, showed up there to enter his party's primary.

"It is a race between Bill Clinton and Bob Dole," said Mr. Dole, the Senate
majority leader, acting as if he had already the nomination.

Mr. Dole, who chugged into town on a train called The Balanced Budget Express,
was greeted at the station, in subzero temperatures, by a small group of
supporters headed by Gov. Stephen Merrill

The Dole and Clinton camps coordinated their schedules to avoid a direct meeting
between the two. As he signed up for the primary, Mr. Dole was asked about Mrs.
Clinton's criticism of Republican plans for Medicare and education, and took the
opportunity to suggest that the President was not serious about balancing the
budget.

"The President has done nothing but play politics" trying to frighten people,
Mr. Dole said. He called Mrs. Clinton's remarks "more politics as usual."

The President is using education and Medicare to define the difference between
himself and the Republican-controlled Congress, and Mrs. Clinton stumped hard
today against Republican budget proposals for savings in both.

Distancing herself from partisan battles of Washington, Mrs. Clinton never
mentioned Republicans directly, simply referring instead to "some people" and
"the other side."

Still, her message was unmistakable. Discussing Medicare with a selected group
of the elderly people arranged around her before an audience at the Margeson
Apartments, she mused about "the idea some people have that we don't really need
a system like Medicare for everybody."

This she called, "really, a kind of survival of the fittest mentality -- if you
are healthy and you can take care of yourself and you've had enough during your
lifetime, then good for you, and if you're not, then you should have done
something different along life's way."

At the University of New Hampshire, she criticized Republicans for proposals to
make savings in student loan and education programs. "Today there are some among
us who are willing to knock down the ladder of opportunity after they themselves
have reached the top," she said. "That is not the American way."

As the next Presidential election approached, Mrs. Clinton said, the nation has
to decide how it will provide its citizens with the skills to earn a living, "no
matter where they're born, no matter to whom they're born, no matter what their
income." She added, "I believe we do not answer that question just by talking
about family values. We do it by valuing families."

In 1992, Mr. Clinton's Presidential dreams almost foundered in New Hampshire
because of questions about his purported marital infidelity and his draft status
during the Vietnam War. He fought his way back to a second-place finish in the
Democratic primary, calling himself the Comeback Kid.

This time aides say that New Hampshire is already Mr. Clinton's first victory.
He is the first Democratic President since Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964 not to face
a primary challenge here. Still, the Clinton campaign opened an office here this
week and wants to maintain a presence in the state to counter the expected
deluge of attacks on the President as Republicans vie with each other to win
their party's nomination.

Mrs. Clinton, who sought to expand the role of the First Lady, has become a
lightning rod for conservatives and a target for the Congressional committee
investigating the Whitewater real estate deal. Nonetheless, Democratic
strategists call her one of the President's best campaign assets, a sure draw
for the liberals, women and minorities whose votes Mr. Clinton needs.

Tonight, as Democrats brandished the season's first "Clinton-Gore 96" banners,
Mrs. Clinton reminded them of the recession that haunted the state the year Mr.
Clinton defeated President George Bush.

"America and New Hampshire are in better shape than when my husband came here
seeking the nomination," she said.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 9, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A Concession Is Offered To Help Flag Amendment

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 10;   Column 5;   National Desk

LENGTH: 678 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 8


Struggling to line up the required two-thirds majority for his constitutional
amendment against flag-burning, Senator Orrin G. Hatch said today he would
support efforts to limit its impact.

Mr. Hatch, a Utah Republican, said he would support an effort to give only the
Federal Government, and not the states, the power to "prohibit the physical
desecration of the flag of the United States." He said that would eliminate a
problem some opponents of the amendment saw: that the definition of desecration
or even of the flag itself could vary by state.

Debaters today used "desecration" and "burning" interchangeably, although
Senator John Glenn, Democrat of Ohio, pointed out that burning was the proper
way to dispose of an old flag, and wondered whether it would be criminal if done
by someone who was simultaneously complaining about the Government.

During today's debate about the relative values of free speech and battlefield
patriotism, the Senate agreed today to vote on Tuesday on the proposed amendment
and any changes to it. Mr. Hatch said he was not sure whether he could get the
66 votes needed, even with this change. The House passed the measure on June 28,
312 to 120, and gave the state power to regulate desecration.

If the Senate passes the measure, it either will have to go to a House-Senate
conference and then be passed again by both houses, or the House will have to
vote to take the Senate version. After approval by Congress, the amendment would
be sent to state legislatures for ratification; if 38 states approved it within
seven years, it would become part of the Constitution.

Before quitting for the weekend early this afternoon, the Senate debated the
measure for four hours, with opponents taking most of the time.

Senator Russell D. Feingold, Democrat of Wisconsin, said, "History as well as
common sense counsel that we only amend the Constitution under very limited
circumstances, because this is a first step that could lead to many other steps
that could leave the First Amendment in tatters."

Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, said that while flag burners
"deserve our contempt," they did not create a problem serious enough to "rip the
fabric of the Constitution at its very center: The First Amendment." Mr.
McConnell said, "Don't let these few scoundrels with nothing better to do than
burn flags chase freedom from the shores of America."

Mr. McConnell proposed a new effort to proscribe flag-burning by ordinary
statute. But Senator Hatch contended that just as the Supreme Court had thrown
out previous statutes because they treated flag-burning as constitutionally
protected speech, the Justices would reject the McConnell proposal, too.

Senator Jon Kyl, Republican of Arizona, complained that opponents of the
amendment were "trying to have it both ways" by arguing that there was hardly
any flag-burning and that the amendment would be a "significant intrusion on the
First Amendment." Mr. Kyl said the real deprivation of rights was the
prohibition that keeps states from punishing flag-burning. (Mr. Hatch's proposed
change in his amendment would maintain that ban.)

Mr. Kyl also argued that as senators, "we do not amend the Constitution." He
said, "The people amend the Constitution. All we can do is recommend an
amendment."

Mr. Kyl said that all Congress was being asked to do was to let the issue be
debated in the 50 states.

Senator Bob Kerrey, the Nebraska Democrat who won the Medal of Honor while
serving in South Vietnam, called the proposed amendment a well-intentioned
gimmick.

"It should be the force of our knowledge, the force of our conscience," Mr.
Kerrey said, "that causes us to revere this flag, not the force of the police of
our local community, not the force that we are afraid something bad is going to
happen to us if we desecrate the United States flag."

Senator Hatch contended that the amendment was not designed to restrict the
First Amendment, but merely to correct a Supreme Court decision that, he said,
misconstrued flag-burning as speech.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 9, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Melvin Kranzberg, 78, Historian of Technology

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 52;   Column 4;   National Desk

LENGTH: 670 words


Melvin Kranzberg, a scholar who helped establish the study of the history of
technology and explained its impact on society, died on Wednesday at his home in
Atlanta. Dr. Kranzberg, a professor at the Georgia Institute of Technology, was
78.

The cause was cancer, said August Giebelhaus, a professor of history at Georgia
Tech and a longtime colleague.

Dr. Kranzberg co-founded the Society for the History of Technology in 1958. From
then until 1984, he was the editor of its quarterly journal, Technology and
Culture.

"His life's work was to assert the autonomy of this discipline," Professor
Giebelhaus said. "It was not just applied science, and it was not just a minor
part of economic history, but it was a discipline in itself.

Dr. Kranzberg argued that technological development could not be understood
without seeing how it was linked to society.

He wrote or edited 11 books and wrote more than 150 scholarly articles; he also
popularized his field in newspaper articles.

In a 1968 article, he wrote: "Engineers, in general, live in the suburbs, vote
Republican and mouth the cliches of conservatism. Actually, if unwittingly, they
are greater social revolutionaries than many wild-eyed political radicals.

"Without necessarily meaning to, they invent new products, processes, systems
and devices that produce profound socio-cultural transformations."

The automobile self-starter, he wrote, freed women and children to see the world
and electric washers, driers, vacuum cleaners, supermarkets and telephones freed
women for "drinking, loafing, heavy thinking about issues like Vietnam and even
jobs, the same as men."

"Radicals" like the inventors Watt, Fulton, McCormick, Edison and Marconi, he
said, changed the face of the world.

Early in the computer era, he foresaw immense social upheaval, but he remained
optimistic, as he generally was about technological change.

Writing more than 25 years ago, he said, "There is no doubt that many
individuals will be thrown out of their jobs by automation, and the process will
accelerate with every passing year. At the same time computers are speeding and
extending the advance of science and technology at a pace never before witnessed
in history. This, we know, will create new lines of productivity, new and better
jobs, new professions and untold wealth."

Dr. Kranzberg was born on Nov. 22, 1917, in St Louis. He studied history and
economics at Amherst College in Massachusetts, where he earned a bachelor's
degree in 1938. At Harvard University he earned a master's degree in 1938 and a
doctorate in 1942.

During World War II, he served in the Army in Europe as a sergeant in military
intelligence, fought in the Battle of the Bulge and interrogated German
prisoners on the front lines. He won the Bronze Star for finding crucial enemy
gun emplacements.

Originally a specialist in modern French history, Dr. Kranzberg taught at
Harvard, the Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, N.J., and Amherst. In
1952 he joined the faculty of at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland.
There, while developing a history course for engineering students, he shifted to
the history of technology.

He was appointed a professor at Case in 1959, and left in 1972 to become the
Callaway Professor of the History of Technology at Georgia Tech. When he retired
in 1988, he became a professor emeritus, and the institute named a professorship
in the history of technology in his honor.

His awards included the NASA Apollo Achievement Award, the Roe Medal of the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, the State of Israel's Jabotinsky
Centennial Medal for eminence in science and letters, the Olmstead Award of the
American Society for Engineering Education and the Bernal Award of the Society
for Social Studies of Science.

Dr. Kranzberg is survived by his wife, the former Louise Lester of Atlanta; two
sons by a previous marriage, John and Steven, both of St. Louis; a brother,
Maurice, also of St. Louis, and four grandchildren.

NAME: Melvin Kranzberg

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Melvin Kranzberg (Associated Press, 1986)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 9, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION REVIEW;
Making Light With History

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 845 words


They made the oddest of American political couples: the California pol with a
gut suspicion of intellectuals and the immigrant academic given to quoting
Metternich; the despiser of Republican liberals and the creature of Nelson
Rockefeller; the President who pursued vendettas and the diplomat who knew how
to court enemies; the driven hick and the worldly maneuverer. They could have
been grist for Henry James.

But "Kissinger and Nixon," tomorrow night's unflattering docudrama, also gets at
the similarities of these two adroit players on the world stage and in the
closets of power. As captured or created by Beau Bridges and Ron Silver, both
Richard M. Nixon and Henry A. Kissinger possessed outsize egos accompanied by
large doses of paranoia, and both were shifty enough to spot the shiftiness in
the other.

All of which has little to do with how the two actually got along in real life
or how the Vietnam War was ended; if it's history you're looking for, stay away
from docudramas, which are driven to distort for the sake of drama. (Mr.
Kissinger airs his complaints in this week's TV Guide.) But kicking around the
mighty is an American sport, and if you're willing to settle for pointedly
unfair portraits of a pair of the century's movers and shakers, "Kissinger and
Nixon" should satisfy.

"Where the hell's my Jew boy?" calls Mr. Bridges as the play begins, and in
sidles Ron Silver, like an ingratiating peddler selling something he knows the
customer needs but is not yet willing to pay for. Mr. Bridges is, of course,
equipped with the famed 3 or 7 o'clock shadow, jowls and awkwardness. Mr. Silver
has the necessary stuffing under his shirt and an accent that at first seems
like a vaudeville shtick but grows on you; his portrayal of a thin-skinned,
smooth-mannered, tough-dealing operator is subtle and sustained. Both actors
have mastered a convincing timbre and address. Their makeup seems better at some
moments than at others, but their scenes together, doubtless benefiting from
plenty of dramatic license, are good nasty fun.

The two-hour play, with a brisk script by Lionel Chetwynd that draws on Walter
Isaacson's biography of the real Kissinger, focuses on a few months in 1972,
when, as national security adviser, Kissinger was engineering his "back channel"
approach to peace in Vietnam. By this account, Nixon was mainly concerned with
demonstrating American power and his own strength of purpose, while Kissinger
was prepared to kiss off South Vietnam for the sake of a deal with the North and
not incidentally the prospect of a Nobel Prize. "I am your instrument," he
purrs, playing the sycophant as he pursues his own game plan. "An elitist
suck-up," says Nixon of his invaluable foreign-policy shaper and implementer.

Other once-familiar names pop by. H. R. Haldeman and Charles Colson come on like
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. Alexander Haig is presented as a time server with
more stars than scruples.

The scenes involving the North Vietnamese are less entertaining, perhaps because
there's no point now in kicking around Le Duc Tho. Stiffly acted, directed and
written, these interludes seem to be in translation. And by the rules of the
docudrama, both American principals are occasionally obliged to utter slogans:
"I will bring peace despite all this deceit around me," declaims Kissinger. "I
plan to leave office a hero," declares Nixon as he moves from the swimming pool
to the decanter.

I have to confess that until watching Mr. Bridges, I was ignorant of the fact
that it was always cocktail time in the Nixon Oval Office. "Bourbon all around?"
asks the President, who usually has a glass in hand or at elbow. I had heard
about Mr. Kissinger's attraction to good food and pretty companions, which are
noted here in passing, but I was unaware of how grieved he was at never being
invited to a family dinner at the White House. Shades of Newt Gingrich.

The television Kissinger, though not what you'd call lovable, comes off as the
peace-seeking hero, and Nixon, as usual, is the heavy. The scorn that Nixon felt
for the New York and Hollywood set has always been amply reciprocated, and one
awaits Oliver Stone's new movie, "Nixon," to see if the record is sustained.
Meantime, as television docudramas go, "Kissinger and Nixon" mixes fact,
invention and malice in easy-to-swallow portions. From now on, when Mr.
Kissinger appears on a talk show, he'd better sound like Ron Silver.


KISSINGER AND NIXON
TNT, tomorrow night at 8

Written for television by Lionel Chetwynd and based on the book "Kissinger: A
Biography," by Walter Isaacson; directed by Daniel Petrie; produced by Richard
Borchiver; Rene Ohashi, director of photography; production design by Karen
Bromley, edited by Stephen Lawrence; music by Jonathan Goldsmith. Daniel H.
Blatt, Jon Slan, Judith James and Mr. Chetwynd, executive producers.

WITH: Ron Silver (Henry Kissinger), Beau Bridges (Richard Nixon), Matt Frewer
(Alexander Haig), Ron White (H. R. Haldeman), George Takei (Le Duc Tho) and Tony
Rosato (Charles Colson).

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Beau Bridges, left, as Richard M. Nixon and Ron Silver as Henry
A. Kissinger. (Bertrand Carriere/Turner Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 9, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

First Lady Officially Sets Off Clinton Race

BYLINE: By ALISON MITCHELL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 928 words

DATELINE: CONCORD, N.H., Dec. 8


Stepping back onto the campaign trail and abandoning her self-imposed lower
profile, Hillary Rodham Clinton officially registered her husband as a candidate
in the nation's first primary state today. She lost no time in accusing
Republicans of making budget proposals that would "knock down the ladder of
opportunity after they themselves have reached the top."

With scores of reporters and camera people shoving each other to catch a glimpse
of her, Mrs. Clinton stood at an antique desk in the office of the New Hampshire
Secretary of State to submit the papers that officially begin President
Clinton's re-election campaign.

"There weren't very many other people here when I was here before," she said,
remembering what little notice she had received when she submitted the same
forms in 1991.

Mrs. Clinton quickly put to rest any idea that her departure from the spotlight
after the Republican sweep of Congress in 1994 and her focus on more traditional
activities for a First Lady, like receiving the White House Christmas tree,
meant that she would not be a force on the campaign trail in 1996.

"I'm going to continue to do what I've done for more than 20 years of marriage,
which is support my husband," she said, when asked what her role would be in
1996. "I believe very strongly in what he's doing."

Mrs. Clinton crisscrossed the state in her first full campaign day, speaking at
a Portsmouth apartment complex for the elderly, the University of New Hampshire
in Durham and at a fund-raising reception for the State Democratic Party in
Manchester.

Shortly after Mrs. Clinton left the Secretary of State's office, Senator Bob
Dole, the Republican front-runner, showed up there to enter his party's primary.

"It is a race between Bill Clinton and Bob Dole," said Mr. Dole, the Senate
majority leader, acting as if he had already the nomination.

Mr. Dole, who chugged into town on a train called The Balanced Budget Express,
was greeted at the station, in subzero temperatures, by a small group of
supporters headed by Gov. Stephen Merrill

The Dole and Clinton camps coordinated their schedules to avoid a direct meeting
between the two. As he signed up for the primary, Mr. Dole was asked about Mrs.
Clinton's criticism of Republican plans for Medicare and education, and took the
opportunity to suggest that the President was not serious about balancing the
budget.

"The President has done nothing but play politics" trying to frighten people,
Mr. Dole said. He called Mrs. Clinton's remarks "more politics as usual."

The President is using education and Medicare to define the difference between
himself and the Republican-controlled Congress, and Mrs. Clinton stumped hard
today against Republican budget proposals for savings in both.

Distancing herself from partisan battles of Washington, Mrs. Clinton never
mentioned Republicans directly, simply referring instead to "some people" and
"the other side."

Still, her message was unmistakable. Discussing Medicare with a selected group
of the elderly people arranged around her before an audience at the Margeson
Apartments, she mused about "the idea some people have that we don't really need
a system like Medicare for everybody."

This she called, "really, a kind of survival of the fittest mentality -- if you
are healthy and you can take care of yourself and you've had enough during your
lifetime, then good for you, and if you're not, then you should have done
something different along life's way."

At the University of New Hampshire, she criticized Republicans for proposals to
make savings in student loan and education programs. "Today there are some among
us who are willing to knock down the ladder of opportunity after they themselves
have reached the top," she said. "That is not the American way."

As the next Presidential election approached, Mrs. Clinton said, the nation has
to decide how it will provide its citizens with the skills to earn a living, "no
matter where they're born, no matter to whom they're born, no matter what their
income." She added, "I believe we do not answer that question just by talking
about family values. We do it by valuing families."

In 1992, Mr. Clinton's Presidential dreams almost foundered in New Hampshire
because of questions about his purported marital infidelity and his draft status
during the Vietnam War. He fought his way back to a second-place finish in the
Democratic primary, calling himself the Comeback Kid.

This time aides say that New Hampshire is already Mr. Clinton's first victory.
He is the first Democratic President since Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964 not to face
a primary challenge here. Still, the Clinton campaign opened an office here this
week and wants to maintain a presence in the state to counter the expected
deluge of attacks on the President as Republicans vie with each other to win
their party's nomination.

Mrs. Clinton, who sought to expand the role of the First Lady, has become a
lightning rod for conservatives and a target for the Congressional committee
investigating the Whitewater real estate deal. Nonetheless, Democratic
strategists call her one of the President's best campaign assets, a sure draw
for the liberals, women and minorities whose votes Mr. Clinton needs.

Tonight, as Democrats brandished the season's first "Clinton-Gore 96" banners,
Mrs. Clinton reminded them of the recession that haunted the state the year Mr.
Clinton defeated President George Bush.

"America and New Hampshire are in better shape than when my husband came here
seeking the nomination," she said.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 9, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A Concession Is Offered To Help Flag Amendment

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 677 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 8


Struggling to line up the required two-thirds majority for his constitutional
amendment against flag-burning, Senator Orrin G. Hatch said today he would
support efforts to limit its impact.

Mr. Hatch, a Utah Republican, said he would support an effort to give only the
Federal Government, and not the states, the power to "prohibit the physical
desecration of the flag of the United States." He said that would eliminate a
problem some opponents of the amendment saw: that the definition of desecration
or even of the flag itself could vary by state.

Debaters today used "desecration" and "burning" interchangeably, although
Senator John Glenn, Democrat of Ohio, pointed out that burning was the proper
way to dispose of an old flag, and wondered whether it would be criminal if done
by someone who was simultaneously complaining about the Government.

During today's debate about the relative values of free speech and battlefield
patriotism, the Senate agreed today to vote on Tuesday on the proposed amendment
and any changes to it. Mr. Hatch said he was not sure whether he could get the
66 votes needed, even with this change. The House passed the measure on June 28,
312 to 120, and gave the state power to regulate desecration.

If the Senate passes the measure, it either will have to go to a House-Senate
conference and then be passed again by both houses, or the House will have to
vote to take the Senate version. After approval by Congress, the amendment would
be sent to state legislatures for ratification; if 38 states approved it within
seven years, it would become part of the Constitution.

Before quitting for the weekend early this afternoon, the Senate debated the
measure for four hours, with opponents taking most of the time.

Senator Russell D. Feingold, Democrat of Wisconsin, said, "History as well as
common sense counsel that we only amend the Constitution under very limited
circumstances, because this is a first step that could lead to many other steps
that could leave the First Amendment in tatters."

Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, said that while flag burners
"deserve our contempt," they did not create a problem serious enough to "rip the
fabric of the Constitution at its very center: The First Amendment." Mr.
McConnell said, "Don't let these few scoundrels with nothing better to do than
burn flags chase freedom from the shores of America."

Mr. McConnell proposed a new effort to proscribe flag-burning by ordinary
statute. But Senator Hatch contended that just as the Supreme Court had thrown
out previous statutes because they treated flag-burning as constitutionally
protected speech, the Justices would reject the McConnell proposal, too.

Senator Jon Kyl, Republican of Arizona, complained that opponents of the
amendment were "trying to have it both ways" by arguing that there was hardly
any flag-burning and that the amendment would be a "significant intrusion on the
First Amendment." Mr. Kyl said the real deprivation of rights was the
prohibition that keeps states from punishing flag-burning. (Mr. Hatch's proposed
change in his amendment would maintain that ban.)

Mr. Kyl also argued that as senators, "we do not amend the Constitution." He
said, "The people amend the Constitution. All we can do is recommend an
amendment."

Mr. Kyl said that all Congress was being asked to do was to let the issue be
debated in the 50 states.

Senator Bob Kerrey, the Nebraska Democrat who won the Medal of Honor while
serving in South Vietnam, called the proposed amendment a well-intentioned
gimmick.

"It should be the force of our knowledge, the force of our conscience," Mr.
Kerrey said, "that causes us to revere this flag, not the force of the police of
our local community, not the force that we are afraid something bad is going to
happen to us if we desecrate the United States flag."

Senator Hatch contended that the amendment was not designed to restrict the
First Amendment, but merely to correct a Supreme Court decision that, he said,
misconstrued flag-burning as speech.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 9, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Melvin Kranzberg, 78, Historian of Technology

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 52; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 670 words


Melvin Kranzberg, a scholar who helped establish the study of the history of
technology and explained its impact on society, died on Wednesday at his home in
Atlanta. Dr. Kranzberg, a professor at the Georgia Institute of Technology, was
78.

The cause was cancer, said August Giebelhaus, a professor of history at Georgia
Tech and a longtime colleague.

Dr. Kranzberg co-founded the Society for the History of Technology in 1958. From
then until 1984, he was the editor of its quarterly journal, Technology and
Culture.

"His life's work was to assert the autonomy of this discipline," Professor
Giebelhaus said. "It was not just applied science, and it was not just a minor
part of economic history, but it was a discipline in itself.

Dr. Kranzberg argued that technological development could not be understood
without seeing how it was linked to society.

He wrote or edited 11 books and wrote more than 150 scholarly articles; he also
popularized his field in newspaper articles.

In a 1968 article, he wrote: "Engineers, in general, live in the suburbs, vote
Republican and mouth the cliches of conservatism. Actually, if unwittingly, they
are greater social revolutionaries than many wild-eyed political radicals.

"Without necessarily meaning to, they invent new products, processes, systems
and devices that produce profound socio-cultural transformations."

The automobile self-starter, he wrote, freed women and children to see the world
and electric washers, driers, vacuum cleaners, supermarkets and telephones freed
women for "drinking, loafing, heavy thinking about issues like Vietnam and even
jobs, the same as men."

"Radicals" like the inventors Watt, Fulton, McCormick, Edison and Marconi, he
said, changed the face of the world.

Early in the computer era, he foresaw immense social upheaval, but he remained
optimistic, as he generally was about technological change.

Writing more than 25 years ago, he said, "There is no doubt that many
individuals will be thrown out of their jobs by automation, and the process will
accelerate with every passing year. At the same time computers are speeding and
extending the advance of science and technology at a pace never before witnessed
in history. This, we know, will create new lines of productivity, new and better
jobs, new professions and untold wealth."

Dr. Kranzberg was born on Nov. 22, 1917, in St Louis. He studied history and
economics at Amherst College in Massachusetts, where he earned a bachelor's
degree in 1938. At Harvard University he earned a master's degree in 1938 and a
doctorate in 1942.

During World War II, he served in the Army in Europe as a sergeant in military
intelligence, fought in the Battle of the Bulge and interrogated German
prisoners on the front lines. He won the Bronze Star for finding crucial enemy
gun emplacements.

Originally a specialist in modern French history, Dr. Kranzberg taught at
Harvard, the Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, N.J., and Amherst. In
1952 he joined the faculty of at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland.
There, while developing a history course for engineering students, he shifted to
the history of technology.

He was appointed a professor at Case in 1959, and left in 1972 to become the
Callaway Professor of the History of Technology at Georgia Tech. When he retired
in 1988, he became a professor emeritus, and the institute named a professorship
in the history of technology in his honor.

His awards included the NASA Apollo Achievement Award, the Roe Medal of the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, the State of Israel's Jabotinsky
Centennial Medal for eminence in science and letters, the Olmstead Award of the
American Society for Engineering Education and the Bernal Award of the Society
for Social Studies of Science.

Dr. Kranzberg is survived by his wife, the former Louise Lester of Atlanta; two
sons by a previous marriage, John and Steven, both of St. Louis; a brother,
Maurice, also of St. Louis, and four grandchildren.

NAME: Melvin Kranzberg

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Melvin Kranzberg (Associated Press, 1986)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 10, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 44; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 872 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     3   HIDDEN JEWEL, by V.C. Andrews. (Pocket, $6.99.) A young
           woman discovers and lives down her family's secrets.

 2     2   KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Warner, $6.99.) The
           police detective Alex Cross pursues a serial killer and his
           niece's kidnapper.

 3     2   THE HEIRESS, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $6.99.) An
           impoverished knight is hired to escort an heiress to the
           castle of her betrothed.

 4     7   THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.99.)
           Six short stories featuring the sleuth Alvirah Meehan.

 5     4   SELF-DEFENSE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.99.) Alex
           Delaware tries to help a woman who says she is being
           stalked.

 6     8   DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine,
           $7.99.) A man and a woman flee a powerful Government
           agency.

 7    10   MIRROR IMAGE, created by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik.
           (Berkley, $6.99.) Chaotic events in Russia and the United
           States.

 8     9   SNOW FALLING ON CEDARS, by David Guterson. (Vintage, $12.)
           A murder trial recalls the internment of
           Japanese-Americans.

 9     5   THE CHRISTMAS BOX, by Richard Paul Evans. (Evans
           Publishing/Publishers Distribution Center, $4.95.) A young
           family moves in with an elderly widow.

 10    1   CALIFORNIA ANGEL, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet,
           $6.50.) A woman who believes she saves lives is charged
           with murder.

 11    6   THE JUROR, by George Dawes Green. (Warner, $6.99.) A woman
           is a juror for a mob trial.

 12   31   THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The
           journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old
           age. (+)

 13    3   HEAVEN'S PRICE, by Sandra Brown. (Bantam, $5.50.) After an
           injury befalls a dancer, she finds a new romance.

 14    1   MCNALLY'S TRIAL, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $6.99.)
           Archy McNally uncovers criminality at a Palm Beach funeral
           home.

 15    1   TO HAVE AND TO HOLD, by Fern Michaels. (Ballantine, $6.99.)
           A woman's husband is reported missing in action in Vietnam.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    16   DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen.
           (Hyperion, $5.99.) Anecdotes and meditations on life.

 2    21   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Anchor/Doubleday,
           $6.99.) Fighting a deadly virus. (+)

 3     7   THE REAL REAL WORLD, by Hillary Johnson and Nancy
           Rommelmann. (MTV/Melcher Media/Pocket, $16.) Behind the
           scenes during the first four seasons of "The Real World."

 4    37   REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The
           dangers for teen-age girls. (+)

 5     8   REBA: My Story, by Reba McEntire with Tom Carter. (Bantam,
           $5.99.) The autobiography of the country singer.

 6     4   FIGHTER WING, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $15.) How the United
           States Air Force Combat Command was created and how it
           operates.

 7     8   NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $16.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during
           the war.

 8     1   FRIENDS, by David Wild. (Main Street/Doubleday, $12.95.) A
           miscellany of facts and photographs related to the
           television series.

 9    12   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $5.99.) The ups and
           downs of marriage.

 10   63   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany
           with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters
           reflect. (+)

 11   13   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
           (Ballantine, $15.) Myths, folk tales and women's psyches.

 12   631  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) Inspiration. (+)

 13   100  CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           Daily spirituality. (+)

 14   64   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis
           Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.

 15    2   MONTANA, by Joe Montana with Dick Schaap. (Turner, $25.) A
           profusely illustrated autobiography of the former
           quarterback.

 16    6   BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (St. Martin's,
           $6.99.) The former First Lady recalls her life, from
           childhood to the present.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    10   THE CALVIN AND HOBBES TENTH ANNIVERSARY BOOK, by Bill
           Watterson. (Andrews & McMeel, $14.95.) Cartoons.

 2    63   CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and
           Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.)
           Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
           (+)

 3     3   THE FAR SIDE GALLERY 5, by Gary Larson. (Andrews & McMeel,
           $12.95.) A new collection of cartoons.

 4    31   A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by
           Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health
           Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories. (+)


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 25, at 3,985 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 60,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk (*) indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above. A dagger
(+) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders for a book.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Prodigy and Prejudice

BYLINE: By Phyllis Rose;     Phyllis Rose teaches fiction writing at Wesleyan
University. She is the author of "Jazz Cleopatra: Josephine Baker in Her Time"
and the editor of "The Norton Book of Women's Lives."

SECTION: Section 7;    Page 16;    Column 1;    Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1360 words



COMPOSITION IN BLACK AND WHITE
The Life of Philippa Schuyler.
By Kathryn Talalay.
Illustrated. 317 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $30.

THIS enthralling, heartbreaking book restores to attention Philippa Schuyler,
child prodigy of the 1930's, pianist, composer, Harlem's Mozart, "the Shirley
Temple of American Negroes." Her father was George Schuyler, a well-known black
journalist. Her mother was Josephine Cogdell Schuyler, the white daughter of a
Texas rancher. Insisting that her daughter was the normal product of "hybrid
vigor" and good nutrition, Jody Schuyler dedicated her to the cause of
integration: Philippa's brilliance would break down racial barriers in America.
Instead, as Kathryn Talalay tells this important story, racial barriers and a
manipulative, demanding mother broke Philippa.

Based on fascinating family papers in New York's Schomburg Center for Research
in Black Culture, "Composition in Black and White: The Life of Philippa
Schuyler" begins by plunging us into a 1920's world of race enthusiasm:
"Nordics" go to Harlem for the night life and white girls date black men to
rattle their families and prove to themselves they have interesting lives.
Josephine Cogdell arrived in New York in 1927, wanting to write. She had
contributed pieces to The Messenger, a left-wing black publication whose editor
was George Schuyler. They met and were immediately attracted to each other.

A fanatic diarist, Jody even described their first kiss, revealing (or boasting)
that she found George's lips "softer and more sensuous than white lips." Her
primitivist ideas -- the flip side of racism -- glorified everything African and
saw salvation in miscegenation. She encouraged herself to marry Schuyler with
the thought that "the white race . . . is spiritually depleted and America must
mate with the Negro to save herself."

People like Jody Schuyler, literalist ideologues who live out their ideas, make
for great reading but may not make great moms. From the beginning, Philippa was
under tremendous pressure to prove the success of her parents' marriage. She
could read and write at the age of 2. By 3 her parents were showing off her
verbal skills to journalists like young Joseph Alsop, who reported on the
toddler prodigy for The New York Herald Tribune. By 3 1/2 she had started
learning piano, and barely a year later she was playing Mozart in public. She
started composing before she was 5.

For "the education of America," Jody entered her daughter in every possible
musical competition. She was the stage mother from hell, blending a frustrated
artist's ambition with an activist's self-righteousness. She followed the
child-rearing advice of the behaviorist John Broadus Watson, a predecessor of B.
F. Skinner, who didn't believe in coddling or even cuddling children or in
letting them, as John Dewey advised, grow from within. A food faddist, she fed
Philippa only raw foods: cooking destroyed vitamins. Even steaks and liver were
eaten uncooked in the Schuylers' home.

From the age of 8, Philippa concertized constantly, a darling of both the black
and the white press, a role model in black communities throughout America. Her
visibility was achieved through George's press connections and Jody's tireless
management. At 15, she soloed with the New York Philharmonic at Lewisohn Stadium
before an audience of 12,000, in a program that included one of her own
compositions. (A symphony she wrote at 13 was, Virgil Thomson said, as
interesting as the symphonies Mozart wrote at that age.)

But some thought her playing had been undermined by her relentless performance
schedule, and the older she got the more it seems emotional turmoil prevented
her from being a great artist. She made the transition from child prodigy to
concert pianist, but by her mid-teens, whether because of her own inadequacies
or racial barriers or both, she had gone as far as she would go as a performer
in America -- she was a success with black audiences, but of limited appeal to
whites.

Like many other black performers before her, she went abroad for money and large
audiences -- at first to Latin America, later throughout Europe, the Middle East
and Africa. In perpetual motion, she was increasingly unhappy, suffering from
loneliness and rage. Her public image -- the beautiful, witty, competent,
successful world performer -- was carefully nourished by Jody, who arranged even
Philippa's courtships. When a wealthy Italian fell in love with her, Jody wrote
him directly, demanding a prenuptial transfer of land to her daughter. This was
one of many romances that didn't work out.

As a grown woman, Philippa considered her parents' marriage a mistake and was
determined to negate it by marrying a white man -- although the only man she
seems really to have loved was an African diplomat. At one especially unhappy
moment, she was halfheartedly involved with a white British impresario, parrying
his offers of marriage until discovering she was pregnant -- by the African
diplomat. Then she put so much pressure on the impresario to marry her that he
in turn was put off, and especially shocked by her accusation that he wanted to
"take advantage of a colored girl."

For all her talent and brilliance, she came in the end to play the role of the
tragic mulatto, at home nowhere, yearning to be "accepted as a person, not as a
strange curiosity." She started passing for white in 1959, at first so she could
travel in South Africa, later thinking that she might have a better career as a
white performer. She invented another persona, Felipa Monterro y Schuyler, who
was white, and as Miss Monterro played well-reviewed concerts in Europe and gave
a lecture tour in America. Unsurprisingly, this deception proved too difficult
to sustain.

In becoming a journalist, she adopted a new persona in another way. Happening to
be in the Belgian Congo at the time of its independence, she covered those
events for United Press International. Like her father, who had become
increasingly right-wing, Philippa had a pro-colonial take on Africa. "Who Killed
the Congo?," the book she wrote on Zaire's independence in 1962, offended
liberals. Later she believed that only the Roman Catholic Church could save
Africa and wrote a book about Catholic missionaries, "Jungle Saints" (1963).

When U.P.I. refused to carry a second series of dispatches from Africa, she
started writing for the ultraconservative Manchester (N.H.) Union Leader.
Officially a journalist for The Union Leader covering the Vietnam War, she was
also a Catholic lay worker and was engaged in ferrying orphans to safety from
Hue to Danang when the helicopter she was riding in crashed on May 9, 1967, and
she died at the age of 35.

"Do you realize what you are expecting of me?" she wrote her mother in 1960.
"Are you aware of the pressures you put me under? Are you aware of the
impossibilities you ask of me? To be a great pianist. To be a great composer. To
be a great arranger. To be a great author. To be a great journalist. To always
get marvelous reviews. To always pull off marvelous coups no one else could do.
To get good photographs everywhere. . . . To always make money, and always keep
within my budget. . . . To always be a great beauty. This is beyond human
capability."

It's instructive how much of this Philippa Schuyler managed to do, and how
little it made for happiness or social progress. Her talent was inhibited, her
life sadly wasted. Her father became increasingly isolated in his
cantankerousness, even opposing Martin Luther King Jr.'s Nobel Peace Prize. And
Jody Schuyler, two years after her daughter's death in Vietnam, committed
suicide by hanging.

This tragic tale makes an exhilarating book. Thanks to Kathryn Talalay, an
archivist and editor at the American Academy of Arts and Letters, for focusing
on the Schuylers' story, researching it so energetically and telling it so
sensitively. "Composition in Black and White" is a stimulating addition to the
record of race relations in America, as well as a monument to an extraordinary
woman -- perhaps two extraordinary women -- who might otherwise have vanished.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Philippa Schuyler playing dominoes with her parents in late 1944
or early 1945, when she was 13 years old. (FROM "COMPOSITION IN BLACK AND
WHITE")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The C.I.A.'s most Important Mission: Itself

BYLINE: By Tim Weiner;   Tim Weiner, a Washington correspondent for The New York
Times, is an author of "Betrayal: The Story of Aldrich Ames, an American Spy."

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 62;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7015 words


ON AN AUTUMN EVENING, IN A PRIVATE PLANE APPROACHING WASHINGTON, JOHN DEUTCH,
THE NEW Director of Central Intelligence, sprawled wearily in an armchair and
worried aloud about the nation's spies. He compared them to a defeated force --
the United States Army after the fall of Saigon.

"What happened with the Army?" Deutch said. "The young officers looked at each
other and said: 'We're in trouble. We've got to change. We've got to figure out
a way to do this differently. We're either leaving or we're going to change the
system.' And the people who stayed did change the system."

Deutch's struggle to transform the Central Intelligence Agency, the world's
greatest and most reviled spy service, has become a war in itself, a battle
against the history and the culture of the C.I.A. The opening shot came early
one morning last May when Deutch first walked onstage at the Bubble, the
agency's once-futuristic amphitheater, and looked out at 500 frightened people.
Fear was the watchword of the day. The agency was taking a terrible beating,
lampooned by cartoonists, lambasted by pundits and politicians. Its last chief
had quit abruptly. Its best people were fleeing. Its great enemy, the Soviet
Union, had disappeared. It had been betrayed by Aldrich Ames, the unctuous
apparatchik who had blown a hundred secret missions and exposed scores of
American spies. He helped Moscow create a team of double agents who manipulated
American perceptions of the Kremlin for years, a fact the C.I.A. concealed from
three Presidents and the Pentagon.

The agency's scarred heart -- the spies in the D.O., the directorate of
operations -- needed surgery. Republican Senators, three-star generals and
National Security Council officials were talking in public about whether merely
to "overhaul" or to "eviscerate" or "blow up" the agency. A Presidential
commission was debating whether the C.I.A. should live or die. The agency's very
existence depended on what Deutch did -- and he had vowed to change it, if
needed, "down to the bare bones." No wonder the spooks were spooked.

The new leader told a little joke to put them at ease. He recalled that his
connections with the agency went back to 1976, when George Bush, then the
director, put him on a panel of expert advisers on spy satellites and other
technical wizardry. "And ever since that time," he said, "I always harbored a
secret desire to be the Director of Central Intelligence."

The spies laughed, knowing the truth. In January, the President had gazed fondly
upon Deutch, his brainy and ebullient Deputy Secretary of Defense, and said,
John, your country needs you. Deutch, astute fellow, said no. His punishment was
to find someone willing and able to say yes. The search went on for six weeks.
Finally Deutch came up with an obscure Air Force general whose nomination
wobbled, plummeted and crashed. And then the President gazed with something less
than fondness upon John Deutch.

"The President pressed on me the view that I really had to do it," he recalls.
Thus was a 57-year-old physical chemistry professor from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology given the most difficult experiment of his life.

Deutch's scientific specialty is visualizing atoms and molecules, seeing them
with the mind's eye as they undergo changes, and understanding how those changes
transform matter -- how a lump of coal under enormous pressure becomes a
diamond. With a colleague, Francis Low, he solved a puzzle in laser physics
three years ago: 1) A wave packet of photons (think of a cloud of no-see-ems)
appears to move faster than the speed of light. 2) This is impossible. 3) Prove
it. "The amazing thing about John," says Low, "is his ability to walk into a
system he doesn't know fundamental things about and fix it." But if the physical
world is ruled by immutable principles, the nation's spies are cursed by human
frailty and weighted by a dark past. The biggest problem Deutch had to fix was
not systems but people, for whom no quantum theory holds.

"The clandestine service is the heart and soul of the agency," says Robert M.
Gates, Director of Central Intelligence from 1991 to 1993. "It is also the part
that can land you in jail." The operations directorate was in such deep trouble
that it was facing a life sentence -- or execution. It had "to change its nature
and character," says Adm. William O. Studeman, acting director from January to
May, 1995. Under enormous pressure, it had to be transformed.

The agency would live, Deutch told his audience that May morning, his first full
day on the job. There would always be a C.I.A., he assured them, despite past
calls to shut it down from people like Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan. And
there would always be spies within it, despite proposals to the contrary from
retired generals and would-be wise men ready to give the job to the military.

Deutch knew that the congressional intelligence committees and the Presidential
commission re-evaluating the agency were beginning with a blank sheet of paper.
He had their trust to fill in the blanks -- if they first could be convinced
that the agency's 5,000 spies had the capacity to change, and the morale, the
motivation and the mental wherewithal to perform vital missions. Deutch has had
to convince himself. This is taking time.

The least difficult part of the equation was: which missions? There remains a
widespread belief that the C.I.A., without a cold war to fight, is wandering
around looking for work. The reality is different. The Clinton Administration
has been using the agency as its own private Internet, a kind of secret adjunct
to the Library of Congress, asking thousands of questions about ravaged rain
forests, compact-disk counterfeiters, the opium crop in Afghanistan and the
crooked ruler of Zaire. But many of the answers can be found in newspapers --
"and in many cases I get a better presentation in the newspapers than I do in a
secret briefing from the C.I.A.," says Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, vice
chairman of the Senate intelligence committee.

The clandestine service, unhappy at being thought of as a billion-dollar news
bureau, conceived a plan. Shortly after Deutch arrived, it presented him with a
glossy brochure titled "A New Direction. A New Future." It said, in essence,
forget about ecology and human rights and epidemics and sociology. That's soft
stuff. The spies proposed narrowing and sharpening their focus on what the
C.I.A. calls hard targets.

Most of the top 10 targets were obvious -- though nobody knew where the next
Somalia or Haiti would pop up, and everyone knew the agency would be crucified
for failing to see it coming. The specter of loose nukes, the whole Pandora's
box of weapons proliferation, was high on the list. So was terrorism in all its
faces, including armed Islamic fundamentalism. The C.I.A. always had to satisfy
the military's thirst for intelligence, from the order of battle in the Balkans
to the latest intrigues in Libya.

Five nations pose endless questions. What's going on in the high councils of
Iran, Iraq and North Korea? Who really understands China's future directions and
leadership? What will happen in Russia, a minefield of out-of-work weapons
designers and wild visionaries?

At that point, picking priorities gets trickier. International criminal cartels
are now richer and stronger than many nations, and capable of many crimes from
financial fraud to computer hacking. But supporting American law enforcement has
never been the agency's strong suit -- not if nearly 50 years of bad blood
between the C.I.A. and the F.B.I. is any sign. And grappling with the
international drug market offers little chance for success. "Organized crime and
drugs may be better left in the hands of the F.B.I. than the C.I.A.," says the
chairman of the Senate intelligence committee, Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania.

Last on the priority list was the thorny problem of economic intelligence.
Inevitably, that means spying on Japan, Germany and France. Is the information
gleaned worth the risk of being caught stealing trade secrets from allies? Not
to judge by the recent embarrassments over being caught tapping telephones in
Tokyo and bribing bureaucrats in Paris. And not in the minds of the top American
officials who read the C.I.A.'s take and openly deride its quality, utility and
revelance.

Deutch had reservations about the spies' new vision. He would not have laid it
out quite the same way. Now, he says, he embraces it as the "road map for the
future." One of his deputies says the message for the clandestine service is
blunt: "Let me explain life to you. Here are the 10 or 15 things that we cannot
tolerate to fail against to advance the national-security interests of the
United States. This is what we want you to devote your money, your people, your
language training and your skills to. We want to get this right."

IN ORDER TO GET IT RIGHT, THE CLANDESTINE SERVICE HAS TO change its ways.

American spies overseas are almost all based in embassies, posing as diplomats
and targeting their opposite numbers. But the United States has no embassies in
Iran, Iraq or North Korea. And most terrorists, weapons dealers and drug
kingpins do not wear white tie and tails.

"In the cold war," Bob Gates says, "if you wanted to recruit an East German or a
Pole, the vehicle for that contact was the diplomatic cocktail circuit or the
tennis court. None of the guys you're interested in now are on that circuit.
None. You're not going to recruit a rogue nuclear scientist at a cocktail party.
That's the biggest challenge: how to move the clandestine service away from the
embassy to a more independent status, without the protection of diplomatic cover
or a diplomatic passport. That represents a fundamental revolution in the way
C.I.A. has conducted itself. Your whole training program, your language program,
the way you pay salaries has to change. The risks are different and much higher.
You no longer want people who can do tea and cookies in the afternoon. You have
to look for a new kind of personality" -- different from the vast majority of
the spies, who are "primarily white middle-class guys. You need a guy walking
into Tripoli or Pyongyang who doesn't look like he just left Iowa."

If terrorists, thugs and tribes with flags were the hardest targets, then the
spies had better be good. The alternative is to start from scratch and build a
completely different clandestine service.

So how good were they? Deutch soon learned that though the clandestine service
consumes only 3 percent of his budget, it would occupy half his waking hours,
and more than a few restless nights. The Director of Central Intelligence is
chairman of all the intelligence agencies as well as the C.E.O. of the C.I.A.
Nearly 90 percent of the $28 billion or so Deutch will spend this year goes to
military intelligence services like the National Security Agency, which conducts
signals intelligence, or sigint, with satellites and ground stations, and the
National Reconnaissance Office, which builds the fantastically expensive
satellites. Deutch loves this stuff -- "I'm a technical guy. I'm a satellite
guy. I'm a sigint guy," he says -- and orchestrating the instruments of
intelligence to perform like an symphony was a task he could handle.

Making the clandestine chorus sing his tune was a different problem. From his
first days, he went walking around the agency's headquarters, shaking hands,
lunching in the cafeteria, semi-spontaneously dropping into people's offices,
and then flying off around the world to C.I.A. stations, listening, nodding,
questioning.

His initial impressions of the spies were unsettling. He says he was "shocked by
their inability to formulate solutions" to their problems. He says he heard "a
defensiveness, and almost panic, about what should be done" to reassert the
C.I.A.'s credibility. He heard a lot of complaints, a lot of pleas to save the
clandestine service -- but few ideas about how to do it. Though the spies had
been through their own Vietnam, through two decades of scandals and snafus and
self-inflicted wounds, the clandestine service did not appear to have the
ability or desire to reinvent itself the way the Army did. Deutch did not find
many first-class minds in the ranks. "Compared to uniformed officers," he said
in September, "they certainly are not as competent, or as understanding of what
their relative role is and what their responsibilities are."

He figured out later that the spies knew what he thought of them, and began to
rethink his first impressions. He started to search for the talented younger
officers who were unhappy with the clandestine service but had stuck it out,
hoping for a change. He started saying "we" instead of "they." This, again, took
time.

The directorate of operations' initial response to Deutch was not wholly
favorable either. Antipathy boiled over in the Bubble on Sept. 29. That morning,
Deutch was forced to confront the C.I.A.'s history. There are places where the
agency has done good -- like smuggling money and fax machines to the Solidarity
movement in Poland or securing Vaclav Havel's Velvet Revolution in
Czechoslovakia -- but Latin America is not one of them. Nowhere is the agency's
record worse than Guatemala, where it overthrew the Government in a 1954 coup
and for the next 40 years supported a brutal military that has killed more than
100,000 civilians.

Prompted by the disclosure that one of the C.I.A.'s foreign agents, a Guatemalan
colonel, might have been implicated in the murder of an American, Deutch ordered
a worldwide re-evaluation of thousands of paid informers. The orders were to
identify the crooks and the fingernail-pullers, to weigh the information they
provided against their records, and to sack them if they failed the test. Then
he reviewed the C.I.A.'s recent performance in Guatemala, and found what he
politely called "tremendous deficiencies in the way the agency carried out its
business." Above all, he found "a lack of candor -- between the chief of station
and the Ambassador, between the station and the directorate of operations' Latin
America division, between the directorate of operations' Latin America division
and the deputy director for operations, and between the C.I.A. and the
Congress." Guatemala proved to be a core sample of a deep rot.

In the World-of-Tomorrow setting of the Bubble, Deutch announced he was firing
the former chief of the Latin America division and a former station chief. It is
very hard to get fired from the C.I.A. -- no one was dismissed after the Ames
debacle -- and the discipline did not go over well. The hundreds of officers
gathered there were deeply unhappy, and they told Deutch so. They said he was
moving the goal posts on them. They saw their job in Guatemala as getting rid of
Communists, not providing grist for Amnesty International reports. They saw the
affair as a supremely pointless scandal, a left-wing revisionist history of the
cold war.

Deutch said, O.K., this was a setback, but you can't be afraid of failure. You
can't be afraid of controversy. You've got to go out there and keep taking risks
in the service of your country. And then a low, rumbling growl started from the
back of the Bubble, a bitter, sardonic, self-pitying chuckle signifying: Yeah.
Sure. They were laughing at him. The curse of the Old Boys was upon John Deutch.

THE CURSE IS THE PATRIMONY OF AN ELITE SECRET SOCIETY that degenerated into an
elitist bureaucracy, an inbred tribal culture. The old boys were the Knights
Templar of America. Secrecy was their sword and shield. They had billions of
dollars; they could buy kings and break them; they were saving the world. They
were different. Rules and laws were not for them.

Their legacy is an arrogation of power through secrecy, a
we-know-what's-best-for-America imperiousness, a "lack of candor" -- lying to
Presidents, to the Pentagon, to the Congress and to each other. It's a suicidal
habit; it keeps threatening to do the spies in. Deutch must break the tradition.

"It's a tradition to keep in mind, because I'm certainly flowing against that
tide," Deutch says. "They were careless. Not being fully forthcoming with --
never mind the Congress -- with the President? With the Secretary of State? With
the Secretary of Defense? It's unimaginable." It dies hard. The old boys' heirs
"have habits, they have practices, they have attitudes which are just not
reasonable," he says. "There is a wish that somebody would come in and in one
fell swoop replace what they see as the dignity of the past."

To better understand that past, Deutch stays in touch with the last great
spymaster, the vicar of dirty tricks, who once said he wore his conviction for
failing to testify truly to Congress as a badge of honor: the Honorable Richard
McGarrah Helms, Director of Central Intelligence from 1966 to 1973.

Helms is at an age of funerals. Eighty-two years old, elegant as a British
banker, he stood before a congregation in a small wood-beamed Episcopal church
in September, the blue flag of the Central Intelligence Agency hanging by the
altar. A hundred old men filled the pews. There was Bronson Tweedy, chief of the
Africa division when Washington fought Moscow for dominion over Europe's lost
colonies. Rolf Kingsley, chief of the Soviet division when we were eyeball to
eyeball. Thomas Parrott, the agency's link to the White House in the days of
coups and plots. These were the men, tempered by the fires of the cold war, who
made the C.I.A.  Walter Pforzheimer, the old boys' unofficial historian, leaned
on his cane and observed: "This is the second-to-last great gathering of the
clan. The last one will be for Helms."

The occasion was a memorial for Larry Houston, the agency's chief lawyer from
1947 to 1973. Helms gave the eulogy. He praised Houston as a man who always told
the clandestine service what it could do, not what it could not. "And that," he
said dryly, "was essential at the C.I.A. in those days."

A few days later, Helms sipped a beer under the slowly revolving ceiling fans of
the Bombay Club in downtown Washington and mourned what has become of his
service, how can-do decayed into can't. "Exactly how all this deteriorated, I
don't know." But he does know. "If you're going to be involved with espionage
you've got to be motivated. It's not fun and games. It's dirty and dangerous.
There's always a chance you're going to get burned. In World War II, in the
O.S.S., we knew what our motivation was: to beat the goddamn Nazis. In the cold
war, we knew what our motivation was: to beat the goddamn Russians. Suddenly the
cold war is over, and what is the motivation? What would compel someone to spend
their lives doing this sort of thing?"

"In this," Helms said, polishing off his beer, "the director must provide the
motivation. John Deutch is a damn smart fellow. He's obviously not terribly
interested in having a lot of dirt thrown on him -- he wants to go back to
M.I.T. -- and so he's instinctively drawing away from the D.O., seeing it as
nothing but trouble. Nor is he the first to be distancing himself. He's got a
job to do convincing them he's on the team."

Helms's day ended in congressional hearings that paraded a generation's worth of
skeletons before the public -- the assassination plots, the coups, the spying on
Americans. Then came a brief reformation in the late 1970's. Then came the
counterreformation. In the 1980's, the C.I.A. expanded mightily under William J.
Casey, President Reagan's Director of Central Intelligence. Casey hired
thousands of new spies, but quantity was not matched with quality. He lowered
the intelligence quotient of the C.I.A., said Gates, his deputy director. And
when Casey was caught running guns to Iran and Nicaragua on orders from the
White House in 1986, in defiance of law and common sense, the clandestine
service took another flaying in the form of indictments and investigations.
These left permanent scars, in the form of "a risk-avoidance mentality, a lack
of boldness and imagination," Gates says.

The most recent beating, still being administered, began last year after the
arrest of Aldrich Ames. For seven years after Ames walked out of headquarters
with a six-pound stack of secret papers, no one at the agency investigating the
betrayal ever told Gates or his predecessor, William Webster, anything close to
the truth about the case. The chain of command was broken.

Now some of the best of the second generation of spies say the clandestine
service has forfeited its leading role in national security. Among them is an
old spy named Milt Bearden, a smart tough guy, the kind you want on your side in
a war of words or a bar fight. Today Bearden lives down a dirt road outside an
obscure New Hampshire hamlet. A few years back, he was running Stinger
antiaircraft missiles into Afghanistan, baiting and bleeding the Russian bear.
When the Soviet Union went into its death spasms in August 1991, he was watching
with delight from inside K.G.B. headquarters in Dzerzhinsky Square. As much as
any man, Bearden -- the last chief of the Soviet division -- had a good cold
war. The only blot on his career was the fact that for 10 months he had a mole
on his payroll named Ames.

A year into his retirement, he considers what was lost when we won the cold war.
"It was easy, once upon a time, for C.I.A. to be unique and mystical," he says
over mugs of tea in his New Hampshire dacha. "It was not an institution. It was
a mission. And the mission was a crusade. Then you took the Soviet Union away
from us and there wasn't anything else. We don't have a history. We don't have a
hero. Even our medals are secret. And now the mission is over. Fini."

In its place, he says, are far smaller missions that require a smaller
clandestine service. "Out of 5,000 people, you've got 1,500 buggy-whip makers"
in the spies' ranks, he says. "There's nothing worse than having a couple
thousand more troops than you need. It's poisonous. John Deutch needs to have a
garage sale out there, and have those who remain understand that they're not the
front line anymore. Their mission is greatly reduced: intelligence support to
other agencies that will do things about the great transnational problems."

The spy service's future, he says, is in backing up the military and the F.B.I.
and drug-enforcement agents and friendly foreign intelligence services who will
do the dirty work. His conclusion is shared by many. The Pentagon wants to
increase its own spying abroad, and has plans, not yet approved, to set up
soldiers under the cover of phony overseas companies. The F.B.I. has similar
designs on the agency's turf, and wants to play a greater part in foreign
intelligence. Both would gladly usurp the power of the C.I.A.

Come what may, the agency will always have a role supporting the military,
especially in helping the Pentagon create a 3-D map of the theater of war that
overwhelms the enemy's two-dimensional vision. The failure to deliver timely,
accurate information to battlefield commanders was one of the main shortcomings
in the 1991 gulf war. Deutch's Pentagon experience and connections will create
permanent channels to insure better performance the next time.

But on a typical Sunday morning, the United States is not at war. And its
enemies sit not in the Kremlin or any other capital, but in the Bekaa Valley,
the outskirts of Kabul, the nouveau-riche estates above Bogota and the mosques
outside Teheran. As borders blur and states collapse, the threats are less
nations than gangs. The harm they can do the United States is less a military
matter than a law-enforcement problem.

The F.B.I. thinks this is a job for the F.B.I. The C.I.A. begs to differ.

The bureau and the agency have a lifetime of mutual mistrust to overcome,
another legacy from the old boys, and one of Deutch's biggest burdens. The
C.I.A. wants to keep control of overseas intelligence missions, seeing the
F.B.I. as a bunch of cops in Ninja suits with a certain lack of savoir-faire.
The bureau wants to wrest control from the agency, seeing it as unskilled in the
basics of busting bad guys. They are forced to cooperate, and this requires
working hard to avoid colliding. This struggle either will end in an amicable
truce or a catastrophic loss of power and prestige for the clandestine service.

"The problem we face today," Deutch says, "is getting both these communities to
work together and build on each other's strength and forget about the fact that
this tussle goes back to the time of Allen Dulles and J. Edgar Hoover."

The most fertile terrain for cooperation -- and the biggest minefield -- is in
the C.I.A.'s overseas stations and bases. They maintain liaisons with 400
different foreign intelligence services, internal-security groups and police
departments. These liaisons remain the least-known aspect of the agency's work
abroad. When things go well, the foreign service can arrest a terrorist or
subvert a drug syndicate. When they go badly, people die. And they are often
dangerous liaisons, marriages of convenience marked by infidelity. For liaison
is penetration: the C.I.A. tries to spy on the foreign service, co-opting police
chiefs and colonels, and the foreign service spies on the C.I.A. "We are all
each other's partners," Studeman said, "and we are all each other's targets."

Senior Justice Department officials say they often feel a certain uneasiness in
their liaisons with the C.I.A. "We never know if we're getting the whole story,"
one says. "The agency usually has another agenda. When we don't know if we're
getting the whole truth, it's a little unsettling." This bodes ill for bringing
drug dealers and bomb makers to justice from abroad. The issue is nearly
irresolvable: how can the agency keep secrets when the bureau wants to use them
as evidence? Sharing secrets, says the C.I.A.'s deputy general counsel, Dawn
Eilenberger, creates "a constant tension. That tension is never going to go
away."

If the Pentagon and the bureau set up their own foreign intelligence services,
the C.I.A.'s future role may be irrevocably diminished. But if the agency can
defend itself from its allies in the United States Government, and survive the
slow exhumation of its buried past, then it has a chance to preserve the heart
of its true mission: identifying the handful of real secrets that might harm the
United States and getting station chiefs to steal them.

THOUGH IT IS engaged in fewer clandestine operations today than ever before, the
C.I.A. is still capable of achieving things. It helped to arrest the old
terrorist Carlos the Jackal, 20 years a fugitive, in the Sudan last year. It
helped take apart the Cali cocaine cartel by providing intelligence to Colombian
authorities. It helped track and trap Ramzi Yousef, charged as the ringleader of
the World Trade Center bombing. But to operate effectively, it needs effective
operatives. And the curse of the old boys has so damaged the morale and
reputation of the C.I.A. that it is hard to find good people, keep the best and
replace the ones who leave.

"Some guy who's a talented Arabic speaker who just got a master's at Harvard has
got Salomon Brothers saying you can come tomorrow, versus the agency saying,
well, you have to take a lie-detector test and maybe we'll call you in nine
months -- do I have a chance of competing for somebody like that?" a senior
agency official asks.

The lie detector, or polygraph, is either an indispensible tool for security, or
a medieval machine best suited for hunting witches, depending on your point of
view. The agency's Office of Security swears by it, and rejects a very large
fraction of job applicants for failing it. "Their reliance on the polygraph,"
Deutch said, "is truly insane." He is thinking about cutting back on it, in the
hope that it might be a help in "getting flexible minds to come in and stay."

As for people leaving, that is harder to stop. If the agency conducted exit
interviews, which it does not, if would have heard this from Phil Giraldi, who
spent 16 years in the clandestine service, starting as a field officer in Rome
and ending as chief of base in Barcelona in 1992: "The ultimate tragedy is
spiritual. Most of the younger officers I knew have resigned. These were the
best and the brightest. Eighty or 90 percent of the people I knew, halfway
through their careers, have packed it in. There was very little motivation left.
The enthusiasm was gone. When I joined the agency, back in '76, there was a
tribalism. The esprit de corps that the Agency had was created by this
tribalism, and it served a good purpose. You used to have great eccentrics. You
used to hear criticism, intellectual debate. Now you have M.B.A. clones, not
philosopher kings." Giraldi says that when he started out, his partner in the
Rome station had a Ph.D. in Italian politics. In Barcelona, on his last tour,
she was an English major who spoke no Spanish.

Even so, the best people remaining are very smart -- and very resilient. "How
talented are we?" asks the deputy director of Central Intelligence, George J.
Tenet. "More talented than people know." The greater part of that talent lies in
the think tank, the directorate for intelligence. Its new chief, John Gannon,
says his analysts include some of the most intelligent people in Washington. He
may be among them. When Gannon was a graduate student in the 1970's, "the agency
was not something that interested me," he says. "I was a Latin Americanist, so
not only did it not interest me; I thought the agency was as close to evil as
you get to in the universe. I disapproved of what they were doing in Latin
America."

At the urging of a senior agency analyst, he came in for a look. "The quality of
the work I saw being done was extraordinary. It had nothing to do with my image
of the agency. It was really good stuff." The information was so far beyond what
was available in academia, and the people so interesting, he says, that he
stayed, and, over 18 years, has never looked back. But now, looking ahead,
Gannon fears he may lose the expert colleagues he needs. One of his predecessors
said in 1993 that he found it "hard to do serious analysis with a bunch of
19-year-olds on two-year rotations." That exaggerates the problem, but not by
much.

Right now, Gannon says he has plenty of people, but not the right mix. German
speakers? Too many. Chinese speakers? Some. Slavic language speakers? Nowhere
close to enough. Economists? No. People capable of understanding what's going on
in Azerbaijan or Afghanistan?  Some, but not enough. Worst of all, Gannon says,
the analysts feel adrift: "People in this directorate do want a sense of
direction, a sense of what the mission is, and I need to work hard to give it to
them," he says. "How do you take this supertanker and get it in the direction
you want to put it?"

IT WILL TAKE A VERY long time to turn the C.I.A. around, if it can be done at
all. Deutch is talking about three or four years. But it may be far longer. "We
didn't get to the position we're in overnight and we aren't going to get out of
it overnight," said Nora Slatkin, whom Deutch brought in from the Pentagon to
serve as the agency's executive director, its day-to-day manager and by far the
highest-ranking woman in its history. "Change isn't easy. There's always going
to be some resistance to change. Always. If it takes a decade or so to build a
new satellite, it's not unreasonable to take that long to build a new generation
of C.I.A. officers."

If the curse can be broken, Deutch has the chutzpah to do it. "If any man can
change the culture of the C.I.A., this is such a man," Senator Moynihan says.
Few in Washington can match his brains, and not too many are aware that he has
been around the business most of his life. "John's resume in intelligence," says
Brent Scowcroft, President Bush's national security adviser, "is a lot deeper
than most people know."

It begins with his father. Michael Deutch was a Russian Jew, born in Smolensk in
1908, who with his family fled the Bolshevik Revolution for Belgium and who
learned chemical engineering at the University of Ghent. He married Jean
Fischer, the daughter of a diamond merchant who ran the Zionist Federation in
Belgium. Their son was born in Brussels in 1938, an inauspicious time and place
for a child of his heritage. In 1939, the Deutches fled from the Nazis, first to
Paris, then Lisbon and finally to America. His father quickly joined the
military-industrial elite, serving as deputy director at the War Production
Board, in charge of making synthetic rubber. He befriended generals and admirals
and intelligence types, all of whom fascinated him.

In 1951, he went on a Presidential mission to the Philippines as an economic
adviser. He became deeply impressed by an Air Force lieutenant colonel named
Edward G. Lansdale. Detailed to the C.I.A., Lansdale was simultaneously trying
to kill off a Communist insurgency in the Philippines, create a pro-American
President and win over the populace with star-spangled propaganda, psychological
warfare and covert action. Michael Deutch became a lifelong friend to Lansdale,
a man who through hidden-hand diplomacy and dirty tricks came to embody American
influence in the Philippines and Vietnam in the 1950's. (He was memorialized,
heroically, as Col. Hillendale in "The Ugly American" and, devastatingly, as
Pyle in Graham Greene's "The Quiet American.") Deutch was by Lansdale's side for
a far less successful return engagement of his winning-hearts-and-minds road
show in Vietnam.

President Kennedy loved Lansdale's style, and created a job for him as the
assistant to the Secretary of Defense for special liaison operations. In 1961,
the President, through his brother Robert, the Attorney General, set Lansdale
off on a C.I.A. plot code-named Mongoose -- a plan to eliminate Fidel Castro.
That year, Lansdale personally recruited John Deutch for his first Government
job.

At 22, Deutch became one of Secretary of State Robert MacNamara's whiz kids in
the Pentagon's office of systems analysis. The generals hated the whiz kids, and
who could blame them? These earnest young men with slide rules were about to
overturn the central tenet of American nuclear strategy: the complete
destruction of everything east of the Iron Curtain at the first sign that the
Soviets were ready for war. The plan was to kill hundreds of millions of people
with 3,423 nuclear weapons on the first day of World War III.

The plan was based on bad intelligence. The C.I.A. and the Air Force estimated
-- falsely -- that the Russians had a two-million-man army with 175 divisions
and hundreds of nuclear missiles. The United States had a million-man army and
thousands of nuclear missiles. Ergo: nuke them with a bolt from the blue.

"The idea was to get away from the single spasm response that destroyed
everything and create the capacity to do something more complex," said Deutch's
boss, Alain Enthoven, then 30 years old. Their idea -- that you could fight and
win a limited, controlled nuclear war -- is a concept that theologists of the
nuclear church still debate.

It was heady business for young John Deutch, who spent four years in systems
analysis while earning his graduate degree at M.I.T. His father's fascination
with military and intelligence matters now rested in him. So did the experience
of overturning hidebound thinking with reason. And Deutch liked his taste of
power.

He began a lifelong pattern. He held political posts in Democratic
administrations and went back to academic and advisory posts in Republican
times, serving in a sort of permanent government of defense intellectuals --
neither hawks nor doves but owls. He was a member of President Reagan's
commission on nuclear strategy, President Bush's Foreign Intelligence Advisory
Board and six other similar panels. Deutch stuck close to academic politics,
becoming dean of science and then provost of M.I.T. Moving between these worlds,
the bivalent professor won admirers in both. He may be the only living American
to gain the approval of both Ronald Reagan and Noam Chomsky, the M.I.T. linguist
and leading left-wing thinker. "He has more honesty and integrity than anyone
I've ever met in academic life, or any other life," Chomsky said. "If somebody's
got to be running the C.I.A., I'm glad it's him."

Deutch wanted to become president of M.I.T. in 1990, but did not win the prize.
He stepped down as provost and returned to teaching, one of a dozen among the
more than 900 given the title of institute professor. He had become rich from
patents and consultancies and companies and investments and a partnership with
William Perry, an old friend and colleague from the Pentagon. When the Democrats
returned to power in 1993, there was a limited universe of people deemed capable
of running the Defense Department. Deutch and Perry were in it, as was another
friend from M.I.T., Les Aspin, a whiz kid who was chairman of the House Armed
Services Committee. Aspin became Defense Secretary, Perry his deputy. Deutch
became the procurement czar and by most accounts, did very well. He cut $90
billion out of President Bush's five-year military plan. He took a ruinously
expensive and fouled-up program -- the new C-17 transport plane -- and made it
fly.

In March 1994, Perry became Defense Secretary and Deutch his deputy. And now
that Deutch holds what Perry says "may be the toughest job in Washington" --
tougher than running the Defense Department or, for that matter, the White House
-- Deutch looks back and sees his experiences in stark relief.

"The Pentagon, this time around, was an organization equipped to take on change
and well aware that it was necessary because of the fall of the Soviet empire,"
he says. "It was a huge organization whose leadership and all of its different
parts said: 'We need to change, and to organize our resources and our people to
accomplish this change.'

"The C.I.A. is an organization suffering because it's had tremendous criticism
because of its own mistakes, and part of the problem is for the core work force
to recognize that they are responsible for some of these problems and that it's
in their power to change," he says. "There's been some tendency to say, 'It's
the world that's wrong, not us, and if only we could revert to the good old days
things would be better.' It's very much harder for an outsider to come in and
make progress, especially when a great fraction of my time has been spent
explaining these inexplicable past errors. It's a very, very different
management challenge and by far the most difficult, running the C.I.A. By far."

IT IS THE BUSINESS OF INTELLIGENCE TO REPLACE ignorance and fear with knowledge
and confidence. The C.I.A has been imprisoned by its own lies, living in fear,
unsure of its history, uncertain of its future. Deutch is trying to force the
agency to face its sins and shortcomings. If the C.I.A. has a future, this is
how it must begin.

At 8:30 on Halloween morning, John Deutch returned to address the spies in the
Bubble, once again trying to explain the inexplicable. The agency had suffered
yet another self-inflicted wound, this time to its soul.

For eight years, the agency had knowingly given the White House and the Pentagon
reports from Soviet agents it knew to be under Moscow's control -- a stupid and
self-destructive decision. It was the most important job of the C.I.A. to speak
truth to power. But the agency had simply picked the most plausible-sounding
stories told by paid liars. Passing along information without revealing that its
source works for the other side is putting poison in the well. The officers in
question figured that they knew best. They thought the information was probably
true, so they did not have to tell anyone that it came from double agents. They
concealed that salient fact from three Presidents -- whose policy judgments may
have been swayed by the reports. This deception reflected supreme arrogance,
Deutch says, "an arrogance that let them ignore the fundamentals of their
profession."

The double agents existed thanks to the treason of Aldrich Ames, and his treason
sprang from that same arrogance. Ames was a child of the C.I.A., the son of an
agency man, a living emblem of the malevolent mediocrity in its ranks. His
treason has forced the agency to live in a state of fear, not knowing which of
its secrets are secret. And this latest disaster shows that his spirit lives on.
In a jailhouse interview last year, he spelled out why he sold out the agency's
crown jewels to the Kremlin. "Call it arrogance, if you will, but I'd say: 'I
know what's damaging, and I know what's not damaging, and I know what the Soviet
Union is really all about, and I know what's best for foreign policy and
national security.' And I do."

In the Bubble, Deutch discussed the disaster in detail for 15 minutes, then
answered questions. And then he talked to the spies about the future. He said he
understood the damage to their morale. He exhorted them not to let it bring them
down. There are ways to fix it, he said. We're going to pull together. We're
going to stand as one and move on.

They rose and applauded, long and loud.

Deutch received a similiar reception the next day at a convocation of station
chiefs from around the world down at the Farm, the agency's training grounds at
Camp Peary, outside Williamsburg, Va. After his return, a sense of wonder began
showing through his deep weariness.

As he talked about it the next night, in his suite of offices up on the seventh
floor, he began to think aloud again: maybe he was getting through to the spies.
Perhaps this last chapter of the Ames affair had shocked them into
consciousness.

"This one got to them, on their own terms," he said. "It was such a violation of
their own rules. They've realized what happened here. And I think it's shaken
them very considerably. They're a lot more ready to say: 'Tell us what to do.
We're going to work.' "

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Richard Helms, The last great spymaster. (pg. 62); Deutch is
seeking a cure. (pg. 63); The mighty Casey led the counterreformation in the
80's. (pg. 64); The treasonous Ames was finally discovered and arrested in 1994.
(pg. 65); A rare high note: The tracking and trapping of Yousef in 1995. (pg.
66); North Korean troops in Pyongyang in 1993. North Korea, Iraq and Iran are
still black holes for the Agency. (pg. 67); Nora Slatkin, a C.I.A. deputy
director: "We didn't get to the position we're in overnight and we aren't going
to get out of it overnight." (pg. 82) (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DAN BORRIS/EDGE, FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

What's Up? Listen . . . A Reporter's Life in Politics

BYLINE: By CHARLES STRUM

SECTION: Section 13NJ;  Page 11;  Column 1;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2956 words


IN 1955, when Joseph F. Sullivan became a reporter, New Jersey was as much a
state of farms as of pharmaceuticals. Hudson County was still, post-Hague, a
Democratic machine. Governors were still chosen by clubhouse politicians. Each
county sent only one senator to Trenton -- the 21 Club, it was called.

Statewide politics belonged to moderate Republicans. Instead of Ross Perot,
there was Henry Krajewski, a pig farmer from Secaucus who liked to run for
President. Bruce Springsteen was far off, and so was the income tax.

New Jersey was on its way to becoming the quintessential suburban state, yet
cities like Paterson, Jersey City and Camden remained vibrant. In Newark, Broad
and Market Streets were lined with fine shops and big department stores like
Bamberger's, Hahne's and S. Klein. Office buildings were full. The Hudson
waterfront was bustling, the factories worked at full tilt.

No one talked about the environment. It would be 20 years before the Superfund
cleanup bill was pushed through Congress, by a Representative named Florio.

The Garden State Parkway had just opened, a year after the New Jersey Turnpike,
the two roads that would define the state for years as more of a conduit than a
place.

In 1955, only 4.8 million people lived between High Point and Cape May. Now
almost 8 million do.

And Joe Sullivan, then 25 years old, a graduate of St. Peter's College in Jersey
Ctiy and a veteran of two years in the Army, arrived at The Newark Evening News
to begin a career that would, he would say later, teach him all he ever wanted
to know about human nature and politics. Or at least round out the primary
education he received in the kingdom of Hague and Kenny.

He began his career when newspapers, always eager for scoops, were nevertheless
far more accepting of the status quo than they are now. They dutifully reported
meetings and speeches and took note of whatever public officials said, leaving
the meaning or significance to the reader. That changed with Vietnam and
Watergate, when news organizations identified a growing need to provide more
context and analysis.

By 1971, when he joined The Times, Joe Sullivan's memory bank had already become
filled with all sorts of information, some of it wackier or more compelling than
the bare facts of a newspaper article on a given day -- simply because it
offered a glimpse of the human side of a story or the people who make news.

These tidbits rarely make stories in themselves, but they offer some insights
into the tribulations of leadership that often go unconsidered. Sometimes enough
of them together help form a clearer picture of real life than any amount of
"straight news."

When Mr. Sullivan retired this fall, one of the main questions among his
colleagues and among the politicians, government officials and ordinary people
he wrote about was this: Without Joe, who's left who remembers all of this
stuff? The answer is: hardly anyone.

So the New Jersey section asked him to dip into his memory for some of the lore
that helped shape a career, and for some gentle reminders that vaults don't
always contain what you expect them to.   CHARLES STRUM

HUDSON COUNTY
The Good Old Days

Hudson County is endlessly fascinating. Its heroes and rogues tend to be one in
the same. And politics, while more sophisticated in the age of television and
polling, continues to be rough and tumble. It was only a few years ago, after
all, that political pranksters in City Hall gummed up office keyholes with glue.

Every notable public figure has a personal style, and for Frank Hague it was
that of a stern patriarch. So well did he live the role that people often would
bring their most personal problems to him.

The wife of a prominent physician once came to Hague because her husband was
stepping out with another woman. Hague summoned the couple to his office, and as
the wife beamed, he bore down on her husband.

"Now, John," Hague said, "Mary tells me you've been running around with some
floozie. Is that so?

The husband sat stonily, unable to answer.

"Well, John, let's see," Hague said. "What are your property taxes now? They
seem a bit low, don't they? And that job of yours at the medical center could be
in jeopardy in these perilous times, don't you think?

"Now it seems to me," Hague continued, "that to be on the safe side, you might
consider some changes. Wouldn't you say?"

In 1949, John V. Kenny succeeded Hague as boss of the Hudson County Democratic
organization and set up an elaborate chain of bagmen whenever he was about to
receive a large gift. The package of money would pass unopened through a dozen
pairs of hands before he would accept it from a trusted lieutenant.

A former Kenny aide told me last year that the money was often kept inside
automobile tires at a business owned by a man who frequently drove Kenny around.
The aide could also be seen visiting wakes at funeral parlors, where he signed
Kenny's name to the register of visitors, to show that the boss had paid his
respects, and quickly disappeared.

With veterans returning from World War II after fighting dictatorships overseas,
and with advancing age taking its toll on the Hague machine, the stage was set
for a palace coup. Kenny was a Hague lieutenant who had been read out of the
party by the boss in a personal dispute. He quickly became the leader, albeit a
reluctant one, of the anti-Hague forces.

Kenny and his running mates won the May 1949 Jersey City elections, but the new
Mayor knew the fight wasn't over. Kenny said later he kept his bags packed for a
quick departure because he believed he would be going to prison if the
Democratic candidate for Governor won in November with Hague's help.

Kenny's organization worked for the election of the Republican candidate, Alfred
E. Driscoll, and while the Democrat, Elmer Wene, carried Hudson County, the
margin was so small that it spelled the end of the Hague machine's power and
helped insure Driscoll's victory.

Because of the changing times and a different temperament, Kenny couldn't
emulate Hague's iron-fisted style of leadership. He became a mediator, and as
long as both sides in party squabbles came to him, his power was secure.

He turned up everywhere. If there was an ordination, the picture in the next
day's papers would show the bishop and Kenny flanked by the new priests. If he
attended a wedding, the picture showed the cleric who performed the ceremony and
Kenny standing between the bride and bridgegroom.

In the old machine counties, county clerks had a knack for picking the
Democratic slate in the annual drawing for top ballot position. In Hudson,
someone once hung the familiar "Vote Row A All the Way" banner (for the
Democratic ticket) before the drawing had even been held.

And in Essex, County Clerk Nicholas V. Caputo, the "Man with the Golden Arm,"
picked the Democrats 40 out of 41 times. Only in 1967 did the Republicans win
the favored spot in what must have been an off day for Mr. Caputo. Republicans
eventually sued, saying they'd been robbed. The case made it to the State
Supreme Court, which took judicial note of the phenomenon in 1985 by pointing
out that the odds of replicating Mr. Caputo's string were less than 1 in 50
billion.

The court said that few reasonable people would attribute the Democrats' success
to "blind chance" but stopped short of accusing the County Clerk of wrongdoing.
The court put quotation marks around the word "coincidence" and suggested that
Mr. Caputo provide witnesses with a closer look at what was happening when he
conducted the drawing.

Machine politics is based on loyalty, and few were more loyal than Barney Doyle,
a colorful member of the Kenny organization and a favorite of Gov. Richard J.
Hughes, who liked to banter with him when visiting Jersey City. The Governor
would ask in a loud voice for benefit of other Democratic workers, "What does it
say on the back of the vegetable wagon, Barney?" and Mr. Doyle would reply,
"Pro-DUCE!"

Mr. Doyle was rewarded by Kenny with an appointment as Hudson County
Superintendent of Weights and Measures. Right after he was sworn in, Gene
Scanlon, a reporter with The Jersey Journal, asked him, "Hey, Barney, how many
ounces are there in a pound?"

"Give me a break," Mr. Doyle said. "I've only had the job two minutes."

Mr. Scanlon, who later worked in the Mayor's office, was a founder of the city's
St. Patrick's Day Parade. He and some friends realized that the choice of grand
marshal could be politically sensitive. So late one night they went to the pay
phone in the tavern where they were meeting and called police headquarters in
Dublin.

The plan was to offer the parade marshal's role to the first person to answer
the phone. He turned out to be the police dispatcher, and his name assured the
ad hoc parade committee they had made a sound choice. It was P. J. Kenny.

The parade, with Mr. Kenny, was such a success that the city nearly ran out of
beer. Mayor Thomas Gangemi then decided to invite someone from Italy for the
Columbus Day Parade, and the committee was able to find someone named Cristoforo
Columbo in Genoa.

Mayor Gangemi decided to go to Italy and escort the designated marshal back to
Jersey City, but when he applied for a passport it was revealed he was not a
citizen.

His parents had emigrated when he was very young and he never took out his
papers. He was forced to leave office.

This, and the fact that Columbo was a shy and retiring man, cast a pall over the
coming parade.

It lifted when the parade committee brought the popular P. J. Kenny back for
another march, this time as co-grand marshal of the Columbus Day Parade.

CAMPAIGN TRAIL
Anything for a Vote

In the years before carefully designed television campaigns, candidates would
drive miles to see a handful of people and hand out a variety of trinkets: rain
hats, combs, mirrors, pens, buttons, balloons and straw hats, all colorfully
emblazoned with the candidate's name and slogan.

This seemed a waste of time and money even then, and has all but disappeared
because of the need to save every penny for TV ads. And sometimes the
gift-giving backfired. Bernard M. Shanley, a longtime Republican national
committeeman, was campaigning in a South Jersey mall one day in his unsuccessful
bid to unseat Senator Harrison A. Williams in 1964. An angry shopkeeper
approached him.

"Who's handing out those shopping bags?" he demanded.

Mr. Shanley said his campaign workers were.

"People are using those bags to shoplift my store!" the man shouted.

The campaign quickly moved on and the bags were retired.

Hughes attracted a lot of volunteers to his 1961 campaign for Governor, perhaps
none more colorful, or more counterproductive, than Irv Tucker, an employee of
the West New York Road Department, who quickly became known as "the West New
York Road Department for Hughes."

If Hughes spoke to a gathering at a restaurant, Mr. Tucker would plaster every
car in the parking lot with campaign stickers, whether their owners were there
to hear the candidate or just enjoy a meal. It took some fast talking to mollify
many angry patrons.

The well-meaning Mr. Tucker once drove a sound truck through wealthy Short Hills
blaring the message: "Remember! A vote for Hughes is a vote for labor!"

Like Hughes, Thomas H. Kean, who took office in 1982, was affable and
approachable, and even left the parade to his inauguration to walk over and
shake someone's hand on the sidewalk.

If he was getting into his car for an appointment and someone walked up to him,
he would stop and talk until the person ran out of things to say and left.

For this reason, he was rarely on time. Carl Golden, the Governor's press
secretary, once said he wished he could strap roller skates on the Governor, so
he could be pushed away from these impromptu meetings and into the waiting car.

Mr. Kean's style contrasted sharply with that of Jim Florio, his opponent in the
1981 race for Governor. Mr. Florio's campaign day could have a dozen stops, and
he would make every one on time. Mr. Kean would have half that many and be late
for most of them.

Mr. Florio's intensity, which had been viewed as an asset at the outset, became
a drawback as the campaign progressed. After the election, he told me his
daughter commented on the pictures of him that appeared in newspapers. "You
always look like you're lecturing people," she said.

Mr. Kean won by the slimmest of margins. In fact, he said later, he went to bed
thinking he had lost, and when he learned he had won he had to retrieve a
crumpled piece of paper with his victory statement from the fireplace where he
had thrown it.

Brendan T. Byrne, a former county prosecutor and judge, was an enigma to many of
those around him. They never knew what he was going to do or say until it
happened.

He fought with both of the men he chose to be Democratic state chairman during
his two terms, and weathered periods of unpopularity because of the enactment of
the state income tax and the naming of the Byrne Arena in the Meadowlands in his
honor while he was still in office.

But he developed a humorous, self-deprecating approach to these problems and has
become as famous for his wit as for any accomplishment while in office. He once
said he knew the anger over the income tax was subsiding when he marched in the
St. Patrick's Day Parade in Hudson County "and people were waving at me with all
five fingers."

The Meadowlands controversy also had a bright side. He said he visited Rome and
was treated like a native son.

"They thought my name was Brendan Byrnearena," he said.

Senator Clifford P. Case was a moderate -- some conservatives would say liberal
-- Republican who was virtually unbeatable in general elections because he
suited the majority of New Jersey voters. Democrats were hard-pressed in the
early 1970's to find a willing opponent, so Warren W. Wilentz, a son of David T.
Wilentz, the Middlesex County Democratic leader, was summoned back from his
honeymoon in Hawaii to make the run.

He was personable candidate who seemed to convey the hopelessness of his task by
never appearing to take things too seriously.

The event that became a symbol of his campaign happened when he was flying from
one campaign stop to another. The small plane ran into heavy fog and headed over
into Pennsylvania before the pilot set it down. By the time they figured out
where they were, the rest of the campaign day was lost.

After the campaign, in which Mr. Wilentz carried Hudson County and Mr. Case the
other 20, Mr. Wilentz held a "where did I go wrong?" party.

For his part Mr. Case, a shy and diffident man, had picked up some labor
endorsements. One day he was walking down the main shopping street in a suburban
Union County town, shaking hands with people who recognized him, when several
white cars pulled into parking spaces down the street and burly men in trench
coats emerged.

They were union members who had been dispatched to do advance work for the
candidate. This usually consists of walking ahead and telling shoppers and
strollers that the candidate is coming along and inviting them to say hello.

The union members were more direct. They grabbed people by the arm and walked
them up the street, saying, "Come on and meet Senator Case." Soon the Senator
was unable to move, surrounded by a large number of slightly dazed pedestrians
who were surrounded, in turn, by a cordon of men in trench coats.

Senator Bill Bradley took his first beach walk in 1978 with former State Senator
Herb Buehler of Monmouth County, and the Senator recently said that I suggested
he repeat it every year.

I can't confirm that, but I can agree with his observation that when I went to
cover this year's walk in the sand, I kept falling far off the pace, proving
that what another athlete, Ted Williams, said is true. The first thing to go are
the knees.

GENERATION GAP
A Wobbly Playing Field

T. James Tumulty was a former Assemblyman, United States Representative and
soon-to-be Superior Court judge when he would hold forth at the Majestic Bar
across the street from Jersey City City Hall in the late 1960's. The bar was
owned by a group of city firemen who served drinks and cooked when they were off
duty or retired.

He was serving as the city's chief lawyer when he decided to codify all city
ordinances and found they were kept in a looseleaf binder. He said Hague would
simply have a new ordinance typed up when he needed one and later get the other
four city commissioners, whom Mr. Tumulty dubbed "the four horsemen of the
affirmative" to ratify his actions.

I once invited Mr. Tumulty to address a writing class I taught to freshmen at
St. Peter's College. I sat in the rear of the classroom throughly enjoying his
stories while something entirely different was happening to the students.

Mr. Tumulty rattled on and on about the time he was fighting the Kenny
organization and ran for county office on an opposing ticket.

He said he knew he was going to lose but visited district leaders to ask for
some votes so he wouldn't disgrace himself too much. In many cases he got
exactly the number of votes he requested. Thus, he led the losing ticket and was
invited back into the organization. The students sat in silence.

I told them to write their impressions of the speaker and what he had to say.
But I should have realized they were not prepared to hear that politics is often
not played on anything resembling a level field.

What I had come to know as a young man and a young reporter dropped like a stone
into my classroom. One student's written comment was typical:

"If I believed one word that man said, I would have called the police."

NAME: Joseph F. Sullivan

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In the 1960's, Joe Sullivan filed his reports by teletype from
the State House in Trenton to The Evening News in Newark. (Newark Evening News);
Christine Todd Whitman was the last of the seven New Jersey Governors Mr.
Sullivan covered in a 40-year career. (Laura Pedrick for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: CROWN HEIGHTS;
'The Super's Real-Life Sequel

BYLINE: By MICHAEL COOPER

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 10;  Column 5;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 389 words


The Hollywood version had a happy ending. But the real saga of 320 Sterling
Street drags on. It was a dilapidated six-story hulk in 1988 when the landlord,
Morris Gross, was sentenced to live in a neglected apartment for failing to
correct more than 400 housing code violations. The sentence, the first of its
kind in New York, inspired the film "The Super," starring Joe Pesci as an
unscrupulous landlord.

In real life, Mr. Gross fell behind on his real estate taxes. In 1992 the
113-unit building was seized by the Department of Housing Preservation and
Development, which trained tenants to manage it. The goal: to sell them the
building for $250 a unit.

But on Dec. 1, the department took the building back, saying the tenants'
association had "consistently overspent its budget."

Since the tenants assumed responsibility for 320 Sterling Street, the building
has been free of graffiti. A fountain was installed in the lobby; the door is
guarded 24 hours a day, and four security cameras monitor the pristine halls.
But keeping it that way costs more than the $535,000 annual rent roll, according
to the housing department. It said the association spent $314 per apartment per
month for staff, maintenance and repairs, compared with $149 at similar
properties. It also said the association wrote checks to "cash," failed to pay
contractors and paid $5,700 to the son of the group's president, Joyce Stewart.

Ms. Stewart, who is also the unsalaried building manager, said all expenses were
necessary to fix up and secure the building. "They used to call this Vietnam,"
she said. "There were drug dealers, and the police had to come every day. It was
disgusting. There were leaks, holes and cracks everywhere. Nothing worked." She
said that a housing worker had told her to write checks to cash, that the only
bills she had not paid were from contractors whose work she disputed and that
money paid to her son, the building's super, was reimbursement for expenses.

Last week, the association filed suit against the department in an attempt to
reclaim the building. The city wants to sell it to a nonprofit housing
organization that will keep monthly rents -- from $500 to $600 -- affordable.
But David Druce, a tenant, said he and "66 percent of the tenants want to buy
their own apartments."   MICHAEL COOPER

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The housing authority has decided that the tenants of 320
Sterling Street can no longer run the building, because they have not been
staying within budget. The tenants' association, headed by Joyce Stewart, below,
is filing suit to reclaim control. (John Sotomayor/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

COPING;
Deciding That Ladylike Doesn't Work

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 1;  Column 3;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 814 words


"I'LL never say that cancer is a good thing," Carol Hochberg said, "but I will
say it's given me a direction. I was waiting for something to be committed and
enthusiastic about. I guess I took the cancer as a sign."

It has been only nine months since Ms. Hochberg, runner, weight-trainer, almost
vegetarian, first had her breast cancer diagnosed, at 37. But she already calls
herself a "self-employed activist" as she carves out a volunteer career at
Share, the free citywide self-help group for women with breast and ovarian
cancer. She studies, speaks, lobbies and answers hot-line calls with the same
power-lunch intensity she once poured into investment banking. This is how one
woman battles the beast.

"I can understand women who grieve over their disease -- I think a cancer
diagnosis is like losing a person close to you -- and then want to move on, to
put it behind them," she said. "A lot of women don't want to be defined by their
disease. But I want to control the changes in my life. It's like being on a
bucking bronco. I want to go the distance. I want to make this cancer mine."

Ms. Hochberg is not typical of the estimated 184,000 American women with
diagnoses of breast cancer this year; she is younger (fewer than 10 percent are
under 40), more affluent, certainly more prepared to become an advocate for
progressive changes in the medical and political approaches to the disease.
Breast and ovarian cancer activists may eventually be able to combine some of
the gallant ferocity of AIDS protest groups like Act Up with the access to the
big money of the Michael Milken-Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf prostate cancer force.

"Little pink ribbons are not going to do it," Ms. Hochberg said. "Women have
been conditioned to be ladylike, to be
mediators, not to make too much noise. We have to get ot there and kick -- we
can't take this lying down."

She was sitting on the couch in her Upper East Side apartment, a trim woman in
plum velvet pants and a red sweater overrun with appliqued blue scotties. Her
pert, round face, capped with stylishly short hair, was flushed, as if she had
just exercised. But her hair was just growing in after eight months of
heavy-duty chemotherapy, and the color in her cheeks was from the previous day's
intravenous dose. She hopes to exercise again soon, but must forever be alert to
strain or infection in her left arm, stripped of lymph nodes in the classifying
of her disease last spring.

Her cancer arrived, she says smiling, but without irony or tumor humor, at an
opportune time. In August 1994, having decided that "there was more to life than

making rich men richer," Ms. Hochberg
left the financial arena after 15 years.
She had two undergraduate degrees from Wharton and an M.B.A. from Harvard. She
was making, she says, "in the comfortable six figures." She had enough of a
personal portfolio to take off a year "to get my
bearings."

She thought she might work in the environmental field. She read, visited friends
and relatives, traveled to Antarctica, Brazil and the Galapagos Islands and
ignored the lump she had discovered on her left breast. In March, during a
routine exam, her doctor felt it, too.

She chose lumpectomy and radiation over mastectomy because she would never have
reconstruction; she did not define herself by her breasts. Because four lymph
nodes were involved, she opted for an eight-month chemo protocol of Adriamycin
and the drug combination called CMF.

It was the difficulty of telling her mother about the diagnosis that led her to
call the Share hot line (212-382-2111) at the suggestion of Dr. Anne Moore, her
oncologist at New York Hospital. At Share, she found the "normalization" of a
peer group and then, when she could work through her chemo fatigue, an outlet
for her anger. Share, which in 20 years has yet to find a corporate angel, has
been reaching beyond its Manhattan roots to what its executive director, Alice
Yaker, calls the "underserved communities of black and Latina women" in Harlem,
the South Bronx and Queens.

Ms. Hochberg is an old hand at organizing. A second-generation feminist, she
grew up campaigning for her mother, Audrey Hochberg, an anti-Vietnam War
activist who was elected to the Westchester County Legislature and, two terms
ago, to the State Assembly. Audrey Hochberg has accompanied her daughter, the
eldest of three, to most of her chemotherapy sessions.

"I cried a lot," Carol Hochberg said. "I still cry a couple of times a week.
It's hard to be brave, thinking you're not going to have a normal life span. I
don't feel 'why me?' but 'why us?' I believe my cancer was environmentally
caused. The world is being poisoned. And the treatment for cancer, surgery,
chemo, radiation -- I call it slash, poison, burn -- is very crude.

"There's lots to do, and I intend to be around to do it. I've been assaulted. I
will fight."

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Bosnia Highlights A Republican Split

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 4;  Column 4;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 702 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WILLIAM KRISTOL has pretty impeccable Republican credentials. He was Vice
President Dan Quayle's chief of staff, scourge of the Clinton health plan, and
founder of a think tank called the Project for the Republican Future.

But when the new magazine he edits, The Weekly Standard, came out last week in
favor of President Clinton's plans to send American troops to Bosnia, the
brickbats flew. Some Republicans began sarcastically referring to his avowedly
conservative journal as "Mother Jones," after the counterculture magazine. The
letters, Mr. Kristol said, are running 20-to-1 against the magazine's stinging
lead editorial, which assailed Republicans for "flunking" what it termed "a
yea-or-nay question concerning America's continued engagement with the rest of
the world."

"Liberal critics to the contrary notwithstanding," the magazine wrote,
"Republicans did not take control of Congress last fall by pandering to
populism's least sophisticated, most crudely nativist impulses."

Those strong words put Mr. Kristol and his magazine on one side of a widening
chasm in the Republican Party over America's role in the world. Senator Phil
Gramm, the Texas Republican and Presidential hopeful, has vociferously declared
his opposition to the dispatch of American troops, setting him at odds with the
Senate majority leader Bob Dole of Kansas, who has endorsed the President's
policy with some reservations.

Opposition in the House

Mr. Dole remains optimistic about persuading a significant number of Senate
Republicans to cast their votes in favor of the Bosnia operation. But it is much
less likely that the House Republicans will go along in giving the President
bipartisan support, which would be politically beneficial for his plan but is
not necessary to send the troops.

The opposition within House ranks was underscored last week when Representative
Bob Inglis, a 36-year-old second-term Republican from South Carolina, circulated
a letter to Mr. Clinton that read: "We urge you not to send ground troops to
Bosnia." It was signed by 186 House Republicans and 15 Democrats, which means
that House opponents of Mr. Clinton's policy are close to the 217 votes needed
to pass such a resolution.

At its root, the debate is over conflicting visions of how, and when, the United
States should wield its power. Republicans like Mr. Kristol argue that the
future of NATO, and of America's role in Europe, depend on keeping Mr. Clinton's
original commitment to enforce any durable peace settlement in Bosnia.

"We're Republicans, we like allies and alliances," said Mr. Kristol. "We don't
like the United Nations. We like military alliances. That's what it means to be
a Republican, not a McGovernite."

Oddly enough, Secretary of State Warren Christopher sounded much the same theme
on Friday, saying: "Our nation's ability to work with these European countries
on every other security issue -- reducing the nuclear threat, fighting
terrorism, you name it -- depends on our partnership here."

That argument hasn't moved many House Republicans. As Mr. Inglis sees it, "we
can't ask mothers to send their children off to die unless the homeland is
threatened in some way." The war in Bosnia, he says, poses no immediate danger
to the United States or its allies.

Shortly after The Standard's editorial appeared, Mr. Kristol traveled to the
Richard Nixon Library in Yorba Linda, Calif., to appear before what should have
been an admiring audience: The Lincoln Club of Orange County.

The crowd respectfully applauded him, Mr. Kristol said, but hardly anyone
endorsed his views on Bosnia. There was, he said, a visceral, personal animosity
against Mr. Clinton, a sense that as a President who did not serve in Vietnam,
he had no right to endanger the lives of American soldiers in a faraway place.

As he left California, Mr. Kristol said he was pondering this question: Will Mr.
Gramm be able to use Mr. Dole's support of the President on Bosnia against him,
just as Ronald Reagan used the Panama Canal treaty in 1976 to attack President
Ford?

"Obviously the conservative grass roots aren't happy," Mr. Kristol said. "But
are they really willing to rise in rebellion? I'm not so sure."

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Weekly Standard's stance widened the Republican rift.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The New Attack on Human Rights

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 590 words


Today is International Human Rights Day, so designated to remind an often
uncaring world that there is a Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It was
adopted 47 years ago by the United Nations to establish some clear standards for
the treatment of citizens by their governments.

There has been progress on human rights in recent years. The demise of the
Soviet Union and its empire ended a terrible tyranny for millions of people, as
did the end of apartheid in South Africa and the advance of democracy in Latin
America and Korea. But too many governments retain repressive practices.

The path ahead is blocked in many Asian countries by stubborn government
opposition. The complaint goes like this: It is fine for advanced nations like
the United States to talk about rights like the rule of law and protection of
dissent, but we are addressing the more basic needs of people for food and
shelter, medical care and schooling.

Besides, say countries like China, Indonesia, Vietnam and Singapore, the
Universal Declaration is essentially a Western document, rooted in values that
are alien to the East. These objections have a plausible ring, but they are
misguided.

The first argument assumes a necessary conflict between respect for human rights
and imperatives of development. It is patronizing, indeed almost insulting to
Asians and others, to suggest that citizens in developing countries should not
have the same rights as those in more developed lands.

The new attack coincides with a growing reluctance among richer nations to
impose sanctions that might limit their access to lucrative markets. Freer
markets do help nurture freer societies, as in South Korea. But experience shows
that outside pressure is a vital catalyst, and that sanctions can assist the
democratizing process, as in South Africa.

Nor is there real weight to the argument that the U.N.'s declaration, with its
emphasis on rule of law and political accountability, somehow conflicts with
Asian value systems. The point is effectively made by Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the
Burmese human rights activist, who cites the Buddhist view of kingship: "The Ten
Duties of Kings are liberality, morality, self-sacrifice, integrity, kindness,
austerity, non-anger, nonviolence, forbearance and non-opposition to the will of
the people."

Different cultures nurture different political values, but over the centuries
the world has evolved international codes that express universal aspirations.
Though slavery is viewed as legitimate in some cultures, and some theocracies
believe those they label as heretics should be slain for writing books, the
world is surely not wrong to prohibit slavery and condemn assassination edicts.

China's views on human rights are most paradoxical. Here is a Communist society
that preaches the universal validity of Marxist principles, yet hypocritically
rejects principles intended to protect Chinese workers from being exploited in
prison camps and to uphold the rights of home-grown dissenters like Wei
Jingsheng.

There were brighter developments in 1995.  Countries as different as Honduras
and Chile, Ethiopia and South Africa, conducted judicial proceedings against
military and security officers accused of human rights crimes.

On Human Rights Day, let it be affirmed again that some truths are globally
self-evident, and that a society deserves to be judged by its treatment of those
least able to defend themselves, and by the degree to which rulers govern by
consent and persuasion, rather than by terror.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

COVER STORY;
The Fine Art of the Furrowed Brow: Becoming Nixon and Kissinger

BYLINE: By ANITA GATES

SECTION: Section 12; Page 6; Column 1; Television

LENGTH: 962 words


THERE was this guy, Henry, who was really having trouble at work. His boss,
Richard, didn't like him (wanted to dismiss him, in fact) and snubbed him by
never inviting him to dinner with his family. He had even ordered Henry's
assistant, Al, to spy on Henry. Richard sometimes made what seemed like
completely off-the-wall decisions, then left Henry to explain them to the press.
He would send Henry on business trips and give him the authority to set
deadlines and make agreements, then refuse to abide by them. Worst of all,
whenever Henry did a really good job on a difficult project, Richard would take
all the credit.

This wasn't just another day at the office, of course. The issue was the Nixon
Administration's attempt to end the Vietnam War. "Kissinger and Nixon," a
made-for-television movie, takes viewers back more than two decades, most
notably with makeup that re-creates the visages of two major players on the
world stage.

The film, which is to have its premiere on TNT tonight at 8 (the week before
Oliver Stone's "Nixon" is to open in movie theaters), traces events from June
1972 to January 1973, purporting to take the point of view of Henry A.
Kissinger, then President Richard Nixon's national security adviser. (Al, the
assistant, was Gen. Alexander M. Haig.) The film is based on Walter Isaacson's
1992 book "Kissinger: A Biography."

"There's not a soul in Washington that doesn't know the President detests me,"
says Mr. Kissinger (played by Ron Silver) in the film. "I gave him detente with
the Russians, the opening to China, a foreign policy for the ages, the shining
jewel in his Presidency. Yet in place of affection I get jealousy." Meanwhile,
President Nixon, played by Beau Bridges, is making comments like "People react
to fear, not love," "I plan to leave office a hero," "There never was an antiwar
movement" and "Why are all Jews leftist?"

Mr. Silver sees the film's theme as "the impact that dynamics between
personalities can have on larger forces."

So, at least according to "Kissinger and Nixon," if Nixon hadn't been so
resentful of Mr. Kissinger, the United States might have been out of Vietnam
three months earlier than it was.

But is that the way it happened?

"As many different personalities were involved," said Mr. Silver, "that's how
many accounts there were."

Mr. Silver and Mr. Bridges studied tapes or films of their characters to observe
posture, attitude and physical habits. Mr. Silver began to notice Mr.
Kissinger's habit of nodding his head at certain times and of reserving his
deepest voice for the greater crises. That work, combined with sophisticated
makeup, could lead the slightly near-sighted to do a "Wait, that couldn't really
be. . . . " double take.

Kevin Haney, a makeup artist whose past work included presenting Robert Morse as
Truman Capote for the Broadway play "Tru," considers "Kissinger and Nixon"
"possibly the most difficult job I ever had to do." Neither actor had ever
undergone such a drastic physical transformation for a role. The closest Mr.
Bridges had come was during his portrayal of the former White House press
secretary James Brady in the 1991 HBO film "Without Warning: The James Brady
Story." He wore a skullcap and what people in the industry call a fat suit.

"I love to go for those moments when it takes your breath away, the shock of
recognition," says Daniel Petrie, the director of "Kissinger and Nixon." But he
admits, some efforts at transformation are more successful than others.

For the TNT movie, which was filmed in Toronto, Mr. Haney spent three hours each
day making up Mr. Silver, and another makeup artist, Charles Porlier spent five
hours working on Mr. Bridges. Both were in full prostheses made mostly of latex
and based on molds of the actors' faces. Mr. Silver's consisted mostly of one
large horseshoe-shaped piece; Mr. Bridges's consisted of many small parts ,
which added to his time in the makeup chair.

"In Nixon, there's not really much of my own face left," said Mr. Bridges. "It
was a decision that took some thought in the beginning, because we all weren't
sure how far we wanted to go."

But "the whole technology has changed in the last few years," he added. "It's
like another layer of skin, not as heavy, not as constraining" as masks used to
be.

There was history too. "I was fascinated by the traditional aspect of performing
in mask, which had been going on for thousands of years," he said.

Taking the stuff off took two hours at the end of each working day. But Mr.
Bridges said he was glad he did it. "I had to develop almost a whole new
technique to communicate with the mask on," he said, "because your mouth and
your face don't really come through the mask unless you exagerate them to some
extent."

Mr. Silver found the makeup gave him certain advantages. "Once you have the mask
on, it's truly liberating," he said.

Television can be particularly difficult for makeup artists, Mr. Haney said,
because "the smaller the screen, the more obvious it looks." And there is "a lot
of anti-prosthetic sentiment. One of the things that hurts us is that the best
work goes undetected," said Mr. Haney. "If they don't see the makeup, we're
heroes."

"Old age" makeup, rather than "likeness" makeup, is the category called for most
often. One of his favorite examples is Max von Sydow's makeup in "The Exorcist,"
applied by Dick Smith, who is considered a master. No one complimented the
makeup artist, it seems. "They just said, 'Look how old Max has gotten,' " Mr.
Haney said. Mr. von Sydow was 44 at the time.

Mr. Haney had a few tense moments during the filming of "Kissinger and Nixon."
"Ron takes his glasses on and off," he said. "I thought he was going to come
away with his eyebrows.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Preparing for "Kissinger and Nixon," Beau Bridges, top, from
left, has his wig put on by James Brown and makeup by Charles Porlier for his
role as the President. Ron Silver, bottom, left, is made up as Kissinger. (pg.
7); Beau Bridges as Nixon, left, with Ron Silver as Kissinger in the TNT movie.
(pg. 22) (Photographs by Bernard Carriere/Turner Pictures)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

COPING;
Deciding That Ladylike Doesn't Work

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE

SECTION: Section 13; Page 1; Column 3; The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 814 words


"I'LL never say that cancer is a good thing," Carol Hochberg said, "but I will
say it's given me a direction. I was waiting for something to be committed and
enthusiastic about. I guess I took the cancer as a sign."

It has been only nine months since Ms. Hochberg, runner, weight-trainer, almost
vegetarian, first had her breast cancer diagnosed, at 37. But she already calls
herself a "self-employed activist" as she carves out a volunteer career at
Share, the free citywide self-help group for women with breast and ovarian
cancer. She studies, speaks, lobbies and answers hot-line calls with the same
power-lunch intensity she once poured into investment banking. This is how one
woman battles the beast.

"I can understand women who grieve over their disease -- I think a cancer
diagnosis is like losing a person close to you -- and then want to move on, to
put it behind them," she said. "A lot of women don't want to be defined by their
disease. But I want to control the changes in my life. It's like being on a
bucking bronco. I want to go the distance. I want to make this cancer mine."

Ms. Hochberg is not typical of the estimated 184,000 American women with
diagnoses of breast cancer this year; she is younger (fewer than 10 percent are
under 40), more affluent, certainly more prepared to become an advocate for
progressive changes in the medical and political approaches to the disease.
Breast and ovarian cancer activists may eventually be able to combine some of
the gallant ferocity of AIDS protest groups like Act Up with the access to the
big money of the Michael Milken-Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf prostate cancer force.

"Little pink ribbons are not going to do it," Ms. Hochberg said. "Women have
been conditioned to be ladylike, to be
mediators, not to make too much noise. We have to get ot there and kick -- we
can't take this lying down."

She was sitting on the couch in her Upper East Side apartment, a trim woman in
plum velvet pants and a red sweater overrun with appliqued blue scotties. Her
pert, round face, capped with stylishly short hair, was flushed, as if she had
just exercised. But her hair was just growing in after eight months of
heavy-duty chemotherapy, and the color in her cheeks was from the previous day's
intravenous dose. She hopes to exercise again soon, but must forever be alert to
strain or infection in her left arm, stripped of lymph nodes in the classifying
of her disease last spring.

Her cancer arrived, she says smiling, but without irony or tumor humor, at an
opportune time. In August 1994, having decided that "there was more to life than

making rich men richer," Ms. Hochberg
left the financial arena after 15 years.
She had two undergraduate degrees from Wharton and an M.B.A. from Harvard. She
was making, she says, "in the comfortable six figures." She had enough of a
personal portfolio to take off a year "to get my
bearings."

She thought she might work in the environmental field. She read, visited friends
and relatives, traveled to Antarctica, Brazil and the Galapagos Islands and
ignored the lump she had discovered on her left breast. In March, during a
routine exam, her doctor felt it, too.

She chose lumpectomy and radiation over mastectomy because she would never have
reconstruction; she did not define herself by her breasts. Because four lymph
nodes were involved, she opted for an eight-month chemo protocol of Adriamycin
and the drug combination called CMF.

It was the difficulty of telling her mother about the diagnosis that led her to
call the Share hot line (212-382-2111) at the suggestion of Dr. Anne Moore, her
oncologist at New York Hospital. At Share, she found the "normalization" of a
peer group and then, when she could work through her chemo fatigue, an outlet
for her anger. Share, which in 20 years has yet to find a corporate angel, has
been reaching beyond its Manhattan roots to what its executive director, Alice
Yaker, calls the "underserved communities of black and Latina women" in Harlem,
the South Bronx and Queens.

Ms. Hochberg is an old hand at organizing. A second-generation feminist, she
grew up campaigning for her mother, Audrey Hochberg, an anti-Vietnam War
activist who was elected to the Westchester County Legislature and, two terms
ago, to the State Assembly. Audrey Hochberg has accompanied her daughter, the
eldest of three, to most of her chemotherapy sessions.

"I cried a lot," Carol Hochberg said. "I still cry a couple of times a week.
It's hard to be brave, thinking you're not going to have a normal life span. I
don't feel 'why me?' but 'why us?' I believe my cancer was environmentally
caused. The world is being poisoned. And the treatment for cancer, surgery,
chemo, radiation -- I call it slash, poison, burn -- is very crude.

"There's lots to do, and I intend to be around to do it. I've been assaulted. I
will fight."

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

POP MUSIC;
Out of the Vault and Ready to Wrap

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section 2;   Page 34;   Column 5;   Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 223 words


IN RECENT YEARS, RECORD companies have been repackaging their back catalogues as
lavish, multiple-CD boxed sets geared for holiday gift giving. This year the
companies have dug deeper into their vaults to offer first-time sets from some
of the last of the holdouts among their top artists. There are also sets from
lesser-known artists and labels and from musicians whose works have been boxed
for a second or third time. Here are 30 choices that New York Times critics find
noteworthy. Prices are suggested retail.

'THE MUSIC OF VIETNAM'
Celestial Harmonies, Box 30122, Tucson, Ariz. 85751; three CD's ($48)


 Professional ensembles in Hanoi and Hue perform this sampler of Vietnamese
music. Two CD's feature small ensembles of traditional instruments -- flutes,
zithers, lutes, percussion and an indigenous combination of jaw-harp and
one-stringed fiddle -- playing catchy, finely nuanced melodies. Some have the
jaunty bounce and pentatonic scales of Chinese music; some use delicate twangs
and slides distantly akin to Indian music. The third CD, of dance and ceremonial
music from the court of Hue, often has a processional tone, with marchlike drums
and fierce, nasal, oboelike instruments moderated by zithers and gongs. The
music is enthralling, especially in these sumptuous digital recordings.   JON
PARELES

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1996

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH ; VIETNAM;

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Troops in Bosnia Find a 'Shellshocked' People

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A;    Page 10;    Column 5;    Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 672 words

DATELINE: TUZLA, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Dec. 10


Just past midnight, Lieut. Col. Sidney Kooyman of the First Armored Division
wandered into the bomb shelter that doubles as a television room for the handful
of American soldiers who have already arrived in Bosnia.

He began to pull off his camouflage uniform, the fatigue evident in his face
after another day of trying to make sense of a land that the United States will
try to bring peace to.

"This place is shellshocked," he said of Bosnia. "The people are dazed, just
dazed, and the trauma of what they have been through will take a while for them
to understand what is happening now. They are welcoming us, but in the reserved
manner of people who have been through a horrible time."

As they trickle in ahead of a large airlift of peacekeeping troops expected to
begin arriving later this week, the first American soldiers to land in Bosnia
had received a muted, even indifferent welcome from the people whose suffering
they are supposed to end.

"It's hard to gauge their reactions," said Capt. Anthony Davit of the Air Force,
who arrived in this bleak industrial city last week to oversee renovation work
on Tuzla's airfield, where the Americans now live in a converted school house.
Captain Davit, 28, from Lafayette, Ind., said he had met only a few Bosnians so
far, "but they do tend to keep a lot to themselves."

For their part, Bosnians in the neighborhoods surrounding the airstrip say they
are grateful for the American decision to risk sending troops here. But many
also say that after more than three years of war, it is difficult to muster any
sort of emotion, no matter how good the news.

"I think every Bosnian, everyone, will be happy to see the Americans," said
Elvis Gargich, a 21-year-old Muslim. "My mother liked Elvis Presley -- Elvis was
a big star in Bosnia."

But Mr. Gargich, a day laborer at the Tuzla base, said the tentative response to
the American deployment was understandable. "The war has killed our emotions,"
he explained. "So many killings, so much blood, and it is difficult for us to
feel anything."

If there is a sense of happy expectation here, it is over the arrival of
American consumer goods and the money that the American soldiers will bring and
spend in this impoverished city, its borders ringed with squalid camps that
house thousands of Muslim refugees from other parts of Bosnia.

Already one Tuzla bar has changed its name to the American Club, with a small
Stars and Stripes on each table, while a restaurant has announced that it will
soon begin pizza deliveries to the air base.

Mr. Gargich said that whatever the reputation of other Bosnians, Americans would
find the people of Tuzla to be tolerant and desperate for peace. This mostly
Muslim city has long had a reputation for progressive relations among ethnic and
religious groups, and there is a large population here of Bosnian Serbs, with
intermarriage common between Muslims and Serbs.

Tuzla, which bills itself in an investment-promotion brochure as the city "where
reason prevails," is one of the few places in Bosnia that did not vote along
ethnic lines in national elections after the collapse of Yugoslavia.

"I've lived here all my life, and I don't have anything against Serbs," Mr.
Gargich said as he unloaded the bags of another group of arriving American
soldiers. "When people say that Bosnia is like Vietnam, they do not know what
they are talking about."

Dervis Sedic, 34, a Tuzla-born air traffic controller who will be helping to
guide the Air Force planes into the city, said that although his mother was
Muslim, he did not consider himself anything other than a Bosnian. "I do not
describe myself by religion," he said.

Traditionally, he said, the people of Tuzla made their living as salt and coal
miners, and that was the secret of their tolerance. Regardless of the ethnicity
or religion, "miners know that they have to work together or die," he said.

"They have no choice in the mines. We must live and work together in Tuzla. That
is our attitude today."


LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

For Soldier of Fortune, Bosnia Is Latest Front

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE

SECTION: Section D;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words

DATELINE: BOULDER, Colo., Dec. 6


All year long, Soldier of Fortune magazine tried to lift its circulation with an
increasingly stale gimmick: Each new subscriber got a chance to win a handgun.

Then, as if in answer to a circulation manager's prayer, along came news that
20,000 American troops were to ship out for Bosnia.

"Our circulation will probably jump 15 percent," Robert K. Brown, the magazine's
63-year-old publisher, said with a youthful glint in his eyes. "Bosnia is going
to be next year's big story. We've already got a headquarters set up in Tuzla."

Derided from the beginning as a magazine for mercenaries, Soldier of Fortune
weathered two decades of criticism and lawsuits to observe its 20th anniversary
two months ago. Defining his magazine as "The Journal of Professional
Adventurers," Mr. Brown, a Vietnam veteran, has carved out and dominated a
unique editorial niche.

Each time reader interest starts to dip, sales surge again with a new American
military adventure overseas: Grenada, Panama, Kuwait, Somalia, Haiti and now
Bosnia.

"Our readers like to see what we write when the American military are involved,"
Mr. Brown continued in his gravelly voice during an interview in his office
here. "During Desert Storm, a guy who was buying five issues a year bought eight
issues" of the magazine, which is published monthly.

Incongruously located in this liberal university town, sometimes called "The
People's Republic of Boulder," Soldier of Fortune's offices echo the macho
bravado found in the magazine's glossy pages. During a recent visit, hunting
rifles cluttered one floor. The horned head of a stuffed Namibian gnu peered
from a wall. Pinned on other walls were an aerial map of Nicaragua and a poster
for a Salvadoran bordello.

Guns, exotic locales, conservative politics, American heroism and a whiff of sex
are the prime ingredients of the magazine, which sells about 100,000 copies a
month. Soldier of Fortune, which has a relatively high newsstand price of $4.95,
says it has a total monthly readership of about 300,000 because the magazine is
passed around often.

Imitators have had little success. One copycat, "Survive," died after several
issues.

"Any magazine that survives after four years has established a niche for
itself," said Samir Husni, a journalism professor at the University of
Mississippi who tracks magazine start-ups.

"Other people's miseries are their delight and success," added Mr. Husni, a
Lebanese immigrant who recalled Soldier of Fortune's breathless coverage of
militia warfare during Lebanon's civil war in the late 1970's.

As resilient as a counterinsurgency strategist, this mercenary magazine rolls
with the punches.

The biggest blow was the collapse of what President Ronald Reagan called the
Evil Empire, which deprived red-blooded American mercenaries of proxy wars
around the Third World. In a strange symmetry, the fall of the Iron Curtain left
military orphans from both sides of the cold war. Adapting to a new era, Soldier
of Fortune last year started a Russian-language edition, which has a circulation
of about 35,000.

"It's about as bizarre as you can imagine," mused Mr. Brown before shooting a
brown stream of chewing tobacco into an office spittoon. "Who would have thought
10 years ago that an anti-Communist publication like Soldier of Fortune would be
publishing in Moscow?"

In another blow, the magazine lost a long-running legal battle two years ago to
defend itself against charges that a contract killer was hired through a
classified advertisement in the magazine. But damages, originally set at $14
million, were eventually reduced to $200,000.

Soon after the lawsuit was filed in 1986 by the sons of a Georgia man who had
been killed in August 1985, the magazine stopped accepting personal classifieds.

Another round of notoriety came last May, when it was discovered that Timothy J.
McVeigh, the former soldier accused of the Oklahoma City bombing, had been a
subscriber to Soldier of Fortune.

Although the magazine routinely refers to agents of the Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco and Firearms as "the gun Gestapo," Mr. Brown takes pains to separate his
views from the thinking of groups like the "militias" that have formed in many
parts of the country.

"The militia way is not the way to go," said Mr. Brown, a member of the board of
the National Rifle Association. "Our basic point is: the ballot box and not the
cartridge box."

Another recurring problem for the magazine is that its brand of participatory
journalism has led to the deaths of about a dozen editors and contributors.
Providing an outlet to the warrior journalist, the magazine has sent training
units, including editorial staff members, to several brush wars.

In a recent issue, a former American mercenary in Rhodesia in the mid-1970's
wrote of hunting African nationalist guerrillas: "The rate of contact was
excellent, and the kill ratio even better." Issues typically contain a Vietnam
war hero story, a political column called "Slick Willie Watch" and several
stories of Americans participating in overseas conflicts.

Mainstream advertisers steer clear of the magazine and its controversial
content. Despite their absence, recent issues contained a variety of ads,
including ones for a publication called "Machine Gun News," for muscle-building
steroids, for South African hunting safaris, for night-vision scopes, for a
training video called "Ultimate Sniper," for a booklet on techniques for beating
drug tests and for camouflage T-shirts stamped with the words "Angry White
Male."

For readers too busy with field training to hone their social skills, a bevy of
companies advertised mail-order brides from Russia, Asia and Latin America.

"There are not too many mainstream advertisers that would want to associate with
that magazine," said Martin S. Walker, chairman of Walker Communications, a New
York consulting company. "But advertisers shy away from any cause-related
magazine."

Mr. Brown clearly believes that more and more readers will pick up his magazine
in coming months to follow "our boys in Bosnia," and that the peacekeeping
mission will be far from uneventful.

"There are going to be guys out there who are going to say, 'Just how good are
these Americans? Let's give them a little test,' " said Mr. Brown, who has been
in Bosnia four times in the last three years. "It's not going to be anything
conventional -- an occasional ambush, an assault, car bombs, snipers, isolated
incidents."

Mr. Brown, who sympathizes with the Croats and Bosnian Muslims, rather than the
Serbs, said he feared that mounting casualty tolls in an election year might
eventually prompt President Clinton to pull out the troops.

Advocating a solution that would guarantee a steady flow of war tales for his
readers, the publisher suggested, "We should push for the American equivalent of
the French Foreign Legion."


LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert K. Brown, the publisher of Soldier of Fortune, holding a
rocket casing at the magazine's headquarters in Boulder, Colo. (Michael Lewis
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

DEATH ON 125TH STREET: THE SUSPECT;
Final Act Fueled by Old Grievances

BYLINE: By JOE SEXTON

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1105 words


Walter Wells saw Roland J. Smith Jr.'s face on television and newspapers in
recent days, and he realized that he had seen the face before. It was last
Thursday, he said, and Mr. Smith was among the picketers outside Freddy's
clothing store on 125th Street in Harlem. He recalled that the man's face had
been angry, and he was screaming slurs.

"I remember him because he was the most vocal one out here," Mr. Wells said
yesterday as he stood outside the burned remains of Freddy's. "We went in, then
he started calling me Uncle Tom. Then he spit at my old lady. When we came out,
they were screaming, 'Look at those Uncle Toms coming out, going to shop in the
white man's store." '

Carlotta Herring, one of the young women who worked at Freddy's, also had no
trouble remembering Mr. Smith's face. She said she had been in front of the
store one day recently, folding some of the shirts that were on a display rack.

"His eyes were piercing," Ms. Herring said. "The way he looked, it was like,
'Oh, my God.' It was scary. He seemed more outraged than the others."

Mr. Smith's outrage -- fueled, it appears, by anger over the potential closing
of a black-owned record store next to Freddy's and the hiring practices of the
Jewish-owned clothing store -- reached its final pitch last Friday.

According to the police, the 51-year-old Mr. Smith, a handyman and part-time
street vendor, stormed into the two-story store, ordered the black people off
the premises and opened fire with a .38-caliber revolver. He shot three white
men and a Guyanese worker and then set the store on fire. Mr. Smith and seven
others died.

It was the last act in life that had included displays of principle, incidents
of criminality and acts of defiance.

Mr. Smith's police record reflects that life. Born in Harlem as one of three
children, Mr. Smith was arrested in 1962 at age 18 and charged with stealing a
car in Philadelphia. Four years later, he was arrested again and charged with
possession of a gun.

In 1967, saying that blacks were treated like slaves in America, he renounced
his citizenship and refused to serve in Vietnam, and was sentenced to four years
in a Federal prison.

Years later, in 1989, he was convicted in Tampa, Fla., of assaulting a police
officer and resisting arrest, and a year later, in violation of the terms of his
probation, he returned to Harlem.

And it was in Harlem that in 1994, at the height of the fight over the future of
the street vendors on 125th Street, Mr. Smith was arrested in one of the sweeps
of the vendors conducted by the police. Mr. Smith was charged with resisting
arrest and aggravated harassment.

Abiona Adadevoh, Mr. Smith's 52-year-old sister who lives in Tampa, said her
brother had been deeply disturbed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's decision to
force vendors off 125th Street. She said the decision had forced him to abandon
his modest success hawking African jewelry, oils and other products and return
to working as a handyman. To Mr. Smith, she said, the removal of the vendors was
one more example of perceived injustice for a man who had spent a life
despairing about the fate of blacks in the United States.

On Nov. 28, Mr. Smith was forced from his Bronx apartment when the six-story
building went up in flames. The Fire Department is investigating whether the
building was intentionally set ablaze and whether Mr. Smith might have played a
role in it.

"It's almost like he was trying to make a point," Ms. Adadevoh said of Mr.
Smith's attack on Freddy's. "To me, he broke. Something crushed his spirit."

The rough outline of Mr. Smith's life, offered by his sister, begins in Harlem
in 1944. He was the second of three children, and his mother died when he was 3.
His father owned a bar in Harlem, and he and his sisters attended Public School
186. Mr. Smith, who traveled frequently to Philadelphia, wound up going to
junior high school there. He returned to Harlem at age 16.

Mr. Smith was twice arrested over the coming years, and then went to prison for
his refusal to submit to the draft. After his release from prison in Danbury,
Conn., Mr. Smith moved to Tampa and lived with his sister. He was always
self-employed, creating his own hauling business. Ms. Adadevoh said Mr. Smith
lived with her in her housing complex apartment from 1974 to 1991.

In 1989, Mr. Smith was stopped by the police while driving, and was arrested on
charges of resisting arrest and assaulting an officer. He was convicted at a
nonjury trial in 1990 of one count of resisting arrest and one count of battery.
He was sentenced to 18 months probation.

According to a probation official in Tampa, Mr. Smith met the terms of his
sentence until July 25, 1991. In his dealings with the probation office, he
listed himself as a self-employed gardener and roofer who earned $300 a month.

Ms. Adadevoh said Mr. Smith considered himself a follower of Marcus Garvey and a
committed African nationalist. She said that in Tampa, he would appear at any
events involving civil rights or human rights. She said he had traveled to West
Africa and briefly considered moving there.

"But he couldn't be comfortable going there while blacks in America were still
struggling for human rights," Ms. Adadevoh said.

It was against that backdrop, Ms. Adadevoh said, that Mr. Smith viewed the
events surrounding the forced relocation of about 1,000 street vendors from
125th Street in 1994.

She said he rejected the claim that they were a nuisance and a negative
influence. And he had only recently begun to have his own efforts as a vendor
begin to flourish.

"For 30 years, he had been Mr. Nice Guy, and you get nobody's attention," Ms.
Adadevoh, who often traveled to the city to sell her own African dolls on 125th
Street, said of her brother. "His position was that we were not asking for
something, we were not beggars. We were saying: stop taking."

Ms. Adadevoh said Mr. Smith interpreted the problem surrounding Sikhulu Shange's
store, the Record Shack, as one more assault against black-owned businesses, and
he identified strongly with Mr. Shange's South African heritage. Mr. Shange was
facing possible relocation because he had an ongoing dispute with his landlord,
the United House of Prayer for All People, a predominantly black Pentecostal
church, and the man who held his sublease, Fred A. Harari, the owner of
Freddy's. Mr. Shange has said he did not know Mr. Smith.

Ms. Adadevoh said she last spoke with her brother six months ago, and that he
had recently sent most of his belongings to her.

"He said, 'I just built my market up, and I'm getting kicked out,' " she said.


NAME: Roland J. Smith Jr.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Abiona Adadevoh talks about her brother, Ronald J. Smith, who
set a fire that killed seven people before killing himself. She said her brother
had been disturbed by the eviction of vendors from 125th Street. (Bobby Sanche
for The New York Times); The Fire Department has reopened its inquiry into the
blaze that destroyed the six-story building on Courtlandt Avenue in the Bronx
where Roland Smith lived. Fire officials were at the building yesterday.
(Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times); Family photo of Roland Smith.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Hunch Leads to Discovery of Herd Of Tibet Deer Thought to Be Extinct

BYLINE: By TIM HILCHEY

SECTION: Section C;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Science Desk

LENGTH: 689 words


FOLLOWING a hunch that took him trekking through Tibet, a scientist with the
Wildlife Conservation Society has found a herd of Tibet red deer, a species not
seen in the wild by a Western scientist for about 50 years.

The animal, a relative of the North American elk, was last reported in a Western
publication in the 1940's, and the deer was subsequently listed as "probably
extinct" by the World Conservation Union, said the scientist, Dr. George B.
Schaller, the director for science at the conservation group. The Wildlife
Conservation Society carries out wildlife research and operates the Bronx Zoo.

Dr. Schaller made the rediscovery with Liu Wulin, an official of the Tibet
Forest Bureau, and Dr. Wang Xiaoming of the East China Normal University in
Shanghai.

The search began because several red-deer stags were seen in 1987 in a menagerie
in Lhasa, the capital of Tibet. "The very fact that there were some captive
animals indicated that some remained in the wild," Dr. Schaller said. "From past
records, I knew the approximate range of the Tibet red deer, or shou as it's
sometimes called, so we made a special effort to look at those areas to see if
any deer survived."

The researchers found "scattered remnants" of the deer in their traditional
range in the southeastern Himalayas along the border with India, but in numbers
so limited that long-term survival in those areas is in question. "Then, by
accident, we found a nice little population of maybe 200 animals in an area we
didn't expect them," Dr. Schaller said. The herd was about 100 miles east of
Lhasa in an area about 100 miles north-northwest of the animal's past known
range.

Dr. Schaller said the Tibet Forest Bureau was "now very concerned about
wildlife" and had established a guard patrol to protect the remaining animals
from poachers.

The Tibet red deer, or Cervus elaphus wallichi, is actually gray-brown in color.
Mature animals weigh about 250 pounds and stand about four feet at the shoulder.
Males have a distinctive white rump patch, and adult males typically have
five-tined antlers that bend inward at an angle distinct from that of other
species of red deer, Dr. Schaller said. The animals inhabit alpine meadows
13,000 to 14,000 feet above sea level.

Already geographically isolated, most of Tibet was until recently off limits to
Westerners since the Chinese Communist invasion in 1950. Since then, the Tibet
red deer and other horned animals have been coveted for their velvety antlers,
which are prized in Asian medicine as a treatment for fever and rheumatism, and
as an aphrodisiac.

As a result, Dr. Schaller said, the already limited numbers of red deer were
hunted throughout the 1960's and 70's until they all but disappeared, according
to accounts given by local people.

The news of the Tibet red deer is part of a continuing series of recent
discoveries. Since 1992, two new species of land mammals have been captured in
the 150,000-acre Vu Quang Nature Reserve in northwestern Vietnam near Laos. The
Vu Quang ox, a deer-like animal with long, straight horns, was discovered in
1992, and a giant 100-pound muntjac, or barking deer, was found in 1994. They
are among only a handful of new large land mammals discovered worldwide this
century.

Evidence has also been found in Vietnam of two new species of bird, a new fish
and a tortoise with a striking yellow shell. And in Tibet, a scientific party
reported this year that it had found a breed of horse dating to the Stone Age.

Sometimes, animals known to have existed, but thought to have become extinct,
are rediscovered in out-of-the-way places.

For example, the Vietnamese warty pig, which was last reported seen by
Westerners about 100 years ago, was seen in the wild this year. In Pakistan last
year, two Westerners in an isolated area encountered a woolly flying squirrel,
an animal thought to have been extinct.

Biologists believe that many other species remain to be discovered -- or
rediscovered -- in isolated places around the globe, but they fear that many of
them may be verging on extinction because of human encroachment on their
habitat.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Tibet: Tibet red deer were spotted in remote region, far from
historic range.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SCIENTIST AT WORK: Richard Klausner;
New Administrator Is 'Not an Administrator'

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Science Desk

LENGTH: 1800 words


"I AM not an administrator," says Dr. Richard Klausner, an odd declaration
coming from the new director of the National Cancer Institute.

What, then, is this 44-year-old biologist who has taken the reins of the largest
institute of the National Institutes of Health? And why would a man with such an
attitude accept the directorship in the first place?

"I am a scientist and a physician," Dr. Klausner says. As such, he adds, "that's
the only way I know to run this place."

For Dr. Klausner, the cancer institute is turning out to be the ultimate
challenge, an opportunity to remake a large bureaucracy into his own image of
what the place could -- or should -- be.

But Dr. Klausner was not just picked at random to run this powerful Federal
institute, with its $4.2 billion budget and its immense influence over the flow
of research dollars and the shaping of public opinions. He had previously made
his views known: that the administration of research within the National
Institutes of Health in general and at the National Cancer Institute in
particular, had become sclerotic and needed to be changed.

In 1992, Dr. Klausner directed a highly critical internal review of research
programs within the National Institutes of Health; it recommended, among other
things, that individual institutes be closely scrutinized.

Last year, Dr. Harold Varmus, the new director of the National Institutes of
Health, a Nobel laureate and an academic scientist himself, appointed a panel of
experts to review the cancer institute. Dr. Klausner advised that panel, whose
final report echoed many of his suggestions. It said that the cancer institute
was too bureaucratized, spent too much of its money on itself and failed to
review its own projects objectively.

Dr. Varmus said that Dr. Klausner's influential role in critiquing the cancer
institute had "certainly worked to his advantage in the selection process" for
the directorship. But he added, "It would demean the process to suggest he was
brought in as a hit man to foster my agenda."

Dr. Klausner's background and interests are unusual for a cancer institute
director. He has never spent much time with cancer patients, he is not well
known among cancer specialists, and his scientific research is in fields that
would seem be bear little relationship to cancer. In fact, before becoming
director of the cancer institute, Dr. Klausner was chief of the Cell Biology and
Metabolism Branch at the National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development.

But he does have a vision for the cancer institute.

"What I kept saying is that the N.C.I. needs to have a very clear set of
principles that determine how everything functions," Dr. Klausner said. And, he
said, those principles state that "N.C.I. is a scientific organization -- it
neither sets public policy, nor a standard of clinical practice." What it does
do, he said, "is focus on discovery."

That statement, he said, is "based on a belief that I hold that the only way we
are going to approach the problems of disease and reduce the burdens of cancer
is through science." He added, "It sounds like a vague statement, but if you
force the institution to fulfill its nature, profound changes follow."

And so Dr. Klausner is reviewing every program of the cancer institute, he is
replacing its heavily bureaucratic structure with one more like that of an
academic department at a university, and he is relying heavily on stellar
scientists from outside the cancer institute to advise him on research
opportunities.

Regarded by his peers as a scientist's scientist, Dr. Klausner has all the
requisite credentials: membership in the National Academy of Sciences, an
extensive list of widely cited scientific papers and positions as an editorial
board member or editor of scientific journals. He insists on keeping his lab and
visiting there two or three times a week. And he has a deep, abiding fascination
with fundamental questions of science.

When asked what were the most exciting areas in cancer research, Dr. Klausner
responded with subjects sufficiently in the forefront of research that they have
not yet reached wide public awareness.

For example, he touted "nonnatural natural products," which he said, "is going
to be a new way that we discover drugs" to kill cancer cells. In the past, the
cancer institute and drug companies searched for new drugs with tedious
drug-screening programs that involved testing molecules from the soil or from
plants to see if any could, by chance, kill cancer cells. But now, instead of
going around the world searching for new chemicals, molecular biologists can
create them in the test tube.

The idea behind nonnatural natural products, Dr. Klausner said, is the
realization that half of all the drugs on the market come from a single group of
bacteria, the Streptomycetaceae. These bacteria have produced antibiotics, drugs
for heart disease and cancer, and drugs that can be given to people with organ
transplants to suppress the immune system.

Scientists have cloned the genes that the bacteria use to make these drugs. "In
the test tube we can dramatically speed up evolution by mutating these genes
ourselves," Dr. Klausner said. "We can make millions of mutations."

Then, scientists can mix and match genes, combining mutated and nonmutated
genes, creating entirely new molecules. At every turn, they can search for
potential drugs that can block the newly discovered pathways that fling a normal
cell down a cycle culminating in malignancy.

One of Dr. Klausner's priorities is to find the genes that predispose people to
developing cancer, and to understand why they work. He has formed a new Division
of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics because, he said, "we now know that cancer
is a genetic disease."

He hastens to explain that that does not mean that cancer is always an inherited
disease -- most cancers arise from genetic changes in individual cells that
occur after a person is born. But the cancer genes seem to be the same, whether
a person is born with one or acquires one through an unfortunate mutation later
in life.

In the last few years, biologists have identified several genes that by
themselves, predispose people to various forms of cancer. These single genes
account for about 10 percent of all common cancers and, Dr. Klausner said,
"millions of Americans are walking around with these single-gene
predispositions."

But the lone-acting genes are just the tip of an iceberg. Most cancers probably
result from the concerted action of two or more genes, neither of which alone is
harmful by itself. Discovering these genes is the next frontier, Dr. Klausner
said.

Yet despite his infectious enthusiasm, Dr. Klausner is not all wide-eyed
optimism. He worries deeply about changes in the medical care system threatening
research.

"Right now, there are enormous obstacles to capitalizing on all these advances,"
he said. "Many academic health centers are on the verge of collapse, and if you
can't do clinical research, you can't translate any discoveries to benefit
patients."

Clinical research "takes money and it takes the ability of physicians and
physician-scientists at academic health centers to be supported so that they
have the time to do things other than generating revenue," he said.

"We are confronted with hurdles whose height and magnitude are really
unprecedented since the Second World War," Dr. Klausner said. "It has been a
magnificent and magnificently successful system, and it is now being
fundamentally threatened. This is not the type of system that you can turn off
and then turn on again. You don't tell someone to leave research and then come
back. Young people are getting a terribly discouraging message about whether a
career in science, a career in clinical research is viable. I think that is a
national disaster."

Dr. Klausner grew up in an era in which Federal funds flowed freely and the only
impediments to a career in science were a lack of talent or imagination.

He cannot remember a time when he did not want to be a scientist. His father was
a chemist who worked for a small water treatment company in New York. "My father
had a little lab and I would go there with him on Saturdays when I was 5 or 6.
We would do analyses together," Dr. Klausner said. "I loved those Saturday
mornings when we would run reactions together and talk."

He decided that he wanted to be a physicist. But soon after entering Yale
University he became disillusioned. "When I took physics courses, I just didn't
feel that I was mastering them in the way I wanted to," Dr. Klausner said. "At
the same time, I was getting more and more interested in biology."

Dr. Klausner was attending college in the early 1970's, the Nixon years, the
apogee of the anti-Vietnam War movement on campuses. It was a time when many
science students felt that it was elitist to pursue science for its own sake,
that science had to be socially relevant. Dr. Klausner was swept up in the
movement and decided he had to "be involved with people." He decided he would go
to medical school, become a doctor and set up a clinic in a rural area.

In 1973, he entered medical school at Duke University, still professing a desire
to start a rural clinic. But he quickly realized, he said, that "although I
loved medicine and I really loved dealing with patients, I wasn't going to
practice medicine." Instead, he realized that "I really wanted to discover
things."

Dr. Klausner came to the National Institutes of Health in 1979, to do
postdoctoral work, and never left. His career flowered, and at the surprisingly
young age of 30, he was made head of the Cell Biology and Metabolism Branch at
the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. There he stayed
until his present appointment.

With his lab and the directorship of the cancer institute and his endless
meetings, Dr. Klausner has a tightly scheduled life, making it hard to find time
to be with his wife, who is a psychoanalyst, and his two sons, aged 12 and 6.
Dr. Klausner said he tries to get to his office by 6 in the morning and he does
not get home until 7 or 8 at night, in time, he says, "to at least see the
little one to bed." On some nights, he works for a few hours more at home.

Dr. Klausner tries to keep up his exercise schedule, but it is not easy. He runs
at 5:30 in the morning and plays tennis several nights a week at 9. Although he
exudes boundless energy, he confesses that his position "is pretty tiring."

"The job is very demanding and in ways I didn't entirely expect," he said.

But he is having fun. "I'm actually enjoying it more than I thought I would,"
Dr. Klausner said. "Most of what I'm doing is thinking about science, talking to
people about science."

And, that, to him, is nirvana.

NAME: Richard Klausner

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Richard Klausner with a colleague at the National Cancer
Institute. (Marty Katz for The New York Times) (pg. C11)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Flag-Burning Amendment Fails In Senate, but Margin Narrows

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 999 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 12


The Senate today rejected by three votes a constitutional amendment to outlaw
desecration of the flag, capping another season in the six-year political battle
pitting the values of patriotism against the values of free speech.

The vote was 63 to 36, just short of the two-thirds necessary for passage: 49
Republicans and 14 Democrats voted for the amendment, while 32 Democrats and 4
Republicans voted against it.

Supporters of the amendment had gained ground since the last time the Senate
voted on such a measure, in 1989 and 1990. With the Democrats in power and their
leaders opposed to the amendment, it won 51 votes in 1989 and 58 votes the next
year.

The amendment, a broader version of which had already passed the House, was
intended to circumvent a 1989 Supreme Court ruling that said flag burning by
protesters was a protected form of political speech. The amendment declared,
"The Congress shall have the power to prohibit the physical desecration of the
flag of the United States."

Supporters were bitterly disappointed today but acknowledged that the amendment
was probably dead for this Congress.

"I do not believe we're going to be able to pass this amendment in the current
Senate," said Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, chairman of the Senate
Judiciary Committee. But he added, "I assure my colleagues, this amendment is
not going to go away."

Mr. Hatch also assailed President Clinton, whose Administration portrayed the
amendment as a risky tinkering with the Bill of Rights. Michael D. McCurry, the
White House press secretary, said, "The guys in the powdered wigs had it about
right in 1792, and there's good reason why in 200-plus years we have not amended
the Bill of Rights, which is what this legislation would do."

The debate over the flag amendment has changed little since 1989, when the
Supreme Court rendered unconstitutional the flag desecration laws of 48 states,
as well as a Federal statute, in cases of peaceful political expression.

Advocates of the amendment argued that the flag was a unique national symbol
that demanded special protection; opponents maintained that flag burning was
neither so widespread nor so dangerous that it justified tampering with the
First Amendment.

Mr. Hatch, who led the drive for the amendment, asserted that the issue was part
of a broader struggle over values.

"Today the Senate must decide whether this is freedom or the abuse of freedom,"
Mr. Hatch declared. "Will the Senate of the United States confuse liberty with
license?"

He added: "We live in a time when standards have eroded. Civility and mutual
respect, preconditions for the robust expression of diverse views in society,
are in decline. Individual rights are constantly expanded, but responsibilities
are shirked and scorned."

Opponents, though, suggested that the amendment was the first step on a slippery
slope. "This is the first time in history we'll be amending the Bill of Rights,"
said Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader. "Do we really
hold the symbol more important than the principle? Is the flag really more
important than freedom of speech?"

Mr. Daschle argued that the nation needed to teach respect for its national
symbols, not compel it.

Senator Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska, who won the Medal of Honor in Vietnam,
said flag burning "is not, in my judgment, a great threat to this country."

"What is a great threat to this country," Senator Kerrey said, "is when 40
percent of our youth do not know what the cold war was; when 50 percent do not
know whether Adolf Hitler was an enemy in the Second World War; when a large
percentage of people are unable to associate with any of the narrative of this
country."

The House had easily approved a different version of the flag amendment in June
by a vote of 312 to 120. The House amendment was broader, giving both Congress
and the states the power to outlaw desecration of the flag.

Had the two chambers both passed a measure, it would have been sent to the
states.

Supporters of the flag amendment say they are confident of winning the approval
of the 38 state legislatures necessary for ratification, if they ever get the
amendment through Congress. Of some 10,000 constitutional amendments introduced
in Congress since 1789, only 27 have been ratified. The last was in 1992,
limiting the power of Congress to vote itself pay raises.

The amendment has long had substantial grass-roots support, particularly from
veterans groups. The Citizens Flag Alliance, an umbrella organization for groups
backing the measure, includes the American Legion, the Gold Star Wives of
America, the Knights of Columbus and dozens of other fraternal, civic and
religious groups.

Earlier this year the alliance presented Congress with resolutions from 49 state
legislatures asking for action on the amendment.

After today's vote, Dan Wheeler, chairman of the alliance, said: "We'll be back.
We'll see you in November."

The American Civil Liberties Union applauded the vote. "The First Amendment has
served us well for over 200 years," said Laura W. Murphy, director of the
organization's national office in Washington. "The Senate today stood firm
against strong political pressure and voted to uphold the sound principles on
which this nation is built."

Ms. Murphy said that some of the last critical votes came from Senators Bill
Bradley of New Jersey, Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut and Barbara A.
Mikulski of Maryland, all Democrats who voted against the measure.

Before the final vote today, the Senate rejected, by a vote of 71 to 28, a
proposal by Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, that sought to deal
with flag desecration by a statute instead of a constitutional amendment.

Opponents argued that the Supreme Court had already indicated that such efforts
would not pass constitutional muster.

The latest drive for an amendment was mounted in March, after Republicans gained
control of the Congress.


LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

BALKAN ACCORD: THE DEBATE
CAPITOL SKETCHBOOK;
Clinton Gets Wary Backing From His Rival, Dole

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section A;   Page 15;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 856 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 13


Only hours before President Clinton departed for the signing of the Bosnian
peace agreement in Paris, Senator Bob Dole sought to ease his mission. He
reached back 25 years in history and recalled the furious Senate debates over
the Vietnam War and the issue of supporting American troops and their Commander
in Chief.

The Kansas Republican and Senate majority leader presented one of the more
arresting moments in the inevitable overlap of foreign policy and domestic
politics: Mr. Dole, the scarred war hero, considered the front-runner to
challenge Mr. Clinton in 1996, offering wary backing to a President regularly
dogged for not serving in Vietnam.

"Long debates, rancorous debates, heated debates," Mr. Dole said today,
recalling Vietnam on a spirited day of dispute over Bosnia. Crafting clauses,
sizing up votes, the Senator was intent on delivering a qualified Senate
blessing to the President's Bosnian initiative. At the same time, he was holding
off a significant bloc of members who were as vocal as the critics in the old
Vietnam days in wanting no part of putting 20,000 American troops at risk as
peacekeepers in Bosnia.

"We had one debate that lasted seven weeks," he told a chamber that had little
more than 12 hours to come to terms with the President's action on Bosnia. "And
I was the leader of the effort not to cut off funds because we had people like
John McCain in prison," Senator Dole said of the Vietnam war hero and Senator
from Arizona. The nation's military, he cautioned in retrospect, should never
bear the brunt of unpopular political decisions.

"It was wrong during Vietnam, and it's wrong now," Mr. Dole insisted, nudging
the Senate toward approval of the Dole-McCain resolution, which would support
the President's Bosnian effort but try to reshape it in the name of better
protecting the troops and insuring peace by fully arming the Bosnian faction.

The conflict of proposals for and against going to Bosnia presented as much a
test of Mr. Dole's leadership as the President's. Only weeks from the formal
start of campaigning for 1996, the rivals were, briefly at least, on oddly
parallel tracks in a debate that reflected the full range of the public's doubt
about the mission.

"This is a goofy proposal to send American troops to stand in between warring
factions that have been at war for 500 years and never honored a peace
agreement," warned Senator Hank Brown, a Colorado Republican who cited American
troops' experiences in Vietnam, Lebanon and Somalia. "C'mon now, does anybody
believe the cause of interfering in civil war is important enough that they
should lose their lives?"

Far to the contrary, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, New York Democrat, rose as
a former representative to the United Nations to hail the Bosnian mission as a
"rousing statement of the centrality of law" and the upholding of treaty
commitments by the Government. "We are responding today to what we have learned
from the past," he said, reviewing history from the ideals of the founding
fathers to the darkest lessons of two world wars.

Standing somewhere between was William S. Cohen, Republican of Maine, who
criticized Congress for yielding its constitutional responsibility for war
powers to the White House across the years of ethnic atrocity in Bosnia. Looking
ahead to the coming political year, he warned that the President's failure to
seek stronger Congressional support sooner could prove crucial when casualties
occur and the resolve to continue the mission flags. "Unless you have Congress
on record in support," he said, "when the public turns, the Congress will be in
full pursuit."

Many speakers sought to support American troops yet criticize the President. But
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Connecticut Democrat, warned, "We cannot support
the troops and oppose the mission."

Senator James M. Inhofe, Oklahoma Republican, said, "I don't think we can tell
the good guys from the bad guys," and argued that the troops would be wide open
to terrorist attacks. Mark O. Hatfield, Oregon Republican, scoffed at
Administration assurances about avoiding battle. "We are going into Bosnia with
an army," he said, "And we are going to force the peace."

If nothing else, the debate laid bare the multi-edged domestic politics of the
Bosnian issue. Mr. Dole carefully drew distinctions with Mr. Clinton, saying his
Senate resolution insures not just the arms for Bosnia that he had long sought
over the President's opposition, but also a more "timely and safe withdrawal" of
the troops than Mr. Clinton planned.

"Let's be clear: a date is not an exit strategy," Mr. Dole declared, even as his
primary Republican rival, Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, was setting his sights on
Mr. Dole.

"I am concerned about the Dole amendment," Mr. Gramm said, arguing that arming
the Bosnians would shred American neutrality.

Mr. Dole paid no heed. "This is not about politics," he told the Senate, adding
that "this is about a lot of frightened young Americans" arriving in Bosnia and
asking one question of their homeland: "Did we have the support of those who
represent us?"

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

BALKAN ACCORD: NEWS ANALYSIS;
Flimsy Bosnia Mandate

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section A;   Page 1;   Column 4;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1100 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 13


The grudging Congressional acceptance of the involvement of United States troops
in Bosnia gives President Clinton only the flimsiest political cover on an issue
that could still torment him.

The day's debate exposed a broad vein of doubt and anxiety about the whole
enterprise, and while neither the Senate nor the House of Representatives, both
deeply divided, was ready to try to thwart the President's will, they were
equally unwilling to give his policy any ringing endorsement.

All this uncertainty, persisting even beyond Mr. Clinton's departure for Paris
to sign the peace agreement, testified to his failure to build a genuine
constituency for his Balkan strategy on Capitol Hill or in the nation as a
whole. He left that vital task until very late, pledging early on to take part
in a peacekeeping operation if a workable peace could be achieved but then
talking for months and years mainly about avoiding American involvement.

Today, in a flurry of speeches, statements and interviews to build support for
sending American troops as peacemakers, he tried to draw a distinction between
what he avoided and what he is doing now.

"For three years, I refused to commit our troops in the war," he told Tom Brokaw
of NBC News.  "But almost from the beginning of my Presidency, I said that I
thought we should be part of preserving a peace agreement."

Yet the two things are not so easily distinguished. Peacekeepers can also suffer
casualties and can easily be drawn into combat, especially under the rules of
engagement, permitting a robust response to any provocation, that apply in
Bosnia. And fully two-thirds of the respondents in a New York Times/CBS News
poll said they expect fighting to resume.

Mr. Clinton has not sold the American people on the virtues of sending ground
troops to Bosnia. In the Times/CBS survey, only 36 percent said it was "the
right thing" to do, while 58 percent said the troops should be kept out of the
Balkans. It was not that people do not understand the rationale, but that they
do not accept it; 51 percent said that Mr. Clinton had explained his reasons
well enough that they understood why the troops were going.

Public support for President George Bush's campaign against Saddam Hussein in
the Persian Gulf was also limited at this stage. It built steadily as American
troops took up their positions and won lightning victories. But there will be no
derring-do in the Balkans, just the thankless, difficult work of keeping mortal
enemies from each others' throats.

As it has with other American troop commitments in the last two decades, the
spectre of Vietnam hovers in the background.

Democrats especially remember what the Vietnam war did to the Presidency of
Lyndon B. Johnson, and they fear that a stream of American deaths in the
Balkans, especially if dramatized by television like American losses in Somalia,
could do the same thing to Mr. Clinton. The danger will be there, week after
week, all during the long Presidential campaign next year.

"His re-election hangs in the balance in Bosnia, and we all know it," a top
White House official said.

There is danger for Republicans as well. Senator John S. McCain, Republican of
Arizona, and Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, are backing Mr.
Clinton, and for their pains they have become the targets of intense criticism
from colleagues and constituents alike. Mr. McCain said last week that he had
been "almost universally denounced" in Arizona, and tonight he conceded that he,
like the President, would "have to answer for the loss" of American lives.

It is Mr. Dole, the leading candidate for the Republican Presidential nomination
next year, who has the most at stake in the Bosnia issue.

Mr. Dole is the front-runner in New Hampshire, which holds the nation's first
primary, but many voters remain uncommitted. A poll taken there last week showed
him with the backing of 30 percent of Republican voters, but when his stance on
American troops in Bosnia was explained to those being interviewed, the figure
dropped to 24 percent.

Senator Phil Gramm of Texas and almost all of Senator Dole's other Republican
rivals oppose Mr. Clinton on Bosnia, and they clearly hope that the issue will
enable them to start whittling away at his big lead. Patrick J. Buchanan, the
conservative commentator, is running a commercial in Iowa this week that says,
"If there are casualties, the people who sent them are going to pay a price" --
phraseology meant to include Mr. Dole as well as Mr. Clinton.

Iowa, which will launch the nominating process with caucuses on Feb. 12, is
considered a must for Mr. Dole.  But the state has long looked with skepticism
at foreign wars, and it was an early center of opposition to the Vietnam war.

So why are Mr. Clinton and Mr. Dole, a pair of political survivors if ever there
was one, putting themselves in such potentially perilous positions, especially
when both have spent much of the last three years struggling to stay clear of
involvement in the Balkans?

Because they fear that if they do not, the already strained NATO alliance, on
which much of American foreign policy is predicated, may come apart.

Already, the Western European allies are dubious about American resolve and
reliability in the post-Cold War era. A visitor to France and Britain last month
was peppered with questions about neo-isolationism in the United States, and
several diplomats and military men suggested that the United States had lost the
will to spill the blood of its youth in defense of Europe.

"You're behaving as if you have a toy army that musn't be used because some of
the soldiers might break," said an outspoken British ambassador.

The Clinton Administration promised many months ago that if a peace accord was
reached in Bosnia, the United States would send troops to join the Europeans who
have been there, suffering casualties, for several years. To renege now,
American officials argue, would be to abandon American leadership in NATO.

In this case as in others in recent years, the pivotal decision was made before
any real debate began. Once the United States had committed itself to contribute
troops in the wake of an agreement, the die was cast.

No American government, Republican or Democratic, liberal or conservative, would
be likely to go back on such a commitment, which is why Republicans long
identified with the foreign-policy establishment, like Mr. Dole, Mr. McCain and
Senator Richard Lugar of Indiana, have swung behind the President.

In that sense, the current debate is just window-dressing.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 738 words



International A3-21

SENATE DEFEATS BOSNIA CUTOFF
The Senate, after much anguished debate, agreed to support the sending of 20,000
U.S. peacekeepers to Bosnia, but most Senators criticized the President's policy
in the Balkans. President Clinton, hopeful of more supportive action, left for
Paris to witness the signing of the Bosnian peace accord. A1



THIN COVER FOR CLINTON
News analysis: Congress's grudging acceptance of the involvement of United
States troops in Bosnia gives President Clinton only the flimsiest political
cover. A1
Echoes of congressional wrangling over the Vietnam War. A15

A CHINESE VOICE SILENCED
China silenced the most powerful pro-democracy voice in the country by
convicting Wei Jingsheng in a closed trial of "conspiring to subvert the
Government." A1

The White House criticized China but didn't threaten retaliation. A20

SEARCH FOR U.S. PILOT IN IRAQ
A Pentagon team is on a secret mission to Iraq, searching for the remains of the
first American pilot shot down in the gulf war. A3

A call from the Saudi royal family to end Iraq sanctions. A3

Seville Journal: Brought to its knees, an arid land prays. A4

National A22-28, B14-17

SOFTENING STROKE'S EFFECT
Researchers have found that a clot-dissolving drug made patients who receive it
within three hours of a stroke 30 percent more likely to avoid permanent brain
damage from the stroke.  A1

BATTLE BUOYS CLINTON
As he continues his budget standoff with Congressional Republicans, President
Clinton is enjoying his highest public ratings in nearly two years, the latest
New York Times/ CBS News Poll shows.  A1

A ZOOLOGICAL HIGHLIGHT
Researchers have found a tiny animal that clings to the parts of a lobster's
mouth and lives off errant food particles -- a creature that it has forced
scientists to create a whole new phylum to fit it in their system of
classification.  A1

GEORGIA DISTRICTS REDRAWN
As the first Federal court to put the Supreme Court's standard on redistricting
into effect, a Georgia panel broke up the state's black population and left only
one district with a majority of blacks.  A22

BOEING CONTRACT APPROVED
Assembly workers at the Boeing Company ended a 69-day strike, voting to approve
a contract that gives them most of what they sought. They called it a rare
victory for organized labor.  A22

COCAINE ANTIBODIES FOUND
Inoculating rats with a cocaine-like substance that spurs the body to produce
antibodies to the drug, researchers say that they have for the first time opened
a potential new treatment for drug addiction.  A22

Metro Digest B3

BURNED STORE HAD SEALED EXIT
The Harlem clothing store where eight people died in an arson fire last Friday
had its only fire exit sealed off with bricks more than a year ago and had a
basement sprinkler system that failed to operate during the blaze, Fire
Department officials said yesterday.  A1

SCHOOL FUNDS TO CUT TAXES?
Governor Pataki said he plans to take $100 million in money from the state
lottery money normally given to New York's public schools and use it to reduce
excessively high property taxes instead.  A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C10-20

Dreamworks plans vast new backlot.  C11

Film: Fishburne as Othello.  C11

Music: Springsteen at the Beacon.  C11

"Messiah" at St. Thomas.  C16

The Pop Life C18

Dance: Alvin Ailey salutes a troupe leader.  C18

Books: "In Search of the Birth of Jesus." C17

Television: Sinatra tribute.  C11

Obituaries B18-19

The Home Section C1-9

At home with Al Hirschfeld:
Anarchy behind a Santa beard. C1

Sports B20-27

Basketball: Knicks are relaxed under Nelson. B26
Boxing: Oscar De La Hoya tries to win New York over.  B24

Column: Anderson on Tyson B21

Football: Giants brace for Deion Sanders.  B21

Sanders sounds off. B21

Hockey: Rangers beat Bruins. B21

Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31

Editorials

The Republican split on Bosnia.

Homeless in the cold.

Boss Bulger's new job.

Letters

William Safire: Punditsky's report.

Maureen Dowd: Reversal of fortune.

John F. Cogan: Medicare vs. Medicaid.

Liu Qing: China's show trial.

Neediest Cases B3

Chronicle B13

Bridge C10

Crossword C10

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

With Iraq's O.K., a U.S. Team Seeks War Pilot's Body

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section A;   Page 3;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 874 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 13


A Pentagon team is on a secret mission to Iraq, searching the desert for the
remains of the first American pilot downed in the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

The mission, undertaken with the approval of President Saddam Hussein,
represents a small but potentially significant step in Iraq's attempts to end
its deep isolation. Since the end of the gulf war, Iraq has been an
international pariah, subjected to strict economic sanctions.

Though the mission is under the leadership of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, it represents the first official visit of American military officers
to Iraq since the war's end. American military and diplomatic officials
acknowledged that the Iraqi Government had made a humanitarian gesture by
allowing 11 American military officers to join 4 Red Cross officials on the
search.

The search began this week in a remote section of western Iraq, where a Navy
FA-18 fighter-bomber crashed on the first night of the gulf war nearly five
years ago. The pilot, Lieut. Comdr. Michael Scott Speicher, 33, was the first
American combat casualty of the war. He left a wife and two infant children.

Commander Speicher took off from the aircraft carrier Saratoga in the Red Sea on
the night of Jan. 16, 1991, flying northeast toward Baghdad. Shortly after he
entered Iraqi airspace, his plane disintegrated in midair. Navy intelligence
officers were never sure why. They later concluded that he either had a freak
midair collision with an Iraqi MIG-25 or that the enemy plane shot him out of
the sky.

He crashed in a wasteland, far from civilization. Though Commander Speicher's
status was changed from missing in action to killed in action in 1991, he
remains the only American pilot downed in the war whose body has not been
recovered.

In the fall of 1994, an American spy satellite photographed the crash site.
Intelligence officials conveyed the images to the P.O.W./M.I.A. office at the
Defense Department. Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Pentagon officials
then approached the Red Cross, which has an office in Baghdad, and sought its
help.

"This whole mission is a humanitarian effort," said Frederick C. Smith,
Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for international security
affairs. "The reason we undertook this was our commitment to determine the fate
of all missing U.S. service members lost in conflict."

The Red Cross notified Iraq's Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and on March 1 the
Iraqi Government approved the request that a Red Cross team with Pentagon
personnel be allowed to search the site. After months of haggling over details
of the mission, final approval came last month. Defense Department officials
said they believed the request was personally approved by President Hussein.

American officials offered a very slight tip of the hat to Iraq today.

A State Department official called Iraq's decision "a positive humanitarian
gesture." But he added: "They did the right thing, but they did it for reasons
of self-interest. If they think it's the first building block in a grand edifice
of better relations, they need to think again."

Representative Bill Richardson, a New Mexico Democrat who helped win the release
of two Americans held prisoner in Iraq in July, said he had been discussing the
mission with Iraqi officials since then. "Now, hopefully, they will start
dealing more aggressively with other issues, such as the nuclear issue and
human-rights concerns," he said.

Iraq's efforts to build weapons of mass destruction remain a sticking point with
the United States and the United Nations.

With the go-ahead from Iraq in hand, 11 military officers gathered last week at
the Army Central Identification Laboratory in Hawaii to prepare for the trip.
The team, led by a forensic anthropologist, has conducted several expeditions in
Southeast Asia to identify the remains of American servicemen missing in the
Vietnam War. Using technologies including DNA identification techniques,
high-gauge magnification instruments and computerized dental X-rays, such teams
have identified missing servicemen using no more than a fragment of bone or
tooth.

The team flew to Amman, Jordan, last weekend and crossed the border into Iraq,
traversing the Amman-Baghdad highway and turning off into the desert toward the
site, whose exact location remains a secret. They located the site through the
Global Positioning System, a constellation of satellites that tells users
precisely where they are on an electronic map of the world.

The team made camp and began staking out the site, spreading out in a radius of
a mile and a half from the point of impact. Commander Speicher's jet was
traveling at several hundred miles an hour when it crashed, and thousands of
pieces of debris from the crash are scattered through the desert. Like
archeologists on a dig, the searchers are sifting through the ground, looking
for shards of metal and bone.

They are expected back in Amman on Friday. Pentagon officials said they were
awaiting word on whether the mission was a success.

Commander Speicher lived in Jacksonville, Fla., where he grew up, went to high
school and later taught Sunday school, near a base that is home to hundreds of
Navy fliers.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lieut. Comdr. Michael Scott Speicher flew a fighter-bomber.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Evangeline Bruce, 77, Hostess Known for Washington Soirees

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section B;   Page 18;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 780 words


Evangeline Bruce, the widow of one of the most influential diplomats of the cold
war and one of Washington's last grand hostesses, died on Tuesday at her home in
Washington. She was 77.

Mrs. Bruce -- whose husband, David K. E. Bruce, was the United States envoy to
France, Germany, Britain, China and NATO before his death in 1977 -- was known
for her legendary soirees at their Georgetown home, at once properly
old-fashioned and glitteringly up to the minute. Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis once
sent her a note praising "the bright path you cut through an age where so few
people have grace and imagination and the virtues of another time."

Mrs. Onassis added: "One was so proud as an American to think that other
countries recognized you as our very best."

Mrs. Bruce's A-list guests were politicians, literati and celebrities whose
names often turned up in newspaper articles, diplomatic cables or
campaign-contribution reports: Katharine Graham, Vernon E. Jordan, David
Brinkley, Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Arianna Stassinopolous Huffington.

But despite her undisputed place at the center of Washington's social whirl for
nearly 50 years, she shunned what she called the "H" word.

"Hostess -- that one I really resent," she once said. She was equally adamant
that she did not preside over a salon.

"I don't think any gathering in Washington includes the main ingredients of a
salon," she said in 1984. "The French would say that a salon is like- minded
people getting together to converse on literature, art, history and politics.
The tone has to be light, humorous, witty and, the more elusive the reference,
the more prized. In Washington we don't go in for elusive statements. We are not
particularly well-read and therefore even the deft allusions are lost."

Instead, Mrs. Bruce said, the talk in Washington tended to be "strictly nuts and
bolts."

"It is rare here to discuss things in conceptual or philosophical terms," she
said. "I like living here better than anyplace else in the world, but the first
thing I notice when I leave to spend some time in Europe is the conversation,
the variety, the nonphilistine approach."

A diplomat's daughter who had lived in a dozen countries before going to
Radcliffe in 1937 to study Chinese history and French literature, Mrs. Bruce
moved to London during World War II to work in the London office of the O.S.S.,
the predecessor of the Central Intelligence Agency. One day her boss began
questioning her about the languages she spoke.

"I suppose you speak Italian," he said. She said yes.

"German." She nodded.

"French." Again, yes.

"Well, you certainly don't speak Japanese and Chinese," he said.

"Well," she said, "it happens that I do, sir, because my father was stationed in
both countries."

With that, David K. E. Bruce invited her to lunch.

"I know it's a tired old cliche," Mrs. Bruce told Vanity Fair magazine, "but we
were partners in every sense of the word. For instance, from day one in Paris,
David expected me to be solely responsible for all the diplomatic entertaining,
which forced me to get over my shyness."

Her husband, who worked for every President from Harry S. Truman to Gerald R.
Ford, was called out of retirement to head the American delegation at the Paris
peace talks on Vietnam in 1970, and again in 1973 to be chief of the United
States mission to Beijing. There Mrs. Bruce learned to address Chinese as
"comrade," except when speaking to two male servants who were addressed as
"mister."

In China, Mrs. Bruce found that she had more time to herself than in earlier
postings. She spent some of it writing a book-length manuscript about the year
1795 in France.

She lined up a publisher but shelved the project until a couple of years ago,
when she rewrote the manuscript as "Napoleon and Josephine: An Improbable
Marriage." Its publication by Lisa Drew/Scribner earlier this year was met with
interest in some quarters, incredulity in others. William Doyle, in The New York
Times Book Review, called it "an extremely readable account of their lives
together, and an easy and attractive introduction to Napoleon and his private
life" despite a number of errors of fact, date and sequence.

Mrs. Bruce started a Washington organization for runaways and abused teen-agers,
the Sasha Bruce Youthwork Inc., in the 1970's. It was named for Mrs. Bruce's
28-year-old daughter, Alexandra, who was known as Sasha and was shot to death on
the family estate in Virginia in 1975. Her husband of three months was later
indicted. By then he had moved to Athens and, as a Greek national, he could not
be extradited.

Mrs. Bruce is survived by two sons, David Jr. and Nicholas.

NAME: Evangeline Bruce

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

BALKAN ACCORD: IN CONGRESS;
ANGUISHED, SENATORS VOTE TO SUPPORT BOSNIA MISSION; CLINTON OFF TO PARIS SIGNING

BYLINE: By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section A;   Page 1;   Column 6;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1426 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 13


At the eleventh hour, an anguished and deeply divided Senate handed President
Clinton its reluctant support tonight for the deployment of American troops
after he left for Paris to witness the signing of the Bosnian peace accord.

The Senate voted 69 to 30 to support the deployment on the condition that the
United States lead an international effort to arm and train the Bosnian Muslims.
The resolution, hammered out by Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, and
Senator John S. McCain, Republican of Arizona, passed with the support of 45
Democrats and 24 Republicans. Voting against it were 29 Republicans and a
Democrat.

The resolution passed by an unexpectedly wide margin, which Senator McCain
attributed to Senator Dole's speech on the floor. [Excerpts from the speeches,
page A15. How Senators voted, page A14.]

Vice President Al Gore presided during the vote, his presence a signal of how
important the vote was to the Administration. Although President Clinton
maintained he did not need the authorization of Congress, he avidly sought its
approval.

In an emotional speech on the Senate floor that departed from his prepared
remarks, Senator Dole conjured up the image of American soldiers already in
Bosnia, noting that it was 10:17 P.M. in the warm Senate chamber while it was
4:17 A.M. Thursday in the cold in Bosnia, where troops were waiting to see if
the Senate would back their mission.

"They may have misgivings and we may have doubts about why they're there," he
said, but the decision has been made. If President Clinton got the United States
into Bosnia, Senator Dole said, then he, the majority leader, was offering a way
out by demanding in the resolution that the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government
be armed to parity with the Bosnian Serbs. This would allow the United States to
withdraw, he said, with the knowledge that the Muslims would able to defend
themselves.

The Senate gave another vote of confidence to the President when it defeated a
resolution offered by Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison, Republican of Texas, to
support the troops but to oppose President Clinton's decision to send them. This
vote was 47 in favor and 52 against, with one Democrat, Senator Russell D.
Feingold of Wisconsin, joining 46 Republicans to support Hutchison and 45
Democrats and 7 Republicans opposing it.

Senator Feingold said in an interview that Congress was "ceding its role and
ducking its responsibility" and should have forced the President to go to
Congress for authorization in advance of sending troops. "We shouldn't let any
chief executive off that easily," he said.

At the same time, the House approved a similar resolution, offered by
Representatives Stephen Buyer, Republican of Indiana, and Ike Skelton, Democrat
of Missouri, supporting the troops but opposing the policy.

The House measure went further than the Hutchison resolution in that it said the
United States "should be impartial and evenhanded" toward all parties in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, contradicting the Dole-McCain resolution that says the United
States will arm the Muslims. Neither the House measure nor the Dole-McCain
resolution has the force of law, but President Clinton gave written assurances
that the United States would lead an international effort to arm the Bosnian
Government.

The House vote was 287 in support of the Buyer-Skelton resolution and 141
against, with 221 Republicans, 65 Democrats and an Independent supporting it,
and 11 Republicans and 130 Democrats voting against it.

In earlier votes, both the Senate and the House beat back attempts to cut off
funding for the troops.

As the clock ticked toward President Clinton's departure from Andrews Air Force
Base, Senate leaders realized that so many of their colleagues wanted to speak,
and were speaking at length, that they might not be able to give the President
the vote he needed before he left.

Senator Dole took the extended debate in stride. "I think there's a phone on the
plane," he shrugged.

The Administration was eagerly courting Senators, stationing two State
Department officials just off the Senate floor to talk to members as they headed
into the chamber for each vote.

Those who supported the Hutchison resolution generally said that the United
States had no vital strategic interest in Bosnia, that the mission was
ill-defined, with no clear objective, and that Washington could not be the
world's policeman.

Senator Trent Lott of the Mississippi, the No. 2 Republican leader, supported
Mrs. Hutchison and opposed the Dole-McCain resolution, saying the language of
the latter gave the impression of "acquiescing or agreeing with" the decision to
send troops, which he does not.

He said it was "impractical" for the United States to insert troops among the
warring factions and expect them to be perceived as neutral while the United
States is arming the Bosnian Muslims. "I have not been able to get that problem
worked out in my mind," Senator Lott said.

Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, chairman of the Foreign Relations
Committee, said he supported arming the Muslims.

But he added, "I cannot, I do not and I will not support sending American
soldiers to fight and to die in Bosnia for the sake of an agreement that offers
no more than a brief pause while all sides prepare for the next round of Balkan
wars."

But many Senators, like Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat, criticized the Hutchison
measure as a cloak for political cover that would only undermine the troops.

"It may be what some Senators need," Mr. Nunn said, "but it is not what our
troops need." He said it offered "the worst of both worlds -- full speed ahead
on a risky mission that we don't agree with, don't approve of."

Speaking in favor of the Dole-McCain resolution, Senator Nunn said its message
was that while the Senate may not agree with how President Clinton decided to
send troops, "the commitment of forces is important to prevent the spread of the
conflict."

Supporters of the Dole-McCain resolution noted that troops were already landing,
that the United States had both moral and strategic obligations in the Balkans
and that the mission was an important confirmation of American leadership in
NATO.

"The cause is noble, and the cause is just," said Senator Dianne Feinstein, a
California Democrat who said she opposed the mission until she attended
classified briefings. "Today," she said, "one half of the people of Bosnia are
either dead or homeless."

With a heavy heart, Senator McCain, who was held as a prisoner of war in
Vietnam, said the Dole-McCain resolution was not seeking support for the
President's decision to deploy the troops. "It asks that you support the
deployment after the decision has been made," he said. "The decision has been
made by the only American elected to make such dcisions."

He added, "When we arrive at the moment when less is expected from our
leadership by the rest of the world, then we will have arrived at the moment of
our decline." And he said, "We cannot withdraw from the world into our
prosperity and comfort and hope to keep those blessings."

Senator Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska -- who lost his right leg below the
knee in Vietnam and won the Congressional Medal of Honor -- addressed a topic
popular on talk radio: that President Clinton was a weakened Commander in Chief
because he had evaded combat himself during Vietnam.

In a ringing defense of his onetime opponent in the Democratic Presidential
primaries in 1992, Mr. Kerrey said, "There are parts of a job you grow into, and
I believe very strongly the President has really grown as Commander in Chief."
He said Mr. Clinton "has not flinched from the hard talks with the families of
casualties that occurred on his watch," and "he is not naive or starry-eyed
about what he is ordering young Americans to do."

He added, "Bill Clinton may not have been in combat in Vietnam, but in a very
real way he, like all his predecessors, is experiencing combat now," referring
to the constant danger of assassination.

In a last-minute attempt this afternoon to bolster his argument that the mission
contains a moral imperative, President Clinton met in the Oval Office with Elie
Wiesel, the Holocaust survivor who won the Nobel Peace Prize.

"We in the United States represent a certain moral aspect of history," Mr.
Wiesel said. "A great nation owes its greatness not only to its military power,
but also to its moral consciousness, awareness. What would future generations
say about us, all of us here in this land, if we do nothing?"

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH ;

CORRECTION-DATE: December 15, 1995, Friday

CORRECTION:

Because of a computer entry error, a front-page caption yesterday, with a
picture of Senator Bob Dole during the Senate debate on sending American troops
to Bosnia, was omitted from some copies and replaced by sample typography. The
caption should have consisted of this quotation from Mr. Dole: "The decision's
been made, the deployment started. And our goal should be a Bosnia that is
self-reliant, able to defend itself without depending on the United States."


GRAPHIC: Photos: SUPPORT, WITH DEEP RESERVATIONS: "The decision's been made, the
deployment started. And our goal should be a Bosnia that is self-reliant, able
to defend itself without depending on the United States." -- Senator Bob Dole,
Rupublican of Kansas. (C-SPAN); FOR: "No one else in the world can do this,
except the United States of America. We are doing it . . . to protect vital
interests. And we are doing it in a good cause." -- Senator Bob Kerrey,
Democrat, Nebraska. (C-SPAN); AGAINST: "I submit that you can't run foreign
policy like social work. You can't look for some good to do around the world. .
. We can't right every wrong." -- Senator Phil Gramm, Republican, Texas.
(Reuters) (pg. A1); President Clinton made a last-minute appeal to Congress
yesterday with Elie Wiesel, Nobel Peace Prize winner, who told Americans that
sending peacekeeping troops to Bosnia would fulfill a moral imperative. (Stephen
Crowley/The New York Times) (pg. A14)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 15, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER REVIEWAdvice From an Authority: Laugh!

BYLINE: By BEN BRANTLEY

SECTION: Section C;  Page 3;  Column 4;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 954 words


Probably nobody knows the troubles Dick Gregory has seen.

The 63-year-old barrier-shattering comedian and self-styled political pundit --
whose one-man show, "Dick Gregory Live!!," opened at the Samuel Beckett Theater
last night -- has a curriculum vitae that includes front-line action in the
Southern desegregation movement, assorted arrests for civil disobedience and a
flashy bid for the Presidency in 1968.

He has staged more than 100 hunger fasts in protest of everything from the
plight of American Indians to the Vietnam War; seen his friends Malcolm X and
the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. die violent, world-changing deaths and, of
course, made history himself as the stand-up satirist who faced down Jim Crow in
the white nightclubs of the early 1960's.

So what is Mr. Gregory's advice to the world after being a witness to so much
conflict and strife? Actually, according to his new show, it seems to be
startlingly close to that offered by the title of the Bobby McFerrin hit "Don't
Worry, Be Happy."

"Know who you are," the comedian tells his audience toward the end of a genial,
rambling, two-hour performance. "Stop letting them people get you all uptight."

Some other tips: drink eight eight-ounce glasses of water a day; don't live in
fear of being mugged when you're more likely to be killed by cigarette smoke;
when bill collectors ask you when they can expect to be paid, tell them, "I'm
not in charge of your expectations"; and, above all, whenever the going gets
rough, "Laugh, laugh, laugh."

Mr. Gregory returned to stand-up comedy in 1993, after a 20-year hiatus during
which he was better known for his political activities and his creation of an
all-natural health diet. Those who remember him only from the days of the Hungry
i and the Blue Angel three decades ago will have difficulty recognizing the
grizzly-bearded, lean and determinedly warm fellow who, as Mr. Gregory puts it,
looks "more like Uncle Remus than Uncle Remus."

After all, in his early public incarnations, Mr. Gregory, in three-button suits
and a Martin Luther mustache, was heavyset and determinedly cool, chain smoking
his way through mordant, racially themed monologues the likes of which white
America had never heard before. "You know the definition of a Southern
moderate," he said in those days. "That's a cat that'll lynch you from a low
tree."

Today, Mr. Gregory thinks this country's view of its ethnic divisions is far too
bleak. "No country in the history of this planet has made the progress we made,"
he says, later adding: "Race relations will never go back to what it was. White
folks and black folks are talking."

Which means that the very nature of Mr. Gregory's humor has changed. The sly
razor thrusts at white oppression have been replaced by anatomies, in the style
of a gentler Jackie Mason, of what Mr. Gregory calls "cultural differences":
black versus white table manners, for example, and, hilariously, black versus
white greeting cards. And sardonic, urbane detachment has been succeeded by
avuncular folksiness.

Indeed, the performer once perceived as black America's answer to Mort Sahl now
seems far closer to Will Rogers: a glorification of the common man looking at
all those mixed-up people in power. "I mean, when you think about the silliness
that goes down," says Mr. Gregory, who often begins sentences with phrases like
"We ordinary people . . ." And, like Rogers, he draws directly and wonderingly
from immediate headlines, arriving onstage (in a black suit with bright
kinte-cloth lapels) with a disheveled sheaf of publications ranging from The
Star to Paris Match.

Some of the resulting material is just a whisper away from the standard-issue
jokes of late-night talk shows. (Mr. Gregory on Michael Jackson: "Where else but
America could a poor black boy end up being a rich white man?")

The evening's choicer moments are built on a more original, free-associating
style in which Mr. Gregory pushes his own brand of absurdist logic to the outer
limits. He sniffs conspiracy in the conviction and fatal beating of Jeffrey
Dahmer, a "frail, fragile" white man who improbably "starts eating up unemployed
black construction workers."

He speculates on what might happen if Jesus, who, he points out, was "killed by
the state," were executed today. (People would start wearing electric chairs
around their necks.) And he finds evidence for the existence of God in the fact
that testicles are where they are on men's bodies.

The last observation points to a new streak of raunchiness in Mr. Gregory's
humor that would not, of course, have gone over in his early days in comedy. He
is funny on the subjects of the joys of urination and how "integrated toilets"
have sabotaged myths of black men's sexual endowments.

This is pretty mild stuff in a time when Howard Stern is a star. Actually, Mr.
Gregory (who, with his wife of 36 years, has 10 children) gives off the
comforting feeling of the talky, mildly eccentric relative who arrives at every
big family gathering with an arsenal of fiercely held convictions and off-center
bits of advice.

It all makes for an easygoing, perfectly pleasant evening that is not
inappropriate for the holidays. In lieu of a fat-filled Christmas dinner, Mr.
Gregory is providing free copies of his ascetic diet plan.

DICK GREGORY LIVE!!
Sets by Michael Green; lighting by Marshall Williams; production manager, Janice
C. Lane. Presented by the Negro Ensemble Company, Susan Watson Turner, producing
director; Pamela Faith Jackson, associate producer; Carole Khan-White, executive
producer, by special arrangement with Theater Legend. At the Samuel Beckett
Theater, 412 West 42d Street, Clinton.

WITH: Dick Gregory.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dick Gregory. (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 15, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

'Kissinger and Nixon' Docudrama Assaulted Truth and History

SECTION: Section A;  Page 42;  Column 3;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 302 words


To the Editor:

The "Kissinger and Nixon" docudrama broadcast this week by TNT found me, as a
direct participant in those times, riveted to my seat. I had completely
forgotten that President Nixon was a lush, nor had I realized what a cad I was
or how brilliantly Henry A. Kissinger, then the national security adviser, was
undercut by my machinations.

At the rate the producers had me rising, four stars were hardly a start; a few
more knives in Mr. Kissinger's back and President Nixon might have made me Vice
President!

More seriously, the only drama in this so-called docudrama was its assault on
the truth. President Nixon had his critics, but no one ever alleged drinking on
the job nor did he ever drink during business hours. To my knowledge, the
President was at worst a modest social drinker.

No sympathy or even understanding for the South Vietnamese cause is evident in
the production, while the "case" of the North Vietnamese is treated with the
greatest sympathy despite irrefutable evidence of their aggressive and
tyrannical policies.

The United States is described as the relentless aggressor. All of the memoirs,
studies and other analyses of the Vietnam war are ignored in order to do a fast
hatchet job.

It is as if the more virulent antiwar protesters' views of events circa 1970 had
been frozen, to be thawed 25 years later.

All this came at the expense of respect for the ideals of public service. The
thought that Americans can serve their country without sacrificing its interests
on the altar of ego and ambition is again discredited by historic revisionism.
Americans and especially our youth deserve better even of their popular
entertainment.

ALEXANDER M. HAIG JR.
Washington, Dec. 13, 1995

The writer was an aide and chief of staff to President Nixon.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 15, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BALKAN ACCORD: IN WASHINGTON;
Two Veterans Join Forces On Bosnia

BYLINE: By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 711 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 14


When Bob Dole argued on the Senate floor 25 years ago against cutting off funds
for the Vietnam War, he was wearing a bracelet bearing the name of an American
prisoner of war.

On Wednesday night, when Mr. Dole, the majority leader, was arguing on the
Senate floor for the need to deploy American troops in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
he announced that the name on his P.O.W. bracelet was, by marvelous coincidence,
that of John S. McCain, for the last few weeks his closest senatorial ally on
the Bosnian peacekeeping mission.

Mr. Dole did not know Mr. McCain 25 years ago. And Mr. McCain, a Navy fighter
pilot held captive from 1967 to 1973, said he learned about the bracelet for the
first time on Wednesday night.

Senator Dole, for whom memories of war run deep and close to the nerves, was
linked to John McCain during an unpopular war 25 years ago, and linked to him
again Wednesday in another unpopular cause.

But many admirers in the divided Senate saw their union as a powerful alliance
that carried an unusual degree of moral authority and allowed them to push
through support for an unpopular cause.

Mr. Dole was once a dirt-poor Army grunt whose right arm was crippled by wounds
he suffered in Italy in World War II; Mr. McCain is a graduate of Annapolis and
the son and grandson of Navy admirals. Between them they built a coalition of
fewer than half the Republicans and almost all the Democrats, and put the Senate
on record backing deployment of troops ordered, without the consent of the
Congress, by the Commander in Chief.

"The most impressive thing was the World War II-Vietnam link," said Senator Bob
Kerrey, the Nebraska Democrat, who lost part of a leg in Vietnam and won the
Medal of Honor.

"It's the father-son link," he said. "It's coming in and saying, 'We're the ones
who were on the side of defending an unpopular war because it is right, and
we'll defend an unpopular military effort now because we believe it's right,'
and it's hard to beat that."

Senator William S. Cohen, Republican of Maine, said that when Mr. McCain -- who
supports Mr. Dole's rival, Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, for the Republican
Presidential nomination -- moved to Mr. Dole's side on the Bosnia issue, "it had
a dramatic impact." Mr. Cohen added: "It took politics out of it and showed this
was a principled decision. Without McCain, this could have gone in the other
direction."

The bipartisan back-patting in the Senate was in stark contrast to the more
searing partisan atmosphere in the House.

The same night that the Senate passed the Dole-McCain resolution, which supports
the troops and requires the Administration to arm the Bosnian Muslims so they
have parity with the Serbs, the House spurned a Democratic resolution offering
nothing more than support for the troops. The vote was along party lines.

But Representative Lee Hamilton, Democrat of Indiana, who proposed the measure,
said some House members were feeling so chagrined that they had not even
supported the troops that the Republicans intended to bring the measure to the
floor again, this time with Republican sponsors, and hoped to pass it before
more Americans landed in Bosnia.

Not everyone sees Mr. Dole's actions as outside the realm of politics. A
Democratic consultant with ties to the White House said that by helping the
President achieve his goal, "Dole set up a ticking time bomb that could go off
any time -- if something happens to the troops, people will blame Bill Clinton."

But others see the outcome as positive for both Mr. Dole and President Clinton.

"There was this nagging feeling that we had a President and a Senate majority
leader seeking to be President who were too tactical, always positioning
themselves," said Thomas Mann, an expert on Congress at the Brookings
Institution.

"Now, seeing them act like leaders, it provides an opportunity for people to
take a fresh look," he said.

No one seemed more surprised at Mr. Dole's speech than Mr. McCain, who moved to
a seat closer to him so he could watch his face.

Mr. Mann said Mr. Dole, by appearing statesmanlike and giving an emotional
speech on Wednesday night, reminded viewers of his better qualities -- "his
emotion and his genuine skill at making the legislative process work."

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 15, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Extremist Army Group at War With U.S. Policy

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 40;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1538 words


An underground group claiming to be serving in the Army's elite Special Forces,
headquartered at Fort Bragg, N.C., has been publishing a far right dissident
newsletter that is virulently critical of the Federal Government, and
particularly of its use of soldiers in carrying out foreign policy.

Called The Resister, the publication, for example, was vehemently opposed to
American military involvement in Haiti, which it said was installing a Communist
ruler at the behest of "racists" and "tribalists" in the Congressional Black
Caucus.

And, citing what it said were accounts by its adherents among Green Berets sent
to Haiti, the newsletter asserted that some Special Forces soldiers were
subverting American policy by telling supporters of the ousted military junta
how to hide their weapons and themselves and identifying supporters of the
restored President Jean-Bertrand Aristide for future retribution.

It is not known how large the group is, or even the extent to which its
publication circulates, but the Special Forces acknowledge its existence.

Lieut. Col. Kenneth McGraw, the spokesman for the Special Operations Command at
Fort Bragg, said several checks of the group by the military authorities
indicated that it was not in violation of any regulations.

The Army ordered a sweeping investigation into extremist activity in its 510,000
member ranks on Tuesday after two white soldiers in the 82d Airborne Division,
also at Fort Bragg, were charged with killing a black man and woman. The two
soldiers, assigned to the highly esteemed paratroop division, were believed by
local police officials to be acting out a white-supremacist-inspired random
shooting of blacks.

The possible existence of a right-wing underground within the Special Forces
presents more difficult issues, for it is these highly trained and skilled
unconventional warfare units that are the Army's cutting edge in deploying
troops in brush-fire wars, third world flare-ups and the bitter nationalist
conflicts.

The ideas typical of the newsletter, which has been published for more than a
year, "are basically the white Christian militia mentality," said Michael
Reynolds, who has been tracking the group, known as the Special Forces
Underground, for the Southern Poverty Law Center.

"But you've just ratcheted up from a pickup basketball game to the N.B.A.," he
said. "This is very dangerous. These are individuals trained in insurgency
warfare and they are the best in the world. They have access to weaponry. If
they become more involved with underground paramilitary extremists, this is a
very bad sign."

A glimpse into the tenor of The Resister publication is indicated by its
reaction to the moving of a statue, "Bronze Bruce," honoring Green Berets killed
in Vietnam "fighting the ideological source of the New World Order, the
egalitarian evil of Communism." The statue was moved into the Special Operations
command headquarters, which encompasses several other units.

"He now sits in the breezeway of a building infested with internationalist
Quislings and politically correct Milquetoasts who consider Civil Affairs and
Psychological Operations social workers, Ranger infantry and aviation prima
donnas the equal of Special Forces soldiers and their O.S.S. progenitors," the
newsletter says.

Special Forces troops are deployed in 12-member A-teams, cross-trained in
specialties like engineering, explosives, weapons and medicine and skilled in
languages. They are sent to function independently in remote areas, often with a
political-military purpose, like training local soldiers or guerrillas.

In Haiti, they made assessments of rural needs for roads, hospitals and water
and tried to straighten out the police and court systems. In Central America
they inoculated village children. After the Persian Gulf war, the teams were
dropped on mountaintops in southern Turkey, where Kurds had fled, like heavily
armed social workers.

An example of this new role came in the Kurdistan mountains in the spring of
1991 when a stubby, ferocious Special Forces commander, Brig. Gen. Richard
Potter, landed by helicopter on a mountaintop near the Iranian border, where
thousands of Kurdish refugees were dying of dysentery and cholera.

"This will be stopped," he declared as if the diseases were enemy tanks on the
attack.

An emergency worker, a water purification specialist who looked like a refugee
from the 1960's in wire-rim glasses, graying ponytail and floppy hat, stared in
awe at the food and medicine tumbling from the sky out of military C-140's, and
timidly approached the general to ask if he might carry links of pipe in his
helicopter to a yet more remote camp.

The general barked unintelligibly and a muscular Special Forces captain
materialized, guns and knives strapped to every surface of his body.

"Take this fine young man, get him a helicopter and anything else he needs,"
ordered General Potter, whose richly profane "counseling" of his own troops is
legendary.

This role apparently holds little appeal for the soldiers behind The Resister,
who described American peacekeeping this way: "The U.S. military has become a
slave service for the wealth redistribution schemes of internationalists and
gangs of weeping do-gooder mystics.  One need simply note the circling of media
carrion eaters to predict in which third world toilet these altruists will flush
hundreds of millions of U.S. tax dollars and the lives of U.S. servicemen.
Peacekeeping is a monumental fraud."

The coming issue of Soldier of Fortune magazine carries a not unsympathetic
article on the Special Forces Underground, including an interview with The
Resister's editor, who contends that the Army has begun a "witch hunt" against
the group, trying to drive suspected members out of the elite unit.

But both the Soldier of Fortune article and Mr. Reynolds noted that the groups
had used clandestine skills they had been taught in the Army to conceal
themselves from the authorities. Mr. Reynolds said the publication had been
available until recently on The Internet, the computer communications network,
and had shifted its printing and distribution center from Arlington, Tex., to
Maryland to Kansas City, Mo., to Bloomington, Minn.

Describing its philosophy in its first issue in the summer of 1994, The Resister
said it favored "strict constitutionalism, isolationism, laissez-faire
capitalism, individual rights, limited government and republicanism," and
opposed "statism, liberalism, tribalism, socialism, collectivism,
internationalism, democracy, altruism, pull politics and the New World Order."

With a coiled rattlesnake, a Revolutionary War symbol, on its masthead, the
publication inveighs against Joint Task Force 6, which uses soldiers to help
combat drug smuggling, and it warns of supposed Government plots to use the Army
to disarm the public. Written in a combination of military jargon and
intellectual references to the philosopher John Locke, its articles include both
right-wing politics and military tactics. It also contains cryptic personal
advertisements like "The King's Mountain Model Railroad Club will hold its
quarterly meeting at the Greensboro address. Topic: the joys of timber trestle
modeling," or "Samuel Donaldson has 14 red peonies growing in his garden."

A note in one recent issue advertised "Sniper/Firearms Training: Former Special
Forces Sniper instructor. Selective. Expensive."

The first issue found its way into the reference library of the John F. Kennedy
Special Warfare Center and School at Fort Bragg and was confiscated in August
1994.

The publication itself, however, would only have been illegal if it had been
produced on Army time, or with Army equipment or Army material, like paper, an
Army spokesman said.

In the spring of 1995, Colonel McGraw, the Army spokesman, said all available
issues were sent for review to the Army's Staff Judge Advocate, who ruled that
the material did not violate Army guidelines or regulations. He said a further
review indicated there was no violation of security or disclosure of classified
material.

Still concerned, however, the Commander of Special Operations, Lieut. Gen. J. T.
Scott, issued a policy letter telling commanders they should understand the
rules governing extremist groups, Colonel McGraw said. The general then ordered
a survey of 1,111 troops in Special Operations Command to see if any
participated in extremist groups. All said they did not. The Army had already
ruled, however, that the "underground" did not fit within the extremist
guidelines.

The Special Forces commander in Haiti, General Potter, now retired, has
described The Resister's version of events as "ridiculous," Colonel McGraw said.

The Resister account, which said it was a "synthesis" of accounts by Special
Forces troops on duty in Haiti, said they had met with senior leaders of the
disbanded army and the paramilitary Attaches who had been the junta's enforcers
and delivered "a very blunt cold-pitch describing our hatred for Communism and
our official mission."

The account goes on to say that the Special Forces troops identified leaders of
President Aristide's movement and "waged a clandestine offensive" against them.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 15, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Roland Gittelsohn, 85, Rabbi and a Marine Chaplain on Iwo Jima

BYLINE: By DAVID STOUT

SECTION: Section B;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 327 words


Rabbi Roland B. Gittelsohn, a scholar on religious and governmental issues who
was a Marine Corps chaplain during the battle of Iwo Jima, died Wednesday at
Beth Israel Hospital in Boston. He was 85.

Rabbi Gittelsohn was rabbi emeritus at Temple Israel in Boston, where he served
from 1953 to 1977. From 1936 to 1953, he served the Central Synagogue of Nassau
County in Rockville Centre, L.I.

He was awarded three combat ribbons for his service with the Fifth Marine
Division on Iwo Jima. His sermon at the dedication of the division's cemetery,
titled "The Purest Democracy," attracted wide attention and was read by many
radio and television announcers during and after the war.

In February, Rabbi Gittelsohn gave the benediction at the Iwo Jima Memorial in
Arlington, Va., at a ceremony marking the 50th anniversary of the landing.

Rabbi Gittelsohn was appointed by President Harry S. Truman to a committee
studying civil rights issues. Later, he studied and lectured on United States
involvement in Vietnam, and on euthanasia, Israeli politics and family
relationships. He wrote numerous articles and books on civic and religious
issues.

He was president of the Massachusetts Board of Rabbis from 1958 to 1960;
president of the Central Conference of American Rabbis from 1969 to 1971, and
president of the Association of Reform Zionists of America from 1977 to 1984.

A native of Cleveland, he graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Western Reserve
University in Cleveland in 1931. He studied at Columbia University and Hebrew
Union College in Cincinnati and was ordained in 1936.

His first wife, the former Ruth Freyer, died some years ago. He is survived by
his second wife, Hulda; a son, David, of Framingham, Mass.; a daughter, Judith
Fales of Waitsfield, Vt.; two stepsons, Gerald Tishler of Newton, Mass., and
Douglas Tishler of Brookline, Mass.; a sister, Natalie Falcon of Brookline; five
grandchildren, and two step-grandchildren.

NAME: Roland Gittelsohn

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

India Denies Atom-Test Plan But Then Turns Ambiguous

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Dec. 15


The Indian Government denied today that it was planning its first nuclear test
since 1974, then recast its position a few hours later to describe as "highly
speculative" a report in The New York Times today that quoted American
intelligence experts as saying they suspected an Indian test was being prepared.

The Government offered no explanation for the change in its statements. But the
effect was to leave open the possibility that an underground test is being
prepared or that the Government wants to keep alive the impression that it has
the option to conduct a test.

Senior political, military and scientific officials in India gathered to discuss
the response to the Times report, which said United States spy satellites had
detected preparations at the Pokaran test site in Rajasthan, 340 miles west of
New Delhi.

Western intelligence agencies say India has been pursuing a secret nuclear
weapons program intensively for years.

Someone faxed a copy of the Times article to the Foreign Ministry shortly after
the first edition of the newspaper went on sale in New York on Thursday night.
Within an hour, Arif Khan, Foreign Ministry spokesman, telephoned the Times
bureau in New Delhi with a denial. "There is no truth in this," he said. "There
is no question of any test being conducted."

Mr. Khan said the technical activity detected could have been related to
"routine military exercises," including a recent air force training operation in
the area, which is near the Pakistan border.

After the high-level officials had met to discuss the issue, Mr. Khan held a
briefing for reporters, and was cautious in his responses, avoiding outright
denial. "It is a totally speculative kind of report," he said. When a reporter
asked if the speculation was true or false, he replied: "There is no such thing
as true speculation. Speculation is speculation."

By encouraging uncertainty about its plans, the Government appeared to be
following the ambiguous policy it has laid down since the test at Pokaran on May
18, 1974. That test stunned Western governments that had hoped that India would
turn its back on nuclear weapons. At the time, India described the test of a
Hiroshima-sized bomb equal to about 12,000 tons of TNT, as "a peaceful nuclear
explosion," a description Mr. Khan repeated today.

India's program to perfect nuclear warheads has been presented as a contingency
plan, not as a program aimed at building or deploying nuclear weapons. Mr. Khan
re-affirmed this position today, saying, "While we have the capability, we have
not utilized it, because we believe in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and
not for weapons purposes."

But behind this public stance, Indian experts said, pressures have been building
for new tests. The experts said the tests would measure the effectiveness of
development since 1974, allowing scientists to measure the efficiency of new
approaches to bomb-making, including miniaturization of warheads and new
triggering mechanisms.

But others said the main pressure has been political. While the nuclear debate
here has focused on Pakistan, which has been identified by United States
intelligence officials as having its own secret nuclear weapons program,
officials say India's long-range concerns focus more on China, which has at
least 450 nuclear-armed ballistic missiles capable of striking targets in India.


                             --------------------


South Asian Declaration

BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 15 (By The New York Times) -- The leaders of 10
Southeast Asian nations today rejected objections from the United States and
China and signed a treaty proclaiming the region a nuclear weapons-free zone.

The treaty, signed here during a regional summit meeting, bans the manufacture,
acquisition and possession of nuclear weapons and comes into effect after it is
ratified by each of the Governments.

Under the agreement, Asia would be free of nuclear weapons from Myanmar in the
west to the Philippines in the east, from Laos and Vietnam in the north to the
vast archipelago of Indonesia to the south.

The United States and China had objected to terms of the treaty that could limit
their freedom to move nuclear-armed warships and submarines through the region.

Diplomats involved in the negotiations say that China also objected because the
treaty seemed to suggest that it did not have sovereignty over disputed regions
of the South China Sea.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
Guys Here Need an Idea

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 23;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 715 words


Is anybody else puzzled about the Army and Navy these days? What in the world
are these heavily armed and richly financed people supposed to do anymore?

Congress obviously doesn't want them placed in harm's way. That's why President
Clinton has just had a tough time getting the flimsiest Republican support for
putting Army units into the Balkans. Not so long ago President Bush had trouble
getting Democratic support for using the Army against the Iraqi invasion of
Kuwait.

Congress's attitude seems to be, "God forbid our great fighting forces should
ever have to fight." Yet Congress cannot stop itself from lavishing more and
more money on this magnificent military machine which it cannot bear to use.

In the present budget, for example, though national hardship is used to justify
extensive cuts in domestic programs, the Pentagon is slathered with far more
money than it requested or, apparently, can use.

Cold-war armament programs designed to defend us against a Soviet Communist
military juggernaut continue to be funded as though Stalin's Red Army still
occupied the center of Europe and the Berlin wall still stood.

Some of this squandering of the taxpayer's famous dollar can be put down to a
merciful impulse among Republican budget-cutters. Pouring money into obsolete
multibillion-dollar defense projects, after all, does keep a lot of people
working and many communities from collapsing into poverty.

In New Deal days, government's willingness to finance unnecessary work simply to
provide jobs was deplored by Republicans as "boondoggling." It is heartening to
see they have finally come round to accepting it as a humane act of government,
at least for communities dependent on military spending.

You can't help wondering, though, if there isn't a long-term danger here. With
Congress's reluctance to use the military for dangerous work, you might wonder
if the military will eventually degrade into a gold-plated make-work program for
spreading the money around.

The real trouble, of course, is that since the cold war's end there has been no
sensible explanation of what the military is there for. It was there with a
clear sense of mission when Soviet Russia collapsed. Since then it has just gone
on being there, vast and heavily funded, but with no clear sense at all of what
future it ought to be heading for.

This takes us back to the lack of preparation for winning the cold war.
Apparently nobody in Washington expected us to win or, for that matter, for the
cold war itself ever to end. So naturally there was no contingency plan: "After
the Cold War, What?"

Year after year passes, and there is still no very clear idea what to do with
the military. This is because there is not even a murky idea of what the United
States ought to be doing in this brave new world.

As indicated by the lurching back and forth on the Balkans under two Presidents,
there are no philosophical guidelines to what American policy should be in this
new world. We seem to wait until the bell rings, then charge, or refuse to
charge, depending on the tracking poll of the day.

The cold war policy resulted from the brainwork of a group of brilliant men
whose lives were dedicated to understanding foreign affairs and what came to be
called "strategic thinking." The likes of these men do not seem to exist among
us nowadays, and more's the pity. We stumble around blinded by lack of
intellectual vision of what might be possible in the future.

The nasty tendency of certain military types to refer to the President as a
"draft dodger" shows, among other things, that the new professional military
doesn't understand its own history. Except for President Bush, a combat pilot,
and Senator Dole, an authentic war hero, recent and present Presidential
campaigners have mostly been "draft dodgers."

The new professional Army was created because draft-dodging had become a popular
form of political action. This forced the politicians to abolish the historic
citizens' army. So many citizens saying "No" to the Vietnam War endangered
government's power to make war without popular support.

President Nixon ended the draft, and the present all-pro military was born, the
product of grand-scale draft-dodging and politicians' fears of the classic
citizens' army.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Pursues Its Democratic Goals

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 22;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 279 words


To the Editor:

"Outsiders Gone, Cambodia Unravels" (Week in Review, Dec. 3) depicts my nation
as slipping back into a morass of corruption and lawlessness -- a description I
do not recognize.

After the general elections in Cambodia in May 1993, the Royal Government of
Cambodia has made great efforts to institute the rule of law and to insure law
and order. An anti-corruption law is being drafted to be submitted to the
National Assembly for adoption.

You said there is no reform in the key ministries, but you ignored that early
this year a military reform reduced the number of generals from 2,000 to 199.

The institutionalization of a civil society in Cambodia will take years to
accomplish and will be marked by mistakes and miscalculations. That reality does
not diminish our dedication or energy in pursuing our democratic goals. Our
course of action should be encouraged and supported, keeping in mind the
realities my country is facing as we develop our economy and educate our people.

I do not have to remind you that Cambodia still suffers from the aftermath of
the mass murder, starvation and destruction by the Khmer Rouge. The Pol Pot
regime, which engineered Cambodia's destruction, was in some part a consequence
of your country's military actions during your war with Vietnam, spilling over
into my country and resulting in the destabilization of our Government.

Our economic and human resource base is a narrow one, and we need all the help
we can get. I do not see that the future of Cambodia is bleak and that hopes for
a true multiparty election in two years are dying.

VAR HUOTH
Ambassador of Cambodia
Washington, Dec. 12, 1995

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Word for Word/The Flag Bulletin;
Two Centuries of Burning Flags, A Few Years of Blowing Smoke

BYLINE: By SARAH BOXER

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 7;   Column 1;   Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1189 words


LAST Tuesday, the Senate narrowly defeated a constitutional amendment to outlaw
flag desecration. The vote of 63 for the amendment and 36 against it fell just
shy of the two-thirds majority necessary for passage. (The House has already
passed a broader version of the amendment.)

How times have changed. The first flag desecration laws (most of which were
passed between 1897 and 1905 by individual states) were not to stop political
dissidents from burning flags. According to Robert Justin Goldstein, the author
of "Saving Old Glory" (Westview, 1995) and the forthcoming book "Burning the
Flag" (Kent State), these laws (all states had them by 1932) were intended to
prevent the use of flag imagery for political campaigns and for commercial and
advertising purposes -- uses that are now seen as patriotic.

History also shows that flag burning has never been epidemic in this country.
Mr. Goldstein, of Ann Arbor, Mich., who teaches political science at Oakland
University in Rochester, Mich., says he was able to turn up records showing
"fewer than 45 reported incidents of flag burnings . . . in all of American
history between the adoption of the United States flag in 1777 and the Texas v.
Johnson Supreme Court decision in 1989," which declared that politically
motivated flag desecration is protected under the First Amendment. "About half
of those incidents occurred in a single five-year period, 1966 to 1970, and were
overwhelmingly associated with protests against the Vietnam War," he said.

Here is a sampling of Mr. Goldstein's list of burnings, published in the
March-April 1995 issue of The Flag Bulletin, the publication of the Flag
Research Center.   SARAH BOXER

May 10, 1861. Liberty, Miss. Flag burned in protests against President Lincoln's
decision to suppress Confederate states' secession from the United States.

Oct. 31, 1896. Sedalia, Mo. Flag used as part of demonstration in support of
Republican Presidential candidate William McKinley reportedly seized and burned
by supporter of Democratic-Populist candidate William Jennings Bryan.

June 1, 1916. New York City. American flag burned (along with the flags of many
nations) as part of ceremony, presided over by the Rev. Bouck White, pastor of
the "Church of the Social Revolution," designed to call for international
brotherhood following outbreak of World War I in Europe. . . . White was tried
and convicted.

June 1963. Rochester, N.Y. Five boys accused by police of stealing hundreds of
flags from veterans' graves and using them to build a bonfire.

April 8, 1966. New York City. Flag burned during anti-Vietnam War skit "L.B.J."
at the Bridge Theater.

June 6, 1966. New York City. World War II veteran Sidney Street burned flag to
protest Mississippi shooting of civil rights activist James Meredith. During the
flag burning, Street proclaimed, "If they let that happen to Meredith we don't
need an American flag."

April 14, 1967. Terre Haute, Ind. Indiana State University English instructor
Scott Chisholm burned flag during class, subsequently stating he did so without
any political motive but simply to demonstrate that the flag was only a symbol
("merely a piece of cloth and a stick"), was not equivalent with what it might
represent, and could be destroyed without expressing disrespect for the United
States.

April 15, 1967. New York City. Flag burning in Central Park during a massive
anti-Vietnam War demonstration. Because the flag burning was photographed and
the photograph was widely publicized, this incident led directly to the 1968
Federal flag desecration law, for the first time making flag desecration a
Federal offense (up to one year in jail and a $1,000 fine).

February 1968. Richardson, Tex. Former officer in Women's Army Corps burned flag
in her front yard as anti-war protest.

Jan. 20, 1969. Washington. Scores of small flags burned during protests against
inauguration of President Richard Nixon.

May 1969. Brighton, N.Y. Three youths, who admitted burning flag on Memorial
Day, sentenced to raising and lowering flag at Brighton Town Hall for 30 days
under threat of jail term for failure to do so.

April 19, 1970. Dallas. Flag burning in Dallas park (apparently to protest city
ban on swimming in a park creek) led to conviction of Gary Deeds, sentenced to
four years in jail under Texas law (which provided maximum penalty of 25 years,
harshest in the country).

May 4, 1970. Kent, Ohio. Flag burned on the day four students were killed at
Kent State University by Ohio National Guardsmen who opened fire on antiwar
demonstration.

November 1970. New York City. Flag burned on opening day of "flag art"
exhibition at the Judson Memorial Church, held to protest flag desecration
prosecutions. The Judson exhibit was shut down early when city officials
confiscated one of the exhibits, a phallic flag exhibit.

Summer 1974. East Liverpool, Ohio. Two teen-age girls prosecuted for burning
flag were ordered by judge to apologize publicly by newspaper advertisement,
attend flag raising and lowering ceremonies at city hall for one week, observe
six months' curfew, and not communicate with each other for one year.

April 25, 1976. Los Angeles. Attempted flag burning during baseball game at
Dodger Stadium thwarted by Chicago Cubs center fielder Rick Monday, who seized
flag and ran away with it after two would-be flag burners doused it with lighter
fluid but before they could set it on fire.

Nov. 27, 1979. St. Louis. Flag burning during protest against American policy
toward Iran organized by people associated with Maoist-oriented Revolutionary
Communist Party.

Aug. 22, 1984. Dallas. Flag burning during protest against renomination of
President Reagan at Republican National Convention. Gregory Lee Johnson, a
Revolutionary Communist Youth Brigade . . . member, was convicted and sentenced
to a year in jail under Texas law. His conviction was later overturned by the
1989 Texas v. Johnson case, which declared that prosecutions for politically
motivated flag desecration violated the First Amendment to the Constitution.

March 16, 1987. Puerto Rico. Carlos Mendoza-Lugo burned flag in front of post
office during demonstration for Puerto Rican independence and was sentenced to
one year in jail under Federal law. After the Supreme Court implicitly struck
down all flag desecration laws, Mr. Mendoza-Lugo achieved a brief moment of
fame. He was the only person then imprisoned under the Federal law and
(apparently) the only prisoner in the country released from jail as a direct
result of the [Johnson] ruling.

July 1988. Atlanta. Flag burning during Democratic National Convention.

Oct. 17, 1988. Washington. Flag burned by demonstrators during a protest at
Pentagon against American policy toward El Salvador.

Jan. 20, 1989. Berkeley, Calif. Flag burning during protest against inauguration
of George Bush.

April 21, 1989. Detroit. Flag burning during protest demanding officials at
Wayne State University be more sensitive to minority students.

The World: Page 14

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A 1981 flag in Cambridge, Mass. (UPI/Bettmann)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IDEAS & TRENDS;
The Newest Space Race

BYLINE: By WILLIAM J. BROAD

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 3;   Column 1;   Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 988 words


THE right stuff once had to do with guts and grit, with former test pilots and
fighter jocks putting their lives on the line, blasting skyward on machines
renowned for their tendency to explode. But flying into space is safer nowadays,
and increasingly it is fueled by international diplomacy or cash or a little of
both. Like much else in the waning days of the 20th century, space travel is
threatening to turn from a calling into a currency.

The political side of the coin was highlighted last week as President Clinton
announced a plan for Israeli astronauts to fly aboard the space shuttle and the
planned international space station.

No matter that Israel currently has no astronauts in training and no planned
space projects that require human attention. Israel is a major ally of the
United States that is engaged in a delicate peace offensive that Washington
strongly backs. That was apparently enough to give some of its citizens an
opportunity to join the elite corps of humans who have done the next best thing
to "Star Trek," boldly going where few have gone before.

"We look forward to working out the arrangements for this cooperation and we are
absolutely certain that it will benefit Israel's high-tech development as well
as our own," Mr. Clinton said Monday during a state visit to Washington by Prime
Minister Shimon Peres of Israel.

No Junket, Israel Says

In Israel, Dr. Yuval Ne'eman, head of the Israeli space agency, emphasized that
no astronaut would be lofted unless a good reason could be found. "We don't need
a junket," he told The Jerusalem Post. "It would be embarrassing."

Dr. Giora Shaviv, head of the Institute for Space Research at Technion
University in Haifa, told Israel Radio that the astronaut announcement was
merely a "propaganda gimmick" and a costly way to "bring about nothing," adding
that the presence of an Israeli in space would be all show and no substance.
Space scientists often fear that their own research projects stand to be
undercut by expensive astronaut ventures.

Two days before Mr. Clinton's announcement, the Russian news agency Tass
displayed the financial side of the coin by reporting that two German astronauts
were undergoing training near Moscow for a flight next year on the Russian Mir
orbital station -- the price, about $10 million. The Germans join a growing list
of clients who have paid Moscow for the privilege of a bone-rattling ride into
space, including a chain-smoking Japanese television journalist who in 1990
during a live broadcast from space described in detail the more unattractive
details of space sickness.

To be sure, orbital politics, if not the outright purchasing of space travel, is
as old as the space age. Most of the original astronauts of East and West were
key players in a ostentatious rivalry meant to show whether capitalism or
communism was the best way to impress the world and generate a flood of material
benefits.

"In contrast to space probes and the scientific stuff, piloted programs have
always fundamentally been about geopolitics," observed John E. Pike, head of
space policy at the Federation of American Scientists, a private group in
Washington.

But it is also clear that in the past decade or so the once-exclusive astronaut
club has thrown open its ranks to newcomers. One reason is that maturing space
programs have produced a surplus of available seats, with Russia launching
capsules up to orbital outposts like clockwork and the United States regularly
lofting shuttles that can carry up to eight astronauts.

During the cold war, especially the frenzied 1980's, these extra seats often
went to allies and would-be clients, as when Russia lofted astronauts from
Vietnam and Outer Mongolia and the United States sent the Sultan Salman Al-Saud
of Saudi Arabia into orbit.

Today, in step with the times, the patronage is more broadly political. For
instance, Mr. Clinton last year promised to send into space an astronaut from
the Ukraine, a nation split off from the Soviet Union whose nuclear arms
Washington dearly wants returned to Moscow. So too, the collapse of the Soviet
Union has sent Moscow scrambling for sources of hard currency -- so much so that
it is has promised to loft an astronaut from South Africa, a former foe.

"People from two dozen countries have gone into orbit," said James E. Oberg,
author of "Red Star in Orbit," a history of the Soviet space program, and an
expert on international space programs. "It's an accelerating trend."

Despite the pomp and patronage, the internationalization of space travel still
includes lots of serious scientific work as well as no little right stuff, given
the high probability that human lives will eventually be lost in a space
catastrophe. Next month, the shuttle Endeavour is scheduled to blast off with a
Japanese astronaut on board who is going to help retrieve an unmanned Japanese
spacecraft that for nearly a year has been testing all manner of weightless
gear.

Such work is precursor to an international space station involving United
States, Russia, Europe, Canada and Japan, the impending debut of which is
currently one of the driving forces in the internationalization of space travel.
The station's first components are to be launched into space in late 1997 and
the entire outpost is to be completed by 2002, at which time it will serve as a
permanent orbital base for six astronauts of many different countries.

A Global Glue

Many experts applaud the diversification in the ranks of space travelers on
political grounds, saying it is a new kind of glue to help hold together a
fragmenting world.

"All this is a good thing because the cosmos is big and humanity is small," said
Mr. Pike of the Federation of American Scientists. "The challenge of space
flight clearly exceeds the ability of any one nation. Extending the human
presence into space is going to require global cooperation."

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Koichi Wakata of Japan, second from left, will be part of the
space shuttle Endeavour crew for a planned January mission to retrieve a
Japanese satellite. (Agence France-Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

YANKEE COME BACK;
American Money Makes the Whole World Sing

BYLINE: By ALLEN R. MYERSON

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1253 words


ONCE again, American guns, carried by American soldiers, are heading into a
distant fray, their reception in Bosnia at best uncertain. Memories of Somalia
and, still, Vietnam, haunt every military venture overseas.

American butter, spread by American corporations investing abroad at a record
pace, has meanwhile never been so widely welcomed. Although United States
battleships and B-52's have in many places overstayed their welcome, Boeings
filled with business executives and Commerce Department aides can land almost
anywhere, even at Noi Bai Airport in Hanoi.

The new spirit has spread so thoroughly and rapidly, but with so little comment,
that it's easy to forget how recently the United States was seen as an economic
Godzilla. Nobody talks about Coca-Colonization anymore -- "Coke welcomes you to
Hanoi," say a pair of signs in the shape of giant bottles bracketing the airport
highway -- and seldom are Yankees bearing briefcases told to go home.

More Jobs at Home

As most economists agree, direct foreign investment, as distinct from portfolio
investment in stocks and bonds, generally raises demand for American goods and
services and creates jobs and wealth back home. Although some foreign spending
has shifted jobs abroad, most goes to penetrate overseas markets.

In the first nine months of this year, American direct investment abroad was
running at a record $74 billion annual rate, more than double the 1992 pace. By
now, the world's thirst for American investment is taken for granted, so much so
that exceptions seem downright quaint.

When noisy Indian nationalists recently halted construction of a $3 billion
American power plant and health inspectors shut New Delhi's first Kentucky Fried
Chicken, nobody in other countries applauded. Even many Indians snickered. "The
Tale of Two Flies," they called the Kentucky Fried Chicken case, noting that by
local standards, a restaurant with so few deserved to be celebrated, not
punished.

The rest of the world is competing for American capital, to finance factories,
public works, telecommunications, technology transfers and jobs. This nation's
capitalists are eager to oblige, and not just in countries recuperating from
Communism or rambunctious self-reliance.

American products and culture are the rage everywhere. In Japan, consumers
allied themselves with the United States Government in pressing officials to
open markets. More and more Japanese are learning to eat at McDonald's, shop at
Toys 'R' Us and strike sullen, slouching poses in clothing from the first two
Gaps, which opened in September.

Western Europe -- which American executives, policymakers and journalists were
calling Fortress Europe just a few years ago -- has absorbed by far the most
American capital and the greatest absolute increases. Even the largest funeral
home chains in France and England have been bought by a Houston-based company
determined to sell Europeans the flashy, overengineered coffins that Americans
crave. Mon Dieu!

And to think of all the trouble the world's revolutionaries and intellectuals
took to paint foreign investment in general, American in particular, as
colonialism in another ravenous form. Back when banana republics weren't just
outfitters for expeditions to shopping mall food courts, they often handed over
their natural resources on foreigners' terms. Lenin's description of foreign
investment as economic imperialism captured and colored the outlooks of many
emerging nations.

Europeans, guided by the likes of Charles de Gaulle, resisted American
investment on cultural and political as well as economic grounds. "The Common
Market has become a new Far West for American businessmen," the French
journalist Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber wrote in "The American Challenge,"
published in 1968. "Their investments do not so much involve a transfer of
capital as an actual seizure of power."

French and British universities provided a link to leaders and intellectuals in
the developing world, steeping them in socialism and anti-Americanism while
American universities provided technical skills.

In the 1980's, however, foreign investment was flowing so strongly into the
United States that many Americans themselves went nationalist. First they feared
the flood of Arab petrodollars. Then they were vexed by Japan's superyen, which
bought up the Pebble Beach golf course, Hollywood studios and even Rockefeller
Center. Americans demanded barriers, even though the prices were so crazed that
the slogan among many deal makers became, "I have met the greater fool, and he
speaks Japanese."

Japan's Retreat

The Japanese are still taking their losses, the Europeans just starting to make
many of their American acquisitions profitable. And the United States has
supplanted a retreating Japan as the major font of foreign investment. No other
country has capitalized so well on the political and philosophical turns of the
late 1980's.

In China, Bill Gates can do what Warren Christopher often can't, which is to
receive a warm smile and hearty clasp from President Jiang Zemin (followed by a
decree making Windows the nation's software standard). In Vietnam, where the
United States lifted an embargo on trade and investment last year, Coca-Cola is
already opening its first bottling plant, Mobil is exploring for oil,
Caterpillar is leasing equipment and Otis Elevator is busy with installations in
new buildings.

But the failure of socialism and the ebbing of fears dating to the colonial era
only go part way toward explaining America's new popularity. Many countries are
adopting American corporations (calling them multinational has become redundant)
as their industrial models.  Asian executives go for business training at
Stanford, Latin Americans favor the Ivy League and M.I.T., and British and
French universities teach American management skills.

Norbert Walter, chief economist at Deutsche Bank, recently wrote in Die Welt,
Germany's leading newspaper, that English should become Europe's second
language. Some diplomats protested, he said, but scientists and business people
have already made English their universal tongue. These include even the French,
he added, "which was impossible to imagine 10 or 15 years ago." Mr. Walter is
also on the board of The English Theater in Frankfurt, which recently presented
the shamelessly American "Tony 'n' Tina's Wedding."

Not that the surge in investment always benefits both sides of the deal.
American companies sell drugs abroad that fail safety tests here, foul the
environment and deal with apparel contractors who use child labor.

Among American workers, tens, probably hundreds of thousands have watched their
automobile, apparel and electronics jobs moved to Latin America and Asia.
Companies are even farming out software writing to India.

Still Targets

Instead of raising the alarm about foreigners investing in the United States,
politicians now search for scapegoats among countries where America itself is
spending -- a hunt certain to gather urgency once the next recession hits.

In some places, Americans still make inviting targets. Not even the latest
innovations in combining shampoo and creme rinse have shaken Muslim
fundamentalists from defining the righteous state as one clean of American
influence. But even Cuba's Fidel Castro, on his recent trip to New York, shucked
his combat fatigues for the let's-make-a-deal look. To meet with people named
Rockefeller and Tisch, he wore a business suit.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Vietnamese, among others, are happy to have former
imperialists' investment, which is visible on the road to the Ho Chi Minh City
airport. (Jeffrey Aaronson/Network Aspen)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TAMING THE BULLIES OF BOSNIA

BYLINE: By Roger Cohen;   Roger Cohen covered the Balkan wars for The Times for
the past two years. His most recent article for the Magazine was about the
Zecevic family of Sarajevo.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 58;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7763 words


THE HELICOPTER LANDS near the summit of Mount Igman, just outside Sarajevo. It's
a cool morning with low clouds, the rain has just stopped and the city,
encircled by the Serbs as it has been for more than three years, lies
spread-eagled beneath the Americans. It is Aug. 19, and Richard Holbrooke is on
the first of his Balkan shuttles, which will lead, some months hence, to Dayton,
Ohio, and an agreement that will end -- temporarily, at least -- the brutal war
in Bosnia. This day he leads a team that includes Robert C. Frasure of the State
Department, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense Joseph Kruzel, Col. S. Nelson
Drew of the National Security Council and Lieut. Gen. Wesley K. Clark of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff.

These senior officials find themselves atop a waterlogged Bosnian mountain about
to descend a twisting dirt track into the besieged capital because, the previous
day, Holbrooke failed to obtain security guarantees from the Serbs for a flight
into Sarajevo. He had demanded the guarantees from Slobodan Milosevic, the
Serbian President, saying it was "demeaning and dangerous" for his team to take
the Igman road.

Milosevic spoke with Gen. Ratko Mladic, the Commander of the Bosnian Serbs and
the orchestrator of the long Sarajevo siege. No deal. "Well, Mr. President, can
you give us your assurances?" Holbrooke asked Milosevic. Not without Mladic. The
usual Serbian run-around.

It had been this way for more than three months. Milosevic blaming Mladic or
Radovan Karadzic, the political leader of the Bosnian Serbs. Karadzic blaming
rogue paramilitary forces beyond his control or the inventions of Muslim
propaganda. Americans and Europeans gazing into this hall of mirrors, trying to
make sense of it, blaming each other for failing to do so.

Meanwhile the facts were plain. This August day of 1995, with the shells still
falling on Sarajevo, roads other than the Igman track are unusable, and the
Serbs have just completed the eviction and mass execution of Muslims from the
United Nations "safe area" of Srebrenica. The Srebrenica operation is a rerun of
what happened on a much wider scale in 1992, the first year of the war, when
about three-quarters of a million Muslims were chased at gunpoint from their
homes and herded into camps.

The presence of Holbrooke's team on a remote Bosnian mountain is thus the
expression of a terrible failure -- that of the Clinton Administration, NATO and
the United Nations to end the siege of Sarajevo or do anything but bow to the
whim of the Serbs. This impotence exasperated Frasure, a seasoned State
Department official who, on returning from an inter-agency meeting on Bosnia,
remarked, "Boy, that was like a little-league locker-room rally."

Bosnian diplomacy, Frasure explained to his State Department colleague and
friend Christopher Hill, was like white-water rafting: "You've got to decide
which waterfall you're going to go off." Instead, the Administration kept trying
to straddle the chutes. The result was a series of debacles, like the May
bombing of the Serbs, aborted as soon as 400 United Nations hostages were
seized. Frasure believed that perhaps the only way to end the Bosnian impasse
was to bomb the bridges over the Drina River, which link Serbia with Serb-held
Bosnia.

Holbrooke says now that he agreed with Frasure. But during the year he had spent
in Washington as Assistant Secretary of State for Europe -- after returning in
summer 1994 from his first Clinton Administration post as Ambassador to Germany
-- he had failed to make a difference on Bosnia. Increasingly frustrated by the
Washington bureaucracy, he had dispatched Frasure to the area and adopted a
despairing mantra: Bosnia was "the greatest collective failure of the West since
the 1930's." When the Serbs seized the United Nations hostages on May 29, 1995,
the day Holbrooke wed the author Kati Marton in Budapest, the Assistant
Secretary's exasperation finally exploded: "Give the Serbs 48 hours, and if they
don't release the hostages, bomb them to hell." But, Holbrooke concedes,
"everyone back in Washington thought I was joking."

Washington tended to see Holbrooke that way, or worse. His year there had been
an unhappy one. "He was a very frustrated functionary in an enormous
bureaucracy, being driven increasingly crazy by the generic underminers, the
envious, ferretlike Washington subspecies," his wife says.

He had been brought back to head the regional bureau for Europe because 1993 had
been a disastrous year for the Clinton Administration in Europe. "We needed a
much higher profile on Europe and Bosnia," says Thomas Donilon, chief of staff
to Secretary of State Warren Christopher. "We had not realized that in the
post-cold-war era we had to consolidate the base, not take it for granted. That
base was NATO. We didn't give it enough attention."

For Donilon, higher profile meant "Hurricane Holbrooke." But Anthony Lake, the
national security adviser whose now-uneasy relationship with Holbrooke goes back
more than 30 years, had doubts. Officials say Lake had come to view the man who
was once his closest friend as a "high maintenance" personality, gifted but
disruptive. Lake says his question was merely whether Holbrooke would find
satisfaction in being an assistant secretary -- a rank he held almost two
decades before.

There was a line on Holbrooke in Washington. Domineering. Imagines he's a
seventh-floor official when he's only sixth floor. Too undisciplined to follow
instructions. There was anger at his high-handedness, unease at his bald
ambition. Such was the wariness that, at the National Security Council, thought
was given to using Charles E. Redman, the former Balkan envoy, who replaced
Holbrooke as Ambassador to Germany, to promote the peace plan that would be put
forward in August. By then, Holbrooke, feeling underused and boxed in, was
spreading the word that he was ready to quit and return to Wall Street. But
Donilon and others prevailed upon him to stay, and Christopher convinced a
skeptical N.S.C. that Holbrooke could be entrusted with so delicate a mission.

So at last in August, Holbrooke puts himself on the front line. He is a brave
man. Unlike other Administration officials, he has been around the conflict. He
took a careening car ride into Sarajevo in December 1992 and spent New Year's
Eve there. Just for the hell of it. "I went because I didn't have a date," he
says, laughing. He is also a man driven to be a central protagonist in the
shaping of the American empire. In Vietnam in the 1960's, in the Philippines of
Ferdinand Marcos in the 1970's, on Wall Street in the heady 1980's and most
decisively in the Balkan wars, he has been involved in the exercise and
projection of American power. Now, on Mount Igman, he is trying to settle
Europe's worst conflict since World War II.


A Transforming Moment

GENERAL CLARK PUTS HOLbrooke beside him in a Humvee because "I knew that way
Dick would be able to see more and he's always very curious." The others get
inside a French armored personnel carrier, more secure against Serbian gunfire
but bulkier. The delegation starts down the track, the Humvee leading the way.
Then a French truck coming up the mountain blocks the vehicle. The truck driver
jumps out and tells Clark an armored personnel carrier has gone over the edge.

Holbrooke and Clark dash back up the hill about 100 yards and look down. "It
seemed like a giant lawn mower had gone down the mountain, scything the trees,"
Clark says. "We heard an explosion." The two men run back down the road, which
is exposed to Serbian fire, around a hairpin. Holbrooke, fearing an ambush,
orders his Humvee turned around. He has not heard the intermittent crack of
small-arms fire since Vietnam.

Lieut. Col. Daniel Gerstein was inside the ill-fated armored personnel carrier.
"On the first roll, I thought it would be one roll and stop," he says. "We went
over so slowly. Kruzel landed on top of me and said, 'What's going on?' Then I
realized it was rolling. We were airborne. At one point, I felt four revolutions
without touching the ground. I felt the bones around my eyes break. I tried to
go with the roll, not against it. There was an awful cracking and groaning. A
terrible noise."

Clark, scrambling over fallen trees and branches, reaches the vehicle at last.
It is on its side, the wheels are burning. Gerstein, a mortally injured Kruzel
and a security officer named Peter Hargraves have managed to get out. French
soldiers are gesticulating, warning Clark not to go near the vehicle because it
will explode.

He radios Holbrooke on the road above, asking for a fire extinguisher. Then the
General takes a log and pries open the hatch. He peers into the fire, caused by
oil and fuel on hot pipes as the vehicle rotated and by exploding anti-tank
rounds. The scene reminds him of a gas boiler in a power plant: a round metallic
interior and roaring flames. Frasure and Drew are utterly gone. Kruzel dies
later on the way to a field hospital.

Holbrooke says that when he heard of Frasure's death: "It just hit me. I yelled,
'No, no, not possible.' " But he remained calm. Strobe Talbott, the Deputy
Secretary of State, took one of the first conference calls from Holbrooke, with
President Clinton also on the line. "We were all listening very carefully for
any hint whatsoever of something that would have been totally understandable,"
Talbott recalls. "But he was in control, shattered but totally in control. I
remember him saying to the President, 'Mr. President, we must suspend the
mission long enough to bring our fallen comrades home.' Dick was making the
right judgments."

At an early age, on his return from a three-year stint as a foreign service
officer in Vietnam, working for Robert Komer in the Johnson White House and then
for the Deputy Secretary of State, Nicholas deB. Katzenbach, Holbrooke watched
the best and the brightest falling apart under the pressures of Vietnam and
America's deepening fracture. "The pressure was excruciating -- I saw people
fall back on Scotch before lunch," he recalls. The experience is clearly a point
of reference; his commitment on Mount Igman to comrades fallen on the field of
battle is an echo of Vietnam and the dignity hard won there.

Something shifted, in Holbrooke -- who had been inclined to throw up his hands
on Bosnia -- and in America. A war long clouded by complexity was now reduced to
physical fact in the weight of the coffins against Holbrooke's and Clark's knees
on the chopper rising above the ruins of Sarajevo. Moreover, the obfuscation and
the loss of the three men were linked. It was repeated weakness, prolonged
preoccupation with avoiding failure and pusillanimous policy that put these
senior officials on a road they should never have been on.

"What has impelled Holbrooke in part has been the memory of Frasure," says Ron
Nitesky, the former deputy chief of mission in Zagreb. "He knows Frasure was
much too good a man to die putting the best possible twist on a bad policy."
Marton saw a man "suddenly driven and propelled by a larger force. He felt
terrible over the deaths, and at some level responsible, and the only way to
redeem this was for these people in the Balkans to come to terms and end the
war."


 Peace, Justice and the Pursuit of Glory

IN MAY 1968, HOLBROOKE WAS trying to end another war. He came to Paris as a
young member of the delegation led by W. Averell Harriman to embark on the first
negotiations with the Vietcong. But where he was then trying to help extract an
increasingly lacerated America from its most disastrous cold war failure, he now
finds himself in a vastly different role. At 54, he has become a principal
architect of the nation's most ambitious, and chancy, overseas military
engagement since the Vietnam War.

The dispatch of 20,000 American troops as part of a NATO force to police the
tenuous Bosnian peace is a mission that may well decide the fate of the Clinton
Administration. At a time when isolationist temptations are strong, it is also
likely to define the scope of America's global ambitions in the post-cold-war
era. Holbrooke, who is more at home with the American military than many in the
Clinton Administration, seems comfortable with the odds. He rejects what he
calls the "Vietmalia syndrome" -- the compounded fears born of Vietnam and the
aborted peacekeeping mission in Somalia.

"I've had my disagreements with the Joint Chiefs," he says. "I think they have
had the wrong fear. At the beginning, on Bosnia, from what I've heard, the
Administration could not take on the Chiefs because of the President's Vietnam
record and the gays-in-the-military question. But the fact is, the thing the
Pentagon should be seeking is success, not avoiding failure."

What constitutes success to Holbrooke, a man who now looks well placed to become
Secretary of State if Clinton is re-elected? Is he moved by the notion of
asserting American values around the globe, values that attracted his Jewish
parents to the United States from Nazi Europe? Or is the thing that excites him
the flexing of American muscle to advance the nation's strategic and commercial
interests?

Or, as his many detractors say, do notions of public service, the kicks of
Realpolitik and promoting democracy enter into it only marginally, if at all,
because everything is essentially grist for the mill of Holbrooke's consuming
quest for greater glory? And if hubris and Holbrooke are indeed inseparable, as
many contend, then isn't the Bosnia accord itself flawed, and treacherously so?

"It's nothing but self there, all self," says Patricia Derian, who clashed
repeatedly with Holbrooke when she was Assistant Secretary of State for Human
Rights during the Carter Administration. "He sets his mind on getting something
and then just has a fit if he doesn't get his way. His arms flail, he yells, he
shouts, he leans forward. As you go along, having one sort of encounter after
another with that personality, you see that the main motor is how he is going to
appear and be seen. The rest is marginal and infinitely malleable."

Lake, who served in Vietnam with Holbrooke, sees a rather different person.
Their close friendship has eroded over the years, but a bond of sorts remains.
When they met in London on Aug. 14, as Holbrooke was about to set out on the
feverish four-month Balkan shuttle, Lake says he allowed himself "a moment of
sentimentality."

The sentiment was about dreams. The dreams, he says, were those the two men
shared when they went together to Vietnam in 1963 -- youthful visions of
settling conflicts, changing things, even making the world a better place.
Ideals of action and public service. The allusion, obviously, would have had
scant resonance with a pure narcissist, a man unmoved by the destiny of peoples
or by old-fashioned patriotism. Lake says, "What Holbrooke wants attention for
is what he's doing, not what he is -- that's a very serious quality, and it's
his saving grace."

Holbrooke had long sought to lead a major international negotiation. An
unremitting thirst to make a historical mark characterized him from an early
age. His father had such high ambitions for him that as a bright teen-ager he
was told to aim for the Nobel Prize in Physics. When, at 16, his father died, he
gravitated toward the family of Dean Rusk, the former Secretary of State, whose
son David was his closest high-school friend in Scarsdale, N.Y.

Rusk came to embody the ideals of patriotism and public service that led
Holbrooke into the foreign service after college at Brown, and now make up one
element in his personality. Onto this was grafted an unusual appetite.

At one meal he counts the number of clams on his plate, complains that his
grilled "super-rare" tuna is smaller than his neighbor's and ends up eating
everyone else's dessert. The food is vacuumed down with impressive speed between
two prolonged sorties to chat with a colleague he has spotted at another table.
When it comes to the wine, he nonchalantly tosses ice cubes into a very
respectable chardonnay and downs a glass as if it were his preferred Diet Pepsi.

His appetite goes beyond the table. It is a force of nature. It gulps down
movies, often two in an evening. It mops up books. It zaps restlessly from
channel to channel. It has propelled him through two marriages and now into a
third. It gives him, says Marton, who was previously married to the ABC anchor
Peter Jennings, "this great, wonderful physicality, this very tactile big-bear
quality."

It leads him to carry on two or even three telephone conversations at once. It
causes him to size up people in extremely short order. It endears him to
children, whose language he readily grasps. It impels him to acts of generosity.
It is, at times, transparently insatiable about publicity, driving him to such
stunningly guileless acts of attempted self-aggrandizement as suggesting to
journalists how to write their leads. It guides him through labyrinthine,
sometimes maddeningly meandering sentences interspersed with phrases like, "Just
let me finish this" or "I'm really serious" or, ominously, when he is most
entangled between the truth and the spin he wants to impart, "I just want to be
sure there's no misunderstanding." In general with Holbrooke, the more
long-winded he is, the more manipulative he is trying to be.

The appetite fills rooms and disrupts meetings. It is, in short, a devouring
zest for life that sweeps over people, embracing them in its intrusive warmth or
crushing them in its roughshod power, complicating his life and sometimes
putting his Ruskian ideal of service and self-effacement grotesquely at odds
with the baroque reality of being Richard Holbrooke.

Arriving in Zagreb in October, on the last of his five Balkan shuttles, he is
greeted by Peter Galbraith, the American Ambassador. Galbraith's taste for the
limelight has grated on Holbrooke. He was appalled when, in the glare of
television cameras, Galbraith tried to join him and General Clark in the cortege
as the coffins arrived at Split airport from Sarajevo after the Igman accident.
He nudged the Ambassador out of the way.

The tension between the two men is thinly masked. Later in the evening, after a
meal at the Ambassador's residence, which Holbrooke has enjoyed in bare feet,
talk turns to Galbraith's former job on the House Foreign Relations Committee.
Holbrooke's comment: "It's not really adult work." Then, not so gently, he rubs
it in: "Of course, somebody as aggressive and forceful as you, Peter, can
perhaps make something of it."

But the energy and the impatience with form are also constructive, imbued, as
they often are, with an intellectual audacity, a courage and sheer historical
range that seems increasingly rare in Washington. "He lives in three time zones
all the time," says his friend Leslie Gelb, the president of the Council on
Foreign Relations. "Past, present and future. They are all there in his speech
in a very conscious way because he wants to make his life consequential. He has
never wanted to leave the stage until he has done something of real
consequence."

That goal had eluded him until the Bosnian peace settlement. He had been, at age
34, head of Far Eastern Affairs and a Wunderkind of the Carter Administration.
But then his star seemed to fall. When the Republicans took office in 1980 he
went to New York, made a lot of money as a rainmaking investment banker at
Lehman Brothers, dated the television journalist Diane Sawyer and cut a figure
around town. But a big country place in Connecticut and a condo in the Rockies
were no substitute for a life of consequence. His ambitions lay in becoming a
statesman.

In Washington, however, that ambition made people wonder: could he be trusted?
And could a personality of such explosive impatience work in a bureaucracy?

Patricia Derian is among those who have concluded that Holbrooke's relation to
truth-telling is fragile, eternally vulnerable to what she calls "the
willingness to do anything to keep up the pace." She recalls Holbrooke, in his
days as Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs, returning from a visit to
the Philippines in 1977, where he was lavishly entertained by President Marcos
and his wife, Imelda, on the presidential yacht.

"It was extraordinary," she says, "Holbrooke is a real sycophant to people like
Marcos, but he started regaling me with these stories about how sickening the
party had been, how vulgar the Marcoses were, how imperious she was, how
disgusting they were. He was really so scornful I had a little pang of pity for
Marcos! But, you know, it was almost as if they were two different people, the
Holbrooke on the yacht and the man talking to me. It must be a difficult
lifetime role to play, but maybe not, maybe it's a twin, an evil twin."

The root of the differences between Derian and Holbrooke lies in a battle over
the relative place of human rights and broader American interests in the conduct
of foreign policy -- an issue that haunted Holbrooke in his extensive dealings
with Slobodan Milosevic.

She believed that the sweeping human rights abuses of the dictatorial Marcos
regime should head the Administration's Philippine agenda. Holbrooke saw other
priorities. In particular, he focused on the renewal of an agreement for two
important American military bases, Subic and Clark, in the Philippines. This
renewal, which had eluded others, was secured under his watch in 1979.

"Derian thought human rights should be our entire foreign policy," Holbrooke
says. "She's naive. She sent an unclassified message to Vance saying we should
use all our leverage to remove Marcos. I said that's not the way to conduct
policy. She simply does not understand the American national interest."

In December 1980, Derian and Holbrooke clashed again over a plan to invite the
Philippine opposition leader, Benigno Aquino, to speak at the State Department.
Aquino, who was assassinated by a Marcos agent in 1983, had been released in
1980 after a long imprisonment, an achievement, Holbrooke insists, that
illustrates his striving to balance human rights and the national interest. But
when Holbrooke heard of the invitation to Aquino, he was furious.

Lake, then the head of State's Office of Policy Planning, weighed in on
Holbrooke's side. He sent a memo to Derian arguing that Aquino's appearance at
the State Department was not in America's interest. Lake, who was angry, then
visited Derian. Holbrooke followed, "arms akimbo, just a raving, furious man,
telling me that it was bad for the country," Derian says. In the end, the Aquino
meeting was relegated to a back room.

Holbrooke now argues that he has always tried to tread a middle path between
moralism in foreign policy and a Kissingerian focus on raison d'etat, defined in
purely strategic and economic terms.

"There's been a long tension in America between a value-based Wilsonian foreign
policy and the Realpolitik of a Kissinger," he says. "The fact is, America is
one of the few countries whose inhabitants came here in pursuit of an idea, and
that ideal is part of our values at home and abroad. Often we have not lived up
to these ideas, but they are our values.

"I am not a Wilsonian. I think he was naive. I think he was a failure. Those
thick red lines he drew at Versailles around imagined ethnic boundaries made a
significant contribution to what is going on in the Balkans today. But I also
believe Realpolitik for America is self-defeating in its cynicism. We cannot
choose between the two -- we have to blend the two."

The fact is, however, that it is the mature man who seems to have found the
blend, or at least become convinced of its central importance. The evidence is
compelling that 15 years ago American military bases and the seductive
companionship of the Marcoses held sway over an impressionable Holbrooke.


 An 'Infuriating Childishness'


DAVID HOLBROOKE, WHO WORKS for the "Today" show and is the older of Holbrooke's
two sons by his first marriage, was once waiting for his father on a ski slope
in Telluride, Colo. The elder Holbrooke came down the mountain toward him, then
abruptly veered off toward a bump, "got a lot of air and came down in the
biggest heap of skis and poles and hats and gloves that you have ever seen."

Baffled, David made his way over to his splayed father. "I didn't know what the
hell he was thinking," David says. "He said, 'I saw you waiting below and I just
thought I would impress you.' "

For many years Holbrooke's many friends had the intermittent impression that his
pronounced sense of theater and his need to impress might leave him in a heap.
His manifold talents seemed matched by equally manifold flaws. Above all, his
rapid insights into others seemed unmatched by any real self-knowledge.

Holbrooke had always been torn between the desire to be a protagonist and to be
an observer. He wanted to write the story, but more than that, he wanted to be
its subject. He recalls watching his journalistic heroes -- Rick Smith, Stanley
Karnow -- standing in the rain outside the American Embassy in Paris in 1968 and
feeding them some line about the Ho Chi Minh trail being renamed "The Highway of
Aggression." They reported it. "My God," he says with his slightly crazed
giggle, "it just hit me then. That's what I wanted to do for a living -- stand
in the rain and report nonsense!"

Holbrooke's mother, whose Jewish family fled Hamburg in 1933 for Buenos Aires
before coming to New York, took him to Quaker meetings on Sundays. "I was an
atheist, his father was an atheist," says his mother, a potter now married to a
sculptor. "We never thought of giving Richard a Jewish upbringing. The Quaker
meetings seemed interesting."

Holbrooke's father, a brilliant doctor born of Russian Jewish parents in Warsaw,
died of cancer. There is a faded black-and-white photograph of the gangly
teen-ager holding his father's hand in the Scarsdale woods that seems to capture
a closeness abruptly shattered. His father changed his name to Holbrooke when he
arrived in the United States in the 1930's. Such, however, is the family's loss
of contact with its roots that his original name is unknown.

"He was my father," Holbrooke says, when asked how the abrupt death affected
him. "He was my father. What can I say? I leave the psychoanalysis to others."

His marriage to Marton, however, has led him to look more closely at his past.
She was born into a family of Hungarian Jews but raised to believe she was a
Roman Catholic. Only in researching a book did she learn that one of her
maternal grandparents had died in Auschwitz. This shared experience is clearly
important to them. She and Holbrooke are not religious, but there appears to be
some nascent sense of Jewish identity, or at least sensibility, that binds them.
They visited Budapest's main synagogue together. She talks of "just melting into
each other as we watched 'Schindler's List.' "

Fritz Stern, a professor of history at Columbia University, is an old friend of
Holbrooke's. "I think you have to see there was a deliberate mystification of
the child," he says. "He grew up believing one thing -- he was another. And now,
at times he has this endearing and infuriating childishness. It's interesting."

His mother, Trudy Kearl, says: "I never imagined that Dick might think about his
roots. Oh, my God, I never thought of that. I do not believe in the roots
business. But perhaps, he is on a sentimental journey. And why not?"

Holbrooke notes that his maternal grandfather, Samuel Moos, a German Jew, fought
for the Germans during World War I. When, in 1993, Holbrooke became Ambassador
to Germany after failing to get the job he wanted as Deputy Secretary of State,
he placed a photograph in his Bonn office of his grandfather wearing the
Prussian spiked helmet and an Iron Cross.

"People would ask me, why that picture?" Holbrooke says, his blue eyes twinkling
with apparent amusement behind his Calvin Klein glasses. "I would say, it is
simply a historical truth. My grandfather fought for the Kaiser against the
Western Allies and later fled Germany. It is an event so complex you could weave
a novel around it. If I was a novelist, which I would have loved to be, I would
make that photograph a centerpiece. I used to tell the Germans, 'If it had not
been for your history, perhaps I would be Germany's Ambassador to the United
States today.' "

But Holbrooke is not the German envoy to Washington or a novelist. He is a Jew
intrigued by the incongruity of his grandfather's wearing the military uniform
of the state that would herd Jews into gas chambers. He says he knew exactly who
he was. "I never made any bones about it. I knew what my background was. Those
who thought I was not Jewish enough were having their own problems."

There were such people. Perhaps the issue was not really Holbrooke's Jewishness.
It was his apparent willingness, at times, to bend the truth to suit his
purposes and rush forward headlong with an unexamined life.  Thus, the
now-notorious 50th birthday party at the "21" Club in Manhattan, where the names
Holbrooke constantly dropped all showed up to roast him. "The story that
Holbrooke is only half Jewish," Gelb said at the party, "is only half true."
Such gibes were all well meant. They also cut close to the bone.


 An Eye on Milosevic, and History


SLOBODAN MILOSEVIC, WHOSE VIRulent nationalism unleashed the wars of
Yugoslavia's destruction, is a very seductive man. Warren Zimmerman, the last
American Ambassador to Yugoslavia, maintains that he deceives everyone once. He
is a deal maker, like Holbrooke, quick, sometimes funny and extremely
hospitable. He does not have Marcos's yacht, but he does have a couple of
hunting lodges where he likes to entertain visiting dignitaries. Frasure, who
spent many hours with the Serbian President, was plied with so much food that he
once cabled Washington with the message, "The lambs of Serbia will be delighted
that I'm leaving!"

When Holbrooke and Milosevic first met in mid-August, a rapport was quickly
established. Frasure, just a couple of days before his death, described the
relationship to the chief European envoy, Carl Bildt: "The two egos danced all
night."

Holbrooke, perhaps more than anyone in the Administration, knew exactly with
whom he was dealing. He had been in Banja Luka in August 1992, where he
witnessed "an insane asylum, with all these half-drunk Serb paramilitaries and
middle-aged men going and raping and killing young Muslim women." Later he was
given a wooden carving from a Muslim survivor of a Serbian concentration camp.
The pose, head bowed in abject humiliation, captures the Serbian terror of the
war's first months, carried out largely by paramilitary forces equipped and
financed by Milosevic. Holbrooke wrote about it for this Magazine and put the
sculpture in his Washington office.

Asked if he thought of the carving when dealing with Milosevic, Holbrooke
becomes defensive; when he's defensive, he does not answer questions. "The
sculpture's sitting there. I point it out to people," he says. When the question
is pursued, he says: "No, it's not that linear. I don't sit there looking at one
of those guys and thinking of this piece of wood. You wouldn't, either. But I
understand the connection. I'm sure we all do."

Holbrooke does care. There can be little doubt about it. He saw what happened to
Bosnia's Muslims. But it was also clear to him that Milosevic was the key to
closing down the war because he was the person who wanted most badly for it to
end, so that trade sanctions against Serbia would be lifted.

This realization became overwhelming on Aug. 29 in Belgrade. NATO had embarked
on its first serious bombing of the Serbs, following an Aug. 28 mortar attack on
the Sarajevo market. Holbrooke had hesitated about going to Serbia in these
circumstances, but he says he recalled Nixon's bombing of Hanoi on the eve of
the SALT II signing in 1972. Leonid Brezhnev, the Soviet President, signed
anyway.

Milosevic does not even mention the bombing. He produces a piece of paper that
becomes known as the "Patriarch document" because it is endorsed by the Serbian
Orthodox Patriarch. In it, Karadzic and Mladic cede authority to Milosevic to
negotiate on their behalf. The Serbian hall of mirrors -- the same one that put
Holbrooke's team on Mount Igman just 11 days earlier -- had finally been
shattered. A serious negotiation had become possible.

Referring to Frasure, who has just been buried in Washington, Holbrooke turns to
Christopher Hill, his State Department colleague, and says, "Boy, I wish Bob
were here with us now to see this."

The relationship with Milosevic develops. It is, says Roberts Owen, the lawyer
on Holbrooke's team, "uniformly good, candid, direct and easygoing." Milosevic,
says Bildt, is so obsessed with America, "he even loves American coffee." The
Serbian President astounds the American delegation repeatedly by saying, "I want
to smell New York again, the wonderful smells!"

Milosevic has the bluntness of the city that he so admires: details in the talks
are "mere technology." American obscenities litter his conversation and are
uttered, Owen recalls, "with a lovely distinctive roll to them." The gulf
between the sides, Milosevic explains, "is wider than those that Evel Knievel
used to jump."

Holbrooke clearly enjoys all this. The two men go on long walks in the woods.
They laugh a lot. Holbrooke, almost certainly, has half an eye on history: here
he is again in the heart of the action. The old inebriation, as in Manila.

But the more mature man also has a much surer eye on the target and seizes on
the leverage provided by Milosevic's evident obsession with American culture: if
he wants readmission to the West, the Serbian leader has to change his ways.

Discussions on human rights, and on the continuing atrocities of Serbian
paramilitary leaders, become increasingly frequent. Holbrooke pushes for the
removal of Karadzic and Mladic. He insists that the killing of civilians has to
stop. It is a condition for peace and sanctions relief, he tells Milosevic.

When, just six days after Milosevic presents the "Patriarch document," the
question arises of whether NATO bombing of the Bosnian Serbs should resume after
a three-day pause, Holbrooke does not hesitate: "History would never forgive us
if we stop now."

His judgment proves sound, as it has throughout the past months. The bombing, as
Frasure long predicted, balances the situation on the ground for the first time
and so makes peace a possibility.


Closing on His Prey


POWER WAS THE KEY. THE Balkans are a snake pit, and good intentions are worse
than useless. Holbrooke understood this. He was ready and willing to be the
biggest snake of all. It is doubtful that anyone else in the Administration
could have bullied the parties to a close. Holbrooke knows about closing. When
he sniffs it, he is like a wolf closing on his prey. The peace, in a real sense,
is his.

He began by giving what amounted to a green light to the Croatian attack on
Serb-occupied Krajina in late July. Others in the Administration were hesitant.
"He took a risk on that," says one senior official. "He acted independently, but
whatever hunch he had proved right." For the first time in the war, the Serbs
suffered a humiliating defeat. Moreover, it became clear that Milosevic was no
longer ready to help the Serbs outside Serbia. At the price of creating about
200,000 Serb refugees, a road to peace was opened.

Holbrooke's last note from Frasure was written on Aug. 18, at a lunch with
Franjo Tudjman, the Croatian President, in Zagreb. There was pressure in
Washington to stop the Croats from moving forward against the Serbs in
southwestern Bosnia. The note, slipped to Holbrooke at the table, reads: "This
is no time to get squeamish. This is the first time the Serb wave has been
reversed. That is essential for us to get stability. So we can negotiate and get
out."

After Frasure's death, Holbrooke remembered the message. He vigorously supported
the NATO bombing of the Serbs in late August and September. In its shadow, the
Croats and the Muslim-led Bosnian Army advanced. Serb-controlled land in Bosnia
was reduced from 70 percent to 49 percent, the share envisaged in an
international peace plan.

When, at a meeting outside Belgrade on Sept. 14, General Mladic, who had
compared NATO to Hitler, went into a customary tirade, Holbrooke cut him short.
"Look," he shouted, "either we can negotiate an agreement on the removal of your
guns around Sarajevo or we can all go home. There's nothing more to say." Mladic
was silenced. He negotiated.

"There is no question in my mind," Owen says, "that we bombed the Serbs to the
bargaining table." It took 42 months.

Holbrooke was equally tough with Bosnia's President, Alija Izetbegovic, and his
chronically divided Government. When Izetbegovic hesitated over a Bosnian
cease-fire in mid-September, Holbrooke warned him that NATO would not be his air
force. He invented intelligence estimates suggesting that the Serbs would
counterattack. When Izetbegovic's hand trembled hesitantly over the cease-fire
accord on Oct. 5, Holbrooke said, "Here, I'll sign it." He did so, with a
theatrical flourish, and the Bosnian President reluctantly followed suit.

Most critically, on Sept. 19 in Zagreb, he bullied Izetbegovic and Tudjman into
abandoning an offensive that was closing in on Banja Luka, the main Serb-held
town in Bosnia. "The light was red, red, red," Holbrooke says. Although he knew
what the Serbs had done in Banja Luka, where Muslims were made to wear white arm
bands like the yellow star with which the Jews were branded in Nazi Germany, he
claims never to have had a moral qualm about this decision. There might have
been another quarter of a million Serb refugees pouring into Serbia; Milosevic
may have fallen, or he may have intervened.

Either way, it is clear that the "peace process" would have been derailed. For
the Administration this would have been a disaster. The morality of not
attacking Banja Luka seems much less clear. Holbrooke's pressure amounted to an
act of consummate Realpolitik, of a man weighing America's overriding interest
in Balkan stability. That stability, he effectively argued, lay more in a de
facto division of Bosnia between a Serb republic and a Muslim-Croat federation,
with a weak central government over them, than in the pursuit of an
unpredictable offensive.

Throughout the exhausting shuttling he maintained a remarkable morale among his
team. Part of this stemmed from the shared determination that Frasure, Drew and
Kruzel should not have died in vain. But Holbrooke's informality and humor were
also important.

Boarding a plane in Zagreb on one of the shuttles, Rosemarie Pauli-Gikas,
Holbrooke's personal assistant, hands him a blond Barbie doll. "Here," she says,
"you've been away from home for a long time." Removing a shoe with one hand,
eating a bunch of grapes with another, Holbrooke replies, "No thanks, I've given
up on blondes." The banter is almost constant.

When, on Sept. 23, Hill and Owen were heading home from an exhausting
negotiation in Belgrade and landed at Shannon airport to refuel, they got a call
from the pilots, who said the plane was being held "by order of the Secretary of
State and the Secretary of Defense."

Hill turned to Owen and said: "That can only be one person -- Dick Holbrooke.
Nobody else would avail himself of both those titles."

A hitch had emerged and Holbrooke, in New York, ordered the two men back to
Sarajevo. When they reached Ancona, Italy, at 6 in the morning, en route to the
Bosnian capital, a dog-tired Hill called his boss. "Look," Holbrooke said,
"we're all being inconvenienced by this. I'm up late and you're in Ancona."

"Yeah," Hill shot back. "You're up late and I'm in Ancona."

The demands from Holbrooke were outrageous. But his team clearly believed in
him. Indeed, they understood: without his outrageousness, without his swagger,
America could not have imposed its peace.


At Dayton, Threats and Theatrics


HOLBROOKE BROUGHT THE three widows and six fatherless children of his fallen
colleagues to Dayton, where the final tumultuous lap of the marathon negotiation
was held. The women, particularly Mrs. Drew, cried a lot. Frasure's younger
daughter was silent. Meetings with the Balkan leaders were sometimes awkward.
Haris Silajdzic, the Bosnian Prime Minister, said that he was overwhelmed.
Marton replied, "If you promise them peace, that would be the best memorial."

To the last, Holbrooke pushed and cajoled, shouted and maneuvered. The French,
kept on the margins because Holbrooke knew the Balkan leaders wanted to
negotiate through the Americans, came away denouncing him as a "schizophrenic,
brutal Mazarin," referring to the French statesman who, along with Richelieu,
was the father of raison d'etat.

When Milosevic objected to one plan for Sarajevo, Holbrooke took the piece of
paper, tore it up in front of the Serbian President's eyes and said, "Tell us
what you want." When Milosevic insisted on plying him with brandy in midmorning,
Holbrooke drank. When somebody then objected that Milosevic had got Holbrooke
"drunk on plum brandy," Holbrooke obediently laughed when Milosevic replied:
"No, I did not get him drunk on plum brandy. I got him drunk on pear brandy."

Confronted by an unyielding Izetbegovic, Holbrooke took Silajdzic for caviar at
L'Auberge, the best restaurant in Dayton, and talked to the younger man about
the economic opportunities for a Bosnia at peace. He let the Bosnians know that
this was America's last big push for a settlement: it would not be repeated and
the Bosnians would be largely on their own.

A lifetime's experience of negotiation obviously helped Holbrooke. He studied
physics at Brown and insists that you have to start with facts. The strategy of
isolating the wavering Bosnian Government by first settling the last differences
between Serbs and Croats was lucid. But Robert S. McNamara, the former Secretary
of Defense, cured Holbrooke of coolly dissecting problems. Watching McNamara's
"ruthlessness in suppressing the emotional, the irrational or the dynamic"
convinced Holbrooke that such an approach can lead to tragic error. People are
what count, not numbers.

Indeed, his rapport with Milosevic paid off. The Serbian President gave away
Sarajevo and provided a land corridor to the eastern enclave of Gorazde. But at
the last, when he realized that Holbrooke was giving the Serbs 45 percent of
Bosnia instead of the promised 49 percent, Milosevic pointed an accusing finger
and said with cold rage, "I trusted you and you tried to cheat me."

A desperate scramble ensued over the last two days of the three-week conference
to find more land for the Serbs. With a prod from Clinton, the Croats eventually
obliged. But still the Bosnians hesitated, confronted at last with the cold fact
that the suggested peace meant dividing the country with no certainty that it
would ever be reunited in anything but name. Holbrooke's frustration built to
the breaking point. On the last night he screamed at Silajdzic, "You're going to
throw this all away for a couple of mountain ridges."

In the end, however, American power, in the person of Holbrooke, and American
persistence, in the person of Warren Christopher, carried the day. A fragile
peace was reached. For all its imperfections, it is a settlement that the
majority of people in Bosnia will welcome. American troops will go to Bosnia.
"What will happen then," Holbrooke says with disarming frankness, "we do not
know."

It is a far from uplifting peace, one that presents half of Bosnia to the Serb
leadership that created the "insane asylum" that Holbrooke witnessed in Banja
Luka in 1992. Almost 21 percent of the country is in Croat hands. Aggression has
worked. Nevertheless, Holbrooke insists that it is not partition and that it is
the best that could be secured. "The world community," he says, "was never ready
to use all-out military force to destroy the Bosnian Serbs, although many,
myself included, thought that appropriate. So then you have to negotiate. What
was done in the end was done with the acquiescence of the Sarajevo government."

Holbrooke says he believes that with real American leadership NATO might be able
to leave Bosnia in about a year as "a single country under a democratically
elected leadership in which Serbs and the federation are ready to live
together." But one year seems an absurdly short time to heal a country so
devastated. The alternative, he concedes, is as possible as it is bleak: "A
country that divides despite our best efforts -- partition and Serbian
anschluss."

Testifying at a Senate Armed Services Committee meeting on Dec. 6, Holbrooke
scrawled a note to William Perry, the Secretary of Defense. "If we succeed in
Bosnia," he wrote, with the "if" underlined, "history may well record that the
month of November-December 1995 was a seminal period in the forging of a new
American post-cold-war policy in Europe (Dayton, Russia, France, NATO)."

He was referring to a number of concurrent developments: America's rediscovered
leadership over Bosnia; the agreement to work with Russian forces there;
France's return to the military wing of NATO and its acceptance of America's
central role in European security, and NATO's new mission as crisis manager and
peacekeeper in a turbulent Europe. These are indeed big shifts, the kind
Holbrooke, with his steady eye on the history books, has always wanted to shape.

Ever since Paris in 1968 he had wanted to test himself in the toughest of
negotiations. "This is what I always wanted to do," Holbrooke says. "And thank
God, it has worked out so far. I do feel different."

Holbrooke, in other words, has found consequence, in his work, and apparently
also in his marriage. He says he will quit before the summer and return to New
York to "do some writing" and spend more time with the extended family he is
building with Marton, his two children and her two teen-agers. Beyond that he
declines to speculate. His wife says he feels vindicated at last against those
who tried to push him aside. Talbott says simply that he is "in pig heaven."

As for Lake, the eternal professional rival, he says he would have felt envious
of Holbrooke if this had happened two decades ago. And now? "If Holbrooke wins
the Nobel Prize," the national security adviser says with his impish smile,
"I'll write his acceptance speech."

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Taking center stage in Ohio to broker a Bosnian peace.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY NIGEL PARRY/C.P.I./KATZ, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg. 59);
Holbrooke set out to prove he was the biggest snake in the Balkan snake pit.
(TOM HALEY/SIPA PRESS) (pg. 60); Holbrooke's theatrics in Ohio included drinking
pear brandy with Milosevic in midmorning. (RALF-FINN HESTOFT/SABA.) (pg. 61);
Ever since the Paris peace talks Holbrooke has been determined to make his mark
on history. (JACQUES PAVLOVSKY/SYGMA) (pg. 62); Holbrooke (with Chiang
Ching-kuo, the President of Taiwan, in 1977) went from political Wunderkind to
Wall Street rainmaker. (ASSOCIATED PRESS.) (pg. 63)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Professor Stone Resumes His Presidential Research

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section 2;   Page 11;   Column 1;   Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2064 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


IN THE FINAL, FRENZIED days before he completed the editing for his sprawling
new film, "Nixon," Oliver Stone seemed oddly calm. He sat slumped in an office
at an editing studio near Santa Monica, exhausted and, yes, frightened. Mr.
Stone, 49, remains scarred by the criticism of historians and journalists that
he twisted facts in his 1991 film "J.F.K." when he dived into the murky waters
of American history and created a Government conspiracy in the assassination of
John F. Kennedy.

Now comes "Nixon," starring Anthony Hopkins, about the life of the nation's 37th
President until his resignation in 1974, two years after the Watergate break-in.

"I don't know what to expect," the director said slowly. "But I think some Nixon
haters will surely say, 'He goes too easy on him.' "

In sweeping fashion, at three hours plus, the film provides what Mr. Stone is
careful to call a "dramatic interpretation" of everything from Nixon's
emotionally and financially distressed early life in Southern California --
including the deaths from tuberculosis of two of his four brothers -- to his
participation in many of the major events of the second half of the 20th
century: the cold war, the rise and fall of Joseph McCarthy, the Presidency of
Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Vietnam War and the fateful break-in at the Democratic
National Committee offices in Washington.

In addition to Mr. Hopkins, the cast of the film -- which weaves realistic
scenes of public and private life with almost surrealistic visual devices --
includes Joan Allen as Pat Nixon, James Woods as H. R. Haldeman, J. T. Walsh as
John Erlichman, Paul Sorvino as Henry A. Kissinger and David Hyde Pierce as John
Dean.

"Nixon's a giant of a figure in the classical tradition," Mr. Stone said. "A
poor boy, humble origins, who rises to the top and crashes down in a heap of
hubris." He paused. "Let's face it, he's a great dramatic character, a
fascinating blend of idealism and sleaziness."

The film maker said that his own view of Nixon had shifted greatly over the
years. As a teen-ager in New York City, he was a fervent Nixon supporter,
largely because of the influence of his father, Louis, a Wall Street broker and
a Republican. As an infantryman in Vietnam, he said, he continued to believe in
Nixon, largely because of Nixon's vow to end the war. But by 1972, with the war
still going on, he was thoroughly disillusioned with the President.

"I was relieved when he left office," Mr. Stonesaid. "I had enough of Watergate
and his cover-ups. I didn't see him as a tragic figure then because he was too
close. I didn't see the drama of it until later."

With "Nixon," which is being released by Hollywood Pictures (a division of Walt
Disney) on Wednesday, Mr. Stone has not only refused to demonize Nixon but has
tried to create nothing less than a classic tragedy or perhaps his version of
"Citizen Kane." (No one has ever accused Oliver Stone of humility.) In
discussing "Nixon" he refers often to Shakespeare, as well as to Orson Welles's
great film. On a personal level, the film is also Mr. Stone's attempt to show
Hollywood that he is not an ideological bad boy with a flair for what many
critics have termed weird politics, as in "J.F.K.," or for diatribes about
Americans, as in his last two movies, "Heaven and Earth" and "Natural Born
Killers," both of which were critical misfires.

"What surprised me when I began researching the film was the suffering he had
gone through in his early life, the sense of isolation and loneliness that
stayed with him," said Mr. Stone, who, in addition to creating the movie, has
seen to the publication of a book that includes an annotated version of the
script with references to more than 80 historical works. "In the end I felt
pity, admiration, depression, disgust."

The line in Hollywood is that Mr. Stone actually identified with Nixon. After
all, the director has shown a preoccupation with conspiracies and enemies that
seems Nixonesque. And Mr. Stone takes this proposition seriously. "I think I do
very much identify with him," he said. "I have some of the same human qualities,
the combination of optimism, pessimism, self-destructiveness. I mean, we're
human. I cover up, too. It's hard to be straight all the time, hard to be honest
and have integrity. That's not to say that I've committed crimes."

(Even "Stone," a friendly new biography of the director written by James
Riordan, depicts a sometimes out-of-control man with a taste for drugs and a
variety of women.)

Stung by the charges that he distorted history in "J.F.K." and wanting to avoid
that sort of charge with "Nixon," Mr. Stone hired three former Nixon aides to
serve as advisers on the film: Alexander Butterfield, a former secretary to the
Cabinet and special assistant to Nixon, who first revealed the existence of the
President's secret tapes of his Oval Office conversations; John Dean, Nixon's
White House counsel, who is now an investment banker in Los Angeles, and John
Sears, a former deputy White House counsel and political adviser.

"Nothing in the film strikes me as unreasonable or unfair," said Mr. Dean, who
made his Watergate-era papers available to Mr. Stone, Stephen J. Rivele and
Christopher Wilkinson, who share the screenwriting credit. "In the larger
picture, it reflected accurately what happened."

The primary task for Mr. Dean and the other advisers was not to validate the
film maker's themes but to provide basic information: who stood where, who
attended certain meetings, who wore what. "I appreciate there has to be dramatic
license," Mr. Dean said. He noted, for example, that there were actually two
Watergate break-ins but that the film shows only one. Also, he added, the film
includes a nighttime meeting between Mr. Dean and Howard Hunt on a Washington
bridge that never took place.

Mr. Butterfield, who worked side by side with Mr. Nixon from 1969 to 1973, said
he examined the script and was on the set constantly to tell Mr. Stone what he
thought was and was not accurate.

"Oliver was very concerned about accuracy, but at times he told me he had to
take dramatic license," Mr. Butterfield said. "In one scene, we have Nixon
walking around the Oval Office. I told him Nixon never got up from the desk.
Oliver said if Nixon didn't walk around, we'd all go to sleep."

Mr. Stone said he expects Nixon's daughters, Tricia Nixon Cox and Julie Nixon
Eisenhower, to object to his portraying their parents' marriage as troubled,
their mother as desperately unhappy and their father as a heavy drinker.

Certainly one element of "Nixon" that will be disputed is its image of Nixon as
an abuser of alcohol. Mr. Stone said that this portrayal was based on books by
authors of various political stripes -- among them Stephen E. Ambrose, Fawn
Brodie, Tom Wicker and Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward -- as well as on
interviews with Mr. Butterfield and other former Nixon aides.

Asked about Nixon's drinking, Mr. Butterfield said, "I never saw him coming
apart at the seams."

Mr. Wicker said that for his 1991 book, "One of Us: Richard Nixon and the
American Dream," he was able to document only one case of Nixon drinking
excessively, on a visit to the United States Embassy in Warsaw as Vice
President. "He got himself drunk," Mr. Wicker said. "It was the only story I
could authenticate. He probably was a heavy drinker at the end, but it's
something I couldn't authenticate."

Beyond this, Mr. Stone has also tentatively stepped back into "J.F.K." territory
with references to an alleged plot to assassinate Fidel Castro. The film -- as
well as an essay in Mr. Stone's book on the film -- contends that the plot was
organized by the Central Intelligence Agency toward the end of the Eisenhower
Administration and that Mr. Nixon, as Vice President, was involved in its
planning. The film intimates that Nixon was subsequently guilt-ridden because he
believed that Cubans involved in the plot were later involved in the
assassination of President John F. Kennedy.

Asked about this aspect of the film, Mr. Wicker said, "It doesn't jibe with
anything I knew about."

The idea for "Nixon" was first presented to Mr. Stone several years ago (before
Nixon died in 1994) in a three-page proposal by Mr. Rivele, an author and a
playwright, and Mr. Wilkinson, a documentary film maker. "From the very
beginning, Oliver saw Nixon as a character of Shakespearean proportions," Mr.
Rivele said. "It was not going to be 'J.F.K. 2,' not a conspiracy film, but a
movie about a great character of dramatic tragedy."

As they created the movie, Mr. Stone and the two other screenwriters kept in
mind the dark images of Breughel paintings and coined a dramatic device that
doesn't appear in the film explicitly but did help them shape it. They called it
"the beast," and compared it to the witches and ghosts of a Shakespearean
tragedy. "We sort of imagined a headless monster that lurches through postwar
history," Mr. Wilkinson said.

The film posits that it was dark forces beyond Nixon's control -- the
assassinations of John and Robert Kennedy and the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.,
the Vietnam War, the destruction of Lyndon B. Johnson and Hubert Humphrey, as
well as the early deaths of two of Nixon's brothers -- that thrust Nixon to
center stage. "It was almost as if Nixon was helped by something he was
terrified of," said Mr. Wilkinson said.

"Both of us started this project despising Nixon," Mr. Wilkinson continued,
referring to himself and Mr. Rivele. "The more we became exposed to him, the
more we knew about him, our contempt was slowly eroded to the point where we
more than pitied him, we empathized with him." The two sreenwriters pointed out
that in addition to his involvement with the House Un-American Activities
Committee, the Vietnam War and Watergate, Nixon was also known for his diplomacy
with China, reaching a strategic arms pact with the Soviet Union and starting
the Environmental Protection Agency.

The challenge of portraying such a conflicted leader fell to Mr. Hopkins, who
was selected by Mr. Stone after Tom Hanks and Jack Nicholson turned down the
part when another studio, Warner Brothers, was involved.

"When Oliver asked me to do it, I thought, this man is crazy," said Mr. Hopkins.
"This is an American President, and I'm a limey, a Welshman. How could I do it?"

Mr. Stone said what had attracted him to Mr. Hopkins were two Nixonesque
qualities, the actor's sense of being an outsider and the sense of loneliness
that he had conveyed in films like "Shadowlands" and "The Remains of the Day."
For his part, Mr. Hopkins was surprised by Mr. Stone. "I expected a kind of
caveman," the actor said by telephone from Paris, where he was working on James
Ivory's film "Picasso." "I heard stories that he was tough and aggressive. But
he was so protective of me."

Despite his good relationship with the director, Mr. Hopkins said, he was almost
overwhelmed by the role: "The hardest part I've ever done. Harder than
Shakespeare and Marlowe. I watched films of Nixon, and I saw a man in such agony
and pain with such a lack of self-knowledge. Amazing man."

"It was such a huge part, so many pages," he said. "They kept adding and
changing dialogue, and I told him one day, 'Oliver I'm drowning; I'm going
under.' And Oliver said: 'No, you're not. You're scared. You could rise above
it. Fear is a good thing.' " Mr. Hopkins laughed. "I've never heard that one
before."

IN THE MIDST OF THE DEmanding dramatic requirements, Mr. Stone insisted that
historical accuracy was foremost -- up to a point. "Obviously you could say I've
learned lessons, to be very careful of some of the imputations," the director
said. "But if you get too careful, you sometimes lose the edge that a movie
needs."

Despite the controversy over "J.F.K.," Mr. Stone still believes that it is the
film maker's responsibility to interpret history through his own prism. "This
thing is in flux; history is not agreed upon," Mr. Stone said. "There is no
official history. The C.I.A. is a secret."

"The country is in many ways a secret to its own citizens," he continued. "We
don't know how the Federal Reserve really works, how banks work, how credit
works, how the mechanisms of power work. I'd love to make a movie about the
Federal Reserve Board. Ultimately film makers should do their research, read all
the books and make their call."

NAME: Oliver Stone

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Oliver Stone, left, and Anthony Hopkins on the set of "Nixon"--A
"dramatic interpretation," says the director. (pg. 11); Oliver Stone with
Anthony Hopkins and Joan Allen on the set of "Nixon"--Classic tragedy. (Sidney
Baldwin/Cinergi Pictures Entertainment) (pg. 26)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ARTS/ARTIFACTS;
The Return of the Conquering Jackets

BYLINE: By RITA REIF

SECTION: Section 2;   Page 45;   Column 1;   Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 878 words


WHEN HUNDREDS OF thousands of American pilots, bombardiers, gunners and
navigators returned home after World War II, they put aside their khakis, boots
and duffle bags. But the one thing many of them kept was their leather flight
jackets, which were often emblazoned with images of tigers, rabbits, bombers or
voluptuous women. They wore them as mementos of the Allied victory much as
medieval knights had paraded around castle courtyards in full armor following
the Crusades.

Spurred in part by this year's celebrations of the 50th anniversary of the war's
end, the popularity of flight jackets is greater today than ever. The originals
are bought as nostalgia items or historical artifacts by ex-G.I.'s, by
collectors of war memorabilia and by retro-fashion buffs. The jackets are now as
fashionable in Tokyo, London, Paris and Munich, as in New York and Los Angeles.
These days too, fakes and reproductions are proliferating: Ralph Lauren stocks
undecorated versions, and Hammacher Schlemmer sells several thousand a year, at
$369 each.

"Certain items of clothing define an era," said Jeff Spielberg, a television
writer in Santa Monica, Calif., who is a collector and dealer in vintage
jackets. "This jacket represents the romance of airmen in World War II. We think
by wearing one that we'll get some of that bravery, some insouciance -- Chuck
Yeager's wink and a nod." (Brig. Gen. Charles E. Yeager was an Army Air Forces
captain when he shot down 15 planes during the war.)

Two recent books, both written by Jon A. Maguire and John P. Conway, who share
an interest in military history, reflect the heightened interest in the jackets.
In "American Flight Jackets, Airmen and Aircraft," the authors document the
basic styles of jackets worn between World War I and the Gulf war. And in "Art
of the Flight Jacket" they illustrate and identify many of the exuberantly
painted jackets worn in air operations from the Philippines to Paris.

"As a boy I would look in the hall closet with awe at my father's uniforms," Mr.
Maguire said. "Dad was issued an A-2 jacket, as it was called, as late as 1944.
He flew C-47's in Europe, and he gave me lots of his things, but never the
jacket. He wore it after the war, when he worked as a plumber while he was going
to college, and it was in shreds long before I was born, in 1958."

Throughout American history, Mr. Maguire said, soldiers have personalized their
uniforms; in Vietnam, for example, G.I.'s put peace signs and rock-and-roll
images on their helmets. But the flight jackets are the most flamboyant example
of this typically American form of self-expression.

The idea of decorating jackets stemmed from the painting of designs on the noses
of planes, a practice that began in Europe during World War I. Flight crews
often copied the nose art onto their jackets. The images, outrageous and
frequently humorous, were deftly painted on the backs, pockets and sleeves. They
ranged from fierce dragons and eagles to naked women and dancing girls to winged
skulls and winged skeletons riding atop bombs. Such Disney characters as Pluto,
Dumbo, Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck were also favorites.

Leighton Longhi, a New York dealer in Japanese art, collects jackets with comic
characters. "The first jacket I ever saw belonged to a Flying Tiger pilot," he
said. "He had Japanese armor to sell and would not part with his jacket. I
bought the armor -- but still miss that jacket."

He views the painted jackets as a kind of folk art, and he likens the ones
bearing comic characters to the 16th-century Japanese helmets decorated with
exotic animals and mythological creatures. The difference, he said, is that the
jackets were worn by young men, whereas the helmets were meant for older men:
the highest-ranking samurai and lords.

"The jackets are a product of the age of innocence," he said. They are witty and
full of strong, simple images. "The best examples express a zany individualism,"
he added.

THOUSANDS OF people own one of the vintage painted jackets, said Mr. Spielberg,
the dealer, but "only a few hundred have more than 10 of them." The cost is a
deterrent. Some are several hundred dollars; others command four- and
five-figure prices. At the height of the Japanese art-buying boom in the late
1980's and early 90's, the best of the painted jackets sold in Japan for as much
as $20,000.

For the most part, today's wearers and collectors were never members of a flight
crew. Neither was the most photographed soldier in a flight jacket during World
War II -- Gen. Douglas MacArthur. But Jimmy Stewart and Clark Gable, as a
colonel and a major, respectively, wore them on bombing missions.

After the war, the jacket has become a Hollywood icon: Gregory Peck sported one
in the 1949 film "Twelve O'Clock High." And since then, worn by the likes of
James Dean in the 50's, Steve McQueen in the 60's and 70's and the rocker
Chrissie Hynde and her band, the Pretenders, in the 80's and 90's, the jackets
have endured as a vivid symbol of youthful rebellion.

"Most of the jackets were painted by American boys, 18 to 24 years old," Mr.
Maguire said. "They were right out of high school and college. They painted
almost anything that reminded them of home, and they became men real quick."

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A decorative patch depicting a bomb against a rising sun.;
Jacket designs depicting a woman in a red dress, above, and a rabbit reclining
on a bomb, right--Fifty years after the end of World War II, the jackets are as
popular as ever. (Photographs by Leighton Longhi)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Mississippi Learning

BYLINE: By Theodore Rosengarten;   Theodore Rosengarten is the author of "All
God's Dangers: The Life of Nate Shaw" and "Tombee: Portrait of a Cotton
Planter."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1555 words



SILVER RIGHTS
By Constance Curry.
Illustrated. 258 pp. Chapel Hill, N.C.:
Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill.
$21.95.

A YEAR after he vowed "Segregation now, segregation tomorrow, segregation
forever," Gov. George Wallace made a swing through New England looking for votes
in his bid to become the Democratic Party candidate for President. The year was
1964 and I was a student at Amherst College, a traditional hotbed of
abolitionism. Mr. Wallace made a stop at nearby Smith College, in Northampton,
and I went to hear him. The lecture hall was packed with civil rights
sympathizers. We were going to let the Governor know that he would not find
fertile ground in Massachusetts for his separatist ideas.

Mr. Wallace said he felt right at home. The hills and woods of New England
reminded him of the rolling wooded farms of northern Alabama, and the people
were just as friendly. He wasted no time getting down to the nitty-gritty. There
were more "Negro" schoolteachers and principals in Alabama than in all the New
England states combined. (He didn't say "nigra.") Yes, there were flaws with
separate school systems -- unequal funding, for example -- but Alabama was
working to correct them. The point was that for all its warts, segregated
education created opportunities for blacks that were unavailable in school
systems dominated by whites.

Of course, he left out a few things. "Negro schools" in Alabama and in other
states that maintained dual systems were housed in dilapidated buildings. Many
had no plumbing and relied on potbellied stoves for heat. The teachers were, for
the most part, poorly trained and overburdened. Books were outdated and in short
supply. Buses for transporting black children to school were a novelty. Schools
for whites and blacks may have been separate, but white hands held the purse
strings for both. Black principals had to report to white school boards, which
controlled what little patronage there was to hand out. For example, paychecks
might have to be cashed in a designated store.

We did not know these details as we sat there listening to the Governor, and
consequently his talk had the effect of disarming us. For all the Faulkner we
had under our belts, we didn't understand the South. Years later we would learn
a hard lesson about social change. We should have known that legislation
outlawing the way of life so dear to George Wallace could not work miracles. We
would applaud the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which mandated that
states do away with racially separate public schools, and redirect our activism
toward other causes. Vietnam, for one.

"Silver Rights" is the account of one family's long and lonely struggle to
educate its children. Constance Curry's book takes its title from an anecdote
told by the novelist Alice Walker about how elderly black Southerners greeted
the word "civil" in the 1950's. They took this bland term and gave it poetry and
dignity; it came out "silver." Dignity certainly is a quality displayed in
abundance by the heroes of this tale.

In August 1965, Matthew and Mae Bertha Carter of Drew, Miss., became the first
black parents to sign their school district's "freedom of choice" papers,
allowing their children to attend previously all-white schools. Drew is a small
town in Sunflower County, in the heart of the Mississippi Delta. The Carters
were sharecroppers; they rented a piece of an old plantation and raised cotton
using the labor of their 13 children. Their first five children had attended
schools that were opened and closed according to the crop.

At great risk to themselves, Mae Bertha and Matthew decided to seek something
better for their second batch of children. Their landlord kicked them off their
place and shopkeepers cut off credit, while friends and neighbors spurned them
for causing trouble. They did have allies, however, including Ms. Curry, who
would become the author of their story. A white woman from North Carolina, she
was sent to Mississippi by the American Friends Service Committee to investigate
the reprisals suffered by people like the Carters. Marian Wright Edelman was
another ally: as an attorney with the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund,
she sued the Drew school district on behalf of seven of the Carter children in
1967 for not taking steps to desegregate the schools.

The "freedom of choice" plan put all the burden on the children and operated
more as a means to deter blacks from using the public schools than as an
invitation to attend. For years the Carters tried to talk other black families
into enrolling their children, but no one dared. The Carters had long since
conquered their fears. They had joined the N.A.A.C.P. in 1955, and when the
Voting Rights Act was passed in 1965 they were already among the 1 percent of
black Mississippians registered to vote.

Mae Bertha and Matthew weren't revolutionaries; they wanted a piece of the
American dream for their children, and they hoped to improve their chances of
getting it by sending them to the better white schools. The children had their
own powerful motivation to go. They wanted to escape the cotton fields. "I would
look up and down those fields," recalled the Carters' oldest boy, J. C., who
never had a chance to go to a good school, "and I could practically feel them
opening -- millions and millions of white bolls -- knowing you'd have to go out
there and pick every last one of them. That was discouraging to me."

No one sympathetic to civil rights in those heady days could have guessed that
things would turn out the way they have. An era of equal rights and
opportunities for all Americans appeared to be dawning. But civil rights
advocates underestimated racism's grip on society. We overestimated the appeal
of integration as a goal in itself. We never imagined that poverty would keep
people in place as surely as discriminatory laws.

Yet "Silver Rights" is a success story. Seven of the eight Carter children who
desegregated the Drew schools went on to graduate from the University of
Mississippi. After a daily fare of cruelty, humiliation and isolation in high
school, you might expect they would have wanted never to see another white face,
never to hear another white voice call them "nigger." But they wanted to get
somewhere in this world, and an Ole Miss education was their best ticket.

When Ms. Curry returned to Drew in 1989 to interview Mae Bertha, only one of the
13 Carter children was still living in Mississippi. Ruth, the oldest girl in the
second batch of children and the first to enroll at Drew High School, was living
in Toledo, Ohio, with her sister Bertha. The other sisters and brothers were
scattered every which way. Ms. Curry visited and interviewed them all. The
chapter called "She Wouldn't Let Us Say We Wished We Had Never Been Born" is
told mainly in their words and is the best part of the book. "Silver Rights"
comes alive when the children speak; when Ms. Curry digresses, the story loses
steam and falters.

Stanley Carter, the third child of Mae Bertha's second batch, attended Drew High
School from the eighth grade through graduation. He recalled that the atmosphere
in school was as bad at the end as it was when he started. "You spend five years
with them and they're still throwing spitballs at graduation," he marveled.
"You'd hate for the next day to come" -- reading this line you feel a twinge of
the agony you see in your own child's face, when all he or she has to look
forward to is boredom -- "because you knew you got to go back into that school
and put up with all that harassment all over again."

Deborah and Beverly Carter remembered with bitterness that they had no one to
play with. Pity the white girl who reached out to Deborah, only to be pulled
back into line by the principal. Beverly hated recess, but she bore up to the
constant taunts of the white kids who called her names, "from 'nigger' to
'walking Tootsie Roll.' " Gloria, who entered the maelstrom in the seventh
grade, never got used to the name-calling: "It's not like the seventh grade was
O.K. and by the eighth you adjusted so you didn't mind. You never got used to
it." Pearl had the worst experience of all. "Five years of hell," she called it.
One teacher made a game of rotating the white children who sat next to her so
that no pale face would have to sit by a black girl for more than a week.

Hell ended after five years, because in 1970 the white and black schools merged
totally. But don't think that heaven set in. Private white academies sprouted in
the delta like toadstools after a rain, and white children left the public
schools "wholesale," taking the air conditioners, the athletic equipment and
many teachers with them. By 1973 Drew's public schools were four-fifths black,
and for all practical purposes the old racial order had adapted from official
segregation to nominal freedom.

For most black Southerners there is no such thing as the good old days of public
school; a state of emergency is normal. But the news is not all bad.
Institutions like our schools are what they are because people have made them
that way, and therefore people can choose to make them different. Parents have
immense latent power. Mae Bertha used this insight to cut a path for her
children. Now it is their turn, and their children's turn.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Last of His Kind

BYLINE: By Alan Brinkley;   Alan Brinkley, a professor of American history at
Columbia University, is the author of "The End of Reform: New Deal Liberalism in
Recession and War."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 9;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1530 words



THE MOST DANGEROUS MAN IN DETROIT
Walter Reuther and the Fate of American Labor.
By Nelson Lichtenstein.
Illustrated. 575 pp. New York:
Basic Books. $35.

WHEN Walter Reuther died in a plane crash in 1970, he had been president of the
United Automobile Workers for 24 years. During much of that time, he was
arguably the most important and revered labor leader in the world and a symbol
of one of postwar America's greatest successes -- the dramatic improvement in
the standard of living of its industrial workers. Reuther's death came as the
labor movement he had done so much to shape was unraveling around him. And one
of the many achievements of Nelson Lichtenstein's excellent biography, "The Most
Dangerous Man in Detroit," is to show how Reuther's extraordinary life
contributed both to the rise of that movement and, unintentionally, to its
eventual decline. A professor of history at the University of Virginia and the
author of an important earlier book on the C.I.O. during World War II, Mr.
Lichtenstein has produced more than a biography. He has given us an elegantly
written and unfailingly intelligent portrait of American labor in the mid-20th
century.

Born in 1907, Reuther grew up in a world that by the time of his death had
almost entirely disappeared: a world in which the working class was dominated by
European immigrants, a world of socialist politics and an intense working-class
consciousness fostered by exclusion and relative powerlessness. Schooled in both
socialism and labor activism by his father, a German immigrant ironworker in
Wheeling, W.Va., he moved to Detroit in 1927 to find work in the booming auto
industry. He soon became a skilled diemaker at Ford's immense River Rouge plant,
a well-paid member of the working-class elite. But his "self-improving
ambitions," as Mr. Lichtenstein calls them, drew him beyond that insular and
relatively privileged environment.

Early in 1933, he and his brother Victor (himself later an important figure in
the trade union movement) left Detroit to visit the Soviet Union. They spent
nearly two years in Gorky, working in a large auto plant and helping the
Russians master their machinery, much of it purchased from Ford. Their time in
Gorky coincided with the early Stalinist purges and with a growing
disillusionment with Soviet Communism among American socialists. But the Reuther
brothers, Mr. Lichtenstein explains, remained enthusiastic about the Soviet
"experiment," and they left for the United States in 1935 still talking about
"the atmosphere of freedom and security . . . an inspiring contrast to what we
know as Ford wage slaves in Detroit." Reuther later became a committed
anti-Communist and a harsh critic of the Soviet Union, but his youthful
enthusiasms haunted him for the rest of his life.

Back in Detroit, Reuther plunged into the excitingly fluid world of labor
organizing. He was committed to the C.I.O. vision of industrial unions -- unions
that would unite all the workers of an industry, whatever their skills or tasks,
into a single bargaining unit. And like many labor militants of the time, Mr.
Lichtenstein says, he worked closely with (although he may never have actually
joined) the Communist Party, which was at the center of many of the great
organizing drives of the mid-1930's. Reuther's effectiveness in organizing auto
workers was critical to the C.I.O.'s success. It also established him as one of
the pre-eminent leaders of the new United Automobile Workers union that emerged
from the battles.

By the time Reuther became president of the U.A.W. in 1946, the American
political landscape had assumed a new and very different shape. The great
corporations -- the automobile companies perhaps foremost among them -- had shed
their Depression-era images as capitalist predators and assumed fresh ones as
the great engines of American victory and prosperity. The newly powerful
industrial unions -- of which the U.A.W. was now the most prominent -- were, if
not popular, at least well established. And the economy, after a decade of
stagnation, was once again a productive dynamo, growing more rapidly than almost
anyone had believed possible even a few years earlier.

Reuther saw in the political economy of the postwar years an opportunity for a
new era in labor-management relations. Workers and employers had essentially
common interests, he argued. A dynamically growing economy with full employment
would create more wealth for everyone. "Labor is not fighting for a larger slice
of the national pie," he said in 1945, using the ebullient Keynesian language
that was beginning to dominate American liberalism. "Labor is fighting for a
larger pie."

Conflicts between workers and employers would continue, of course. Indeed, Mr.
Lichtenstein reports, Reuther was unusual among postwar labor leaders in his
willingness to tolerate, even encourage, strikes. For the most part, however,
the stoppages he supported were tactical ones. He was no longer a militant
socialist; he was a defender, even a champion, of American capitalism (and one
of the principal figures in purging the union movement of its Communist members
in the late 1940's). The future, he claimed, lay in collective bargaining and a
steadily rising standard of living for all. The U.A.W. was fighting "to make
progress with the community and not at the expense of the community."

The symbol of Reuther's brand of postwar unionism was the landmark contract he
negotiated with General Motors in 1950. Fortune magazine hailed it as the
"Treaty of Detroit," and Reuther himself called it "the most significant
development in labor relations since the mass production industries were
organized." It accepted the union shop and guaranteed a 20 percent increase in
workers' standard of living over five years; that meant not just wage increases,
but a built-in cost-of-living allowance. But labor gave up much in return. The
G.M. contract, and the many mass production industry agreements it inspired in
the following years, cemented corporate control over most basic decisions
governing production, investments, pricing and the nature of the workplace.
Reuther's youthful vision of a restructured industrial world in which labor
would share power with employers had given way to an explicitly Keynesian model
of ever-expanding prosperity within an economy whose existing relationships of
wealth and power remained essentially unchanged.

For the next 20 years, Mr. Lichtenstein tells us, Reuther worked constantly to
improve the terms of the "treaty" but never seriously challenged its essential
structure. In 1955, he helped negotiate the merger between the C.I.O., of which
he was then president, and the more conservative A.F.L.; the once-profound
ideological differences between them now seemed to him less important than their
opportunity to work together for a liberal industrial order (although Reuther's
bitter personal feud with the A.F.L.-C.I.O. president George Meany so
disillusioned him that he took the U.A.W. out of the organization in 1968).

But his greatest crusades after 1950 were the new battles for rights that
characterized postwar liberalism. More than any other major labor leader, he
immersed himself in the civil rights movement. He spoke fervently of the need to
rebuild American cities and address the problems of the inner-city poor. (That
was one reason he became so deeply committed to Lyndon Johnson once Johnson
launched his War on Poverty; as late as 1968, Reuther still refused to criticize
the Vietnam War publicly, even though he was filled with private doubts about
its wisdom.) And in the face of vast economic changes that were, by the late
1960's, endangering the future of the labor movement, he struggled to sustain a
role for unions. He died, in fact, in the course of an inspection trip to his
last major project: a lavish new U.A.W. conference center in northern Michigan,
where a new generation of labor leaders would, he hoped, "keep the stars burning
brightly in the eyes of the U.A.W. for years ahead."

THAT project was already doomed. Reuther had staked his hopes for labor on the
Democratic Party and its ability to mobilize a broad liberal constituency. But
by the late 1960's, that constituency -- a fragile one even in the best of times
-- was rapidly collapsing along cultural, regional and above all racial lines.
It has never recovered.

Reuther understood how dangerous the growing polarization of American life was
to his hopes. But he never recognized how inadequate the liberalism he so
ardently embraced would prove to be in healing those divisions. There is a
distinctly wistful quality in Mr. Lichtenstein's discussion of Reuther's last
years -- a suggestion that Reuther had accommodated too easily, had sacrificed
too many of his earlier and more radical views. But this gripping book also
makes it clear that Reuther never gave up on them entirely. The purpose of a
union, he always insisted, was "eternal vigilance and militant resistance." Had
he lived to encounter the very different world of the 1970's and 80's, the
sclerotic labor movement of those years would likely have found a vigorous
challenger.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Walter Reuther. (THE NEW YORK TIMES)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Life of Resistance: A Special Report;
Gunman's Ardent Credo: Black Self-Sufficiency

BYLINE: By JOE SEXTON

SECTION: Section A;   Page 1;   Column 3;   National Desk

LENGTH: 2249 words


On May 26, 1967, Roland J. Smith Jr. stood before Judge Alfred L. Luongo in
Federal District Court in Philadelphia. Mr. Smith was 23 years old, a hard-luck
car thief and self-taught ideologue who called himself a laborer. He made his
argument with an inalterable simplicity.

As a black man, Mr. Smith told the judge, he considered himself a "subject" of
the United States and not a citizen, and thus he refused to be inducted to fight
in the Vietnam War.

"I owe no legal, no national, no moral obligation, nor do I desire to serve in
the armed forces of the enslavers of my forebears," Mr. Smith said.

The judge listened and asked if Mr. Smith believed "a great deal of injustice"
had been done to blacks in America. Mr. Smith said he did.

"And you feel, then," the judge said, "that the way to combat it is to refuse to
accede to the rules and regulations laid down by the society that has been
unfair to you -- and that is your philosophy?"

Mr. Smith answered, "I respect the laws of the country and I abide by them if it
is at all possible."

Moments later, the judge ended the hearing this way:

"You are still a young man. I hope that somewhere along the line you will see a
different kind of light. You certainly have seen a light up to now, whatever
that light may be and wherever it comes from; you have some principles. I can
only say to you that if you adhere to those principles, life ahead is going to
be rocky."

The unfortunate life forecast for Mr. Smith was realized in full, and it ended
Dec. 8 in an act of numbing violence.

Mr. Smith, who had protested regularly outside Freddy's clothing store in
Harlem, opposing the Jewish owner's eviction of a black subtenant, walked into
the store on 125th Street and opened fire with a .38-caliber revolver. Police
say he then set the store ablaze and turned the gun on himself. Eight people lay
dead in the ruins, seven of them workers at Freddy's.

Mr. Smith's brutal end concluded a life his sister said was lived "outside the
system." It was an existence of study and incarceration, modest jobs, protest
and pamphleteering. It was a life steeped in perceived victimization and deep
distrust, in conspiracy theories, poetry and lots of anger. To some, he was
"intense," to others "spiritual," to others "odd and someone to watch out for."

"He always had what I think of as a broken warrior's heart," said Otis Anthony,
the former senior adviser to Mayor Sandy Freedman of Tampa, who knew Mr. Smith
years ago when he lived in Florida. Mr. Anthony said he thought Mr. Smith might
have embarked on the arson attack as one in "a long line of people who thought
it was up to them to stop talking, stop begging and start acting, even if that
was out of some twisted sense of what a real revolutionary act is."

"It was an act of insanity for all of us looking in on it," Mr. Anthony said.
"But I'm 98 percent sure he didn't view it as an act of criminality, but as a
strange act of suicide against an institutional force, based on what I knew of
him dating back to the early 70's when we all had romantic and adventurous ideas
about our role and struggle."

The police, saying they know little about Mr. Smith's life or beliefs, offer a
starker perspective on the crime. According to one senior investigator, Mr.
Smith is regarded as having been one of the "hard-core" vendors who tried to
defy the city's 1994 effort to move the street peddlers off 125th Street.

A wide-ranging criminal investigation of the assault has begun, and
investigators are looking into whether Mr. Smith had any history of mental
problems. The criminal investigation will examine whether Mr. Smith had
accomplices and how much the heated words of the Rev. Al Sharpton and Morris
Powell fueled his embrace of destruction.

The investigator said there was "absolutely no doubt" that Mr. Smith was well
known to Mr. Powell, the vendors' confrontational leader with the criminal past
and taste for racist language, and that Mr. Smith's action was an outgrowth of
the anti-Semitic atmosphere that prevailed among the protesters outside
Freddy's.

Rough Beginnings
A Mother Dead, A Father Departed

Mr. Smith was born in Harlem in 1944, the second of the three children of Roland
J. Smith Sr. and his wife, Satronia Nottingham. Mr. Smith's sister, Abiona
Adadevoh, said that their mother died as a result of complications during an
abortion and that her brother, then 3 years old, "cried for two years
afterward." Their father, she said, managed a bar in Harlem and later became an
advance man for the Royal American Show, a traveling carnival.

The single son in what his sister called a "broken home," Mr. Smith moved
between Harlem and Philadelphia, attending Public School 186 in Manhattan and
then Barry Elementary School and Shoemaker Junior High School in Philadelphia.
He enrolled in, but apparently never attended, Overbrook High School in
Philadelphia. Court records show Mr. Smith lived with aunts and uncles, and was
kicked out once for failing to pay his share of the rent.

Mr. Smith was 13 when he was first arrested, and within several years he had
been charged with multiple car thefts, inciting to riot and receiving stolen
goods. He served two stints at the House of Corrections in Philadelphia, and in
1966 the police found him in an apartment with a .38-caliber revolver, a
machete, a dagger, a bayonet and a hatchet.

But Mr. Smith's seminal moment in court came on what he said was a question of
conscience. He said that he would not "vilify his race" by submitting to the
draft, and that he was involved in "man's just struggle" to "control their own
destiny."

"All of these principles are morally just and shared by all normal people and
should always be solidly defended," Mr. Smith said.

Judge Luongo asked, "Is this an expression of your own philosophy, Mr. Smith, or
is this something that has been instilled in you by others?"

"This is the way I view history," Mr. Smith answered. "It is the onliest
conclusion I can come to."

Mr. Smith was sentenced to four years in a Federal prison. He served two years
at a medium-security complex in Danbury, Conn., and was released in 1969 to a
halfway house in New York City.

The Florida Years
An Advocate Is Shaped

Mr. Smith, who moved from Harlem to live with his sister in Tampa in 1974,
arrived "with a strong Afro-nationalistic background," according to friends in
Florida. He had read dozens of history books, and was dedicated to the ideology
of Marcus Garvey, the advocate of black economic independence and racial
separatism. His beliefs struck a chord, and Mr. Smith became a quiet political
presence in West Tampa, the largely black section of the city dominated by
public housing.

"He seemed studious, very concerned about the overall conditions of the
community," Askia Aquil, Imam for the Believers Mosque in St. Petersburg, said
of Mr. Smith. "He was the type of person who would encourage people to get
involved."

Mr. Smith's political participation included unremarkable contributions --
people remember him helping set up chairs for a Martin Luther King Jr. tribute,
for instance -- as well as greater efforts. He distributed his own newsletter,
and he became affiliated with the Black Organization Project, an advocacy
organization concerned with substandard housing and empowerment of parents and
students in the public schools.

He is consistently described by Tampa acquaintances as an introspective,
reserved man who could go a year after meeting someone before trusting him
enough to talk freely. His sister, who said Mr. Smith was a mentor to her son
and many of the neighborhood's young people, said he moved about their apartment
"like a spirit."

He is also recalled as a hard-working self-employed laborer who ran his own
multipurpose handyman operation. He was a mover, a furniture repairman, a manual
laborer. "The original Sanford and Son," his sister said.

"He was the hardest-working person I have ever met, and no work was beneath
him," said Robert Gilder, the former president of Tampa's chapter of the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. "If you said you
needed a tree cut down, he'd ask where the ax was. If you said, I need the
sprinkler system put in, he'd get the shovel."

But Mr. Smith always had his flashpoint.

"The only time he would get angry is when you started talking about racism,"
said James L. Pettiford, a former journalist who is now director of human
relations for the city of High Point, N.C. "That would bring up the fire from
within."

That fire was often ignited by the topics of police brutality and the lack of
black economic power. Mr. Gilder said Mr. Smith resented the Iranian immigrants
who had come to own many of the grocery stores and gas stations in West Tampa.
Mr. Gilder said that Mr. Smith believed the owners refused to hire black
applicants for meaningful jobs.

"Roland was a poor man, but he was always a very proud man," Mr. Gilder said.

That pride was most likely at the heart of Mr. Smith's 1989 encounter with the
Tampa police. Stopped at a checkpoint and asked for his driver's license,
according to the police account, Mr. Smith did not have a license and tried to
burn an officer with his cigarette. A brawl ensued. Ms. Adadevoh, however,
insisted that the police set upon and "hog-tied" her brother.

"The extent to which he resisted us was unbelievable," said Officer Mickey
Mashburn, one of the officers on the scene. "He tried to get one of the police
officer's guns. He said he was going to kill us, or that we would have to kill
him. It didn't make any sense."

At Mr. Smith's trial, his character witnesses included the president of
Hillsborough Community College, who is Jewish. Mr. Smith was convicted in a
nonjury trial and sentenced to 18 months' probation and 50 hours of community
service.

In July 1991, Mr. Smith, $20 behind on his court supervision payments, told his
probation officer, Susan Stumpf, that "it was too much to expect a poor man to
work and do all that community service," and walked out. In violation of his
probation, he left for Harlem.

Back to Harlem
A Cause, And a Meltdown

Mr. Smith, who had traveled to Africa and Haiti, ultimately changed his name to
Abugunde Mulocko. His sister said it translated as "one who searches for the
truth."

Mr. Smith and his sister had traveled to Harlem from Tampa frequently over the
years and sold their wares in the eclectic, often electric world of the 125th
Street vendors. Mr. Smith made African jewelry and sold rare books; Ms. Adadevoh
sold African dolls.

Back in Harlem in 1991, he saw the growing confrontation between the vendors and
the store owners and police as an emblematic struggle for blacks to retain their
marginal economic strength. Ms. Adadevoh said he firmly believed that the vast
majority of Harlem stores and buildings were owned by whites. And for Mr. Smith,
the particular plight of the black-owned Record Shack crystallized the inequity.

"The vendors had made Harlem rise again from a ghost town," Ms. Adadevoh said.
"We were not selling drugs or stealing. The only dignity we had was the
vendors."

In October 1994, Mr. Smith was arrested and charged with aggravated harassment
as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani enforced his relocation of the vendors. Morris
Powell consequently organized sporadic protests on 125th Street to rail against
individual white-owned or Asian-owned businesses. Mr. Smith -- termed an
industrious "pioneer" by some vendors, dangerously unbalanced by others -- was a
regular in those protests.

"I used to see him all the time," said a vendor who used to sell clothes next to
Mr. Smith. The vendor, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Mr. Smith often
ordered white tourists in Harlem to stay away from his table. "Everything to him
was a conspiracy against black people. It was always, 'Cracker this, cracker
that.' He would say, 'These crackers come through our town looking at us as if
we were caged animals.' "

With his arrest, Mr. Smith's mood appears to have darkened badly. His sister
said that he feared that the revitalization of Times Square would send the
pornography industry to 125th Street, and that he had recently sent his
belongings back to Tampa. Late last month, the Bronx apartment Mr. Smith lived
in burned.

Police officials said they believed that Mr. Smith spent most of his final two
weeks living in one of the city's emergency shelters. So far, they have been
unable to trace the gun he used.

Mr. Powell insisted last week that he knew Mr. Smith only from seeing him and
talking with him on the street over the last several years, and that he last saw
him Dec. 5 outside Freddy's. But Walter Wells, who shopped at Freddy's on
Thursday, said Mr. Smith called him an Uncle Tom and spit at his companion.

Despite the initial findings of the police, Ms. Adadevoh said she has many
questions about what actually took place inside Freddy's on Dec. 8, chiefly
whether her brother killed himself or was shot by someone else. If the police
are right, she said she could only interpret it as the work of a person who had
for so long perceived himself a victim that he at last "had his spirit crushed."

"Everything that means something to you is taken from you," she said in
summarizing her brother's life. "No one ever listened to him. He may have been
sick and tired of being sick and tired. He reached the breaking point in his
beliefs. He always said he'd never be happy in America."

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A card found on the body of Roland J. Smith Jr. was signed
Abugunde Mulocko, a name he chose that means "one who searches for the truth."
(pg. B3)


TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 19, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Commander in Bosnia Is Known for Bluntness and Political Acumen

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1025 words

DATELINE: BAD KREUZNACH, Germany, Dec. 16


Maj. Gen. William L. Nash blew a cloud of cigar smoke from his lungs -- he
actually inhales the stuff -- and recalled the moment years ago when he
abandoned his chemistry studies to follow his father's footsteps into the Army.
This plain-speaking two-star general, now commander of the troops in the United
States sector of Bosnia, had finally overcome his doubts about a career in the
military.

"I couldn't see myself living in a chemistry lab the rest of my life," General
Nash said at his home on an Army base here, days before he led the first major
wave of American troops into Bosnia. "And the adventurous life of a soldier
appealed to me."

He dropped any indecision at the doors of West Point, as he embarked on a
decorated career that has taken him around the world, into combat in Vietnam as
well as against the Republican Guard in Iraq and, now, onto center stage in the
nation's most perilous military endeavor since the Persian Gulf war. The
52-year-old commander of the First Armored Division is not well known, but that
seems likely to change as Americans watch and worry about 20,000 of their troops
deep in Bosnia.

According to those who know him, General Nash, who really does walk ramrod
straight, will bring to the job a colorful, blunt and at times profane persona
that has earned him admirers and detractors alike.

"He brings competence," said retired Gen. Crosbie E. Saint, the former commander
of the United States Army in Europe, who has known General Nash for two decades.
"He brings determination. He brings compassion. He brings political acumen. And
I think he brings the respect of his soldiers."

But, General Saint added: "There are some people who used to complain to me
about him. They didn't like him being so blunt and direct and there are going to
be people like that now. The interesting thing about him is you ask him a
question and he'll tell you.

"If you don't want an answer," he added, "don't ask him."

General Nash has something else Army officials feel they need to court public
support for this endeavor: savvy about the media and good relations with
reporters. While other commanders spurned the press during the gulf war -- a
stance some Army officials now say discounted their victories in the public eye
-- then-Colonel Nash was accommodating, going out of his way at one point to fly
a reporter from the Kuwaiti desert to file a story on the decisive battles at
the war's end.

"As his field radios screamed and crackled in the background, the colonel sat in
a corner of his field tent, one leg draped over a chair, pensively chewing a
cigar stub," the reporter, John Fialka of The Wall Street Journal, wrote in his
book "Hotel Warriors."

"He remained noncommittal until one of his underlings announced," Mr. Fialka
wrote, "perhaps with too much of an air of finality, that there would be no
helicopter available that night."

The statement brought a sharp retort from Colonel Nash, and Mr. Fialka was on
the phone to his editor in Washington within two hours.

In nearly two hours with several reporters on a recent morning, the General
ordered his two cocker spaniels -- Bogart and son Humphrey -- to stay calm as he
spoke of the coming operation, preferring to use the word "challenges" when he
was asked about his "concerns." He explained that the Bosnia mission centered on
"force protection," military jargon for guarding against casualties. So he said
he has been paying special attention to fighting the severe Balkan winter,
worrying about his soldiers' warmth, frostbite, dehydration -- as great a danger
as in extreme heat -- and accidents on the roads.

He repeated worries about thousands of land mines scattered throughout the
region. Each soldier has received training on "mine awareness," and General Nash
said the Army is taking several special precautions, including equipping some
soldiers with full body armor and deploying remote-controlled tanks to sniff
around mined areas.

"The other thing we've worked on is what do you do when you hit a mine," he
said. "I was standing in one place in Vietnam one time, we hit about three or
four -- boom, boom, boom, boom -- and that's because when we hit the first one
we didn't do the right thing.

"So you're really got to have your wits about you," he said.

William Lafayette Nash was born in Tucson, Ariz. in 1943, the son of an Army
cavalry officer, also named William L. Nash. He graduated from high school in
Carthage, N.Y., near Fort Drum, then called Camp Drum, where his father was
commander until his death in 1959.

The younger Nash's uncertainty about the military led him to accept a
scholarship at Tulane University, but in 1963, his junior year, he changed his
mind.

"My mother filled out the applications to the United States Military Academy,
sent them to me and I signed them," he recalled. At West Point, he trained to
become a cold warrior, learning Russian and focusing on the Soviet Union as the
most likely enemy.

Now, he clearly relishes the cooperation between the United States and Russia in
the American sector in Bosnia, where he will have tactical control over a
1,500-man Russian brigade, along with troops from Turkey and several
Scandinavian nations.

Married, with three grown children, General Nash has mostly been in Germany
since 1974 working with NATO -- a structure, he said, "I am very comfortable
with." His combat experience includes a tour in Vietnam in 1969-70, then as
commander of a tank brigade in the Third Armored Division in the gulf war.

In the interview, he spoke only briefly about the threat to American soldiers
from what he called "rogue elements," adding that he could not "imagine why
anybody would think peace in Bosnia is not a good idea."

But he is well aware of the dangers. In an article in the April issue of the
military magazine Field Artillery, he wrote: "One thing we've learned is that an
operation other than war in no way implies an absence of conflict. A
peacekeeping mission can quickly escalate into one of peacemaking, peace
enforcement or some other current phrase that means soldiers on the scene are
involved in close combat."


NAME: William L. Nash

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Maj. Gen. William L. Nash, leader of the American force in
Bosnia. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 19, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

A Strapped Vietnam

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 119 words


To the Editor:

Re "American Money Makes the Whole World Sing" (Week in Review, Dec. 17):

While the false irony of your photo caption seeks to enlist the reader in gentle
ridicule of Vietnam for seeking investment from "former imperialists," the real
irony that you ignore is associated with the American role, from the beginning
of the Diem regime until this year, in reducing Vietnam to an economic and
social husk and insuring its continuation in that state.

That the country should now be desperate for funds from any source is more
accurately a byproduct of 40 years of cynical policies by history's most
powerful nation than the about-face you imply.

HENRY MECREDY
Houston, Dec. 18, 1995

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 19, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

For Students, the Runway Beckons

BYLINE: By AMY M. SPINDLER

SECTION: Section B;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Style Desk;  Fashion Page

LENGTH: 1217 words

DATELINE: PROVIDENCE, R.I.


When fashion students at the Rhode Island School of Design say that Dec. 9 was a
critical day for them, they mean it, literally.

Clutching a microphone and perched on a bar stool like crooners in a karaoke
bar, students ended the fall semester that day, presenting to a panel of
industry critics the projects they had worked on from last summer till 4 P.M.
(exactly) two days earlier.

Called "the crit," the turn in front of the panel was, for seniors, the end of a
feverish week of work to complete a collection, albeit a tiny one, with a coat
as the centerpiece.

The crit is not reserved for fashion students alone. Whether students are at
RISD (pronounced RIZ-dee) to study ceramics, art, architecture, furniture design
or painting, they must suffer the scrutiny of peers, faculty members and experts
in the field. But the way RISD has brought fashion in line with its arts-school
approach has made its graduates creative standouts.

The school's fashion strength is mostly due to the influence of Lorraine de Wet
Howes, the head of the apparel design department, and to the limited influence
of Seventh Avenue, where designer/student relationships often dull individual
statements. Students intern in New York only after they have completed their
first small collection.

Ms. Howes, who has a Miss Jean Brodie-like ability to spellbind, has been with
the school since 1972. She joined during Nicole Miller's senior year, amid
escalating protests over the Vietnam War.

"It was very uninhibited, and everyone was trying to do something
anti-establishment," Ms. Miller said. "There is still that freedom there. A lot
of the projects aren't related to consumerism or selling. At RISD, they have
creativity that hasn't been stunted. Because it's an art school, it keeps them
out of a mold."

On Dec. 7, as the seniors were finishing their small collections, sophomores
were taking a textile test, burning fabrics to find out whether they were
synthetic -- in the same room where the clothes they designed from nonfabric
detritus like Q-tips and coffee wrappers were displayed.

"The first project is to make a garment using a material never used for clothes,
and the only restriction is it has to go through a three-foot doorway," Ms.
Howes explained. It is an assignment the artist Damien Hirst might love. "Kids
are so afraid of pattern making, and they'd all go out anyway and buy fabric
they couldn't handle," Ms. Howes said. "They were so afraid of the sewing
machine and pattern making, and I thought, This assignment is really freeing."

Sophomores showed those pieces at the crit; juniors showed knits.

In the room next to the sophomores, a handful of seniors were using the final
minutes to finish pieces. "The whole fine arts environment helps a lot," Kellye
Wulfers said, sewing the finishing touches on a rubber bodice an hour and 10
minutes before deadline. "We collaborate with people from different departments,
like film/video majors, and it opens up your idea of design."

One student yelled to another: "Do the buttons first. Don't worry about the
hems."

Ms. Wulfers noted, with some relief, that her ambition was to work in fashion
public relations, not the design studio.

Erika Carmichael was working on a men's shearling and leather coat that looked
heavier than she was, a request from a boyfriend that she design him some
clothes. She glanced at the clock and said, "Ex-boyfriend."

On Dec. 9, she was one of the few students who had her entire collection chosen
for the school's final show, on May 18. The seniors have another shot at getting
clothes in the runway event on May 4, at a second crit, where they will show
another collection.

But two days earlier, at 3:45 P.M., she was not quite ready.

"I think it's time to have a little sex in men's wear," she said, showing a
codpiece stitched into satin pajama pants.

At the crit, each student has six minutes for the five-member panel to look at
the clothes and for the student to defend them. Students help Ms. Howes choose
which insiders will critique them each year.

Criticisms can be pointed, like, "The seams are distracting," or philosophical,
like a warning against primary colors. When Margaretha Hutauruk, described her
painstaking cutting of strips of fabric on the bias, then weaving them and
cutting them into a coat, a dress and a cropped jacket, the designer Michael
Leva, who is a graduate of RISD and was a critic, said, "I'm really surprised
you lived to tell about it."

Nicole Gordon brought out models wearing her collection. Mr. Leva deemed it
"sick-cute," and Ms. Howes said it had "an exuberence of personal style I think
is rare." In its off shades -- a mustard corduroy coat, purple knit shirt and
big cuffed gray pants -- it really did.

And Raphael Cardenas showed a romantic revamped Edwardian collection that was
sophisticated well beyond his years.

"I have blurbs I give to sophomores that I wrote some years ago, and it's called
'About Critiques,' " Ms. Howes said. "And it says that the most important thing
is having a deadline and finishing. You are your own best judge. We invite
people from the outside because we want you to see your clothes objectively.

"You will be critiqued daily once you're out there," she continued. "One day the
press will come and adore you; the next day they'll hate you. If you go up with
the love and down with the criticism, you'll be a basket case in no time. So,
you just should take what's said to you and digest it, and if it doesn't apply,
ignore it."

She knows whereof she speaks. Ms. Howes has had a career spanning several
continents and every expertise of fashion, from couture to modeling to
retailing.

"When I began in the industry, I knew exactly what I wanted to do," she said.
"But today, designers have no idea what they might end up doing. I want them to
be able to move in many different directions because the market is so exploded."
Which is why students learn not only to design clothes, but also to knit, draft,
draw and drape.

Ms. Howes is on a one-year sabbatical from teaching, while she prepares an
exhibition, "Dress, Art and Society," to open next fall at the school's museum
of art, based on lectures from her costume history class.

"My mission at RISD has been to teach that clothing is the real fingerprint of
the culture," she said. "Not everybody owns paintings, but everybody wears
clothes, and clothes totally express the culture."

And clothes would happen with, or without, the blessing of a designer label, she
said. Which is why she feels that the struggle to become a famous designer is a
distraction, and why she can name every past student who went to Kmart to work
in the design department, as well as the ones, like Mr. Leva, whose names are a
label.

"There is something about this name game, this obsession to be famous, that
makes them forget that what really matters is the learning process," she said.
"The most important thing to leave RISD with is the feeling that they learned a
lot and they may not be apparel designers, but they had an education that they
could be anything."

But it is clear what she hopes they will decide. "Clothes that are well designed
give so much pleasure," she said. "I think clothing is a mind-altering drug. It
can completely change the way you feel."

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lorraine de Wet Howes, the director of apparel design at the
Rhode Island School of Design.; Crystal White, a junior, shows her knits at the
school's "crit."; Nicole Gordon sewing part of her collection at the last
minute.; Ms. Gordon with her models.; Erika Carmichael working until deadline on
her collection.; Ms. Carmichael with her models.; The romantic designs of
Raphael Cardenas, sophisticated beyond his years.; The hand-woven coat of
Margaretha Hutauruk, worn by a model. (Photographs by Ed Quinn for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 270 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          December 20, 1995 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Stone's Embrace of a Despised President

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1423 words


In his lonely Xanadu on Pennsylvania Avenue, the Citizen Nixon of Oliver Stone's
sprawling new biography is left to contemplate what history has in store. And
not in his wildest dreams can he be imagining anything like this. Like a
prisoner identifying with his captor in a rare form of Stockholm syndrome, Mr.
Stone aligns himself with the Presidential pariah who has captured his
imagination. Out of this comes one of Mr. Stone's biggest gambles, a bold feat
of revisionism that veers unpredictably between turgidness and inspiration.

What it finally adds up to is a huge mixed bag of waxworks and daring, a film
that is furiously ambitious even when it goes flat, and startling even when it
settles for eerie, movie-of-the-week mimicry. Reckless, bullying and naggingly
unreliable, this mercurial "Nixon" is also finally as gutsy and overpowering as
it means to be. And it achieves the effect Mr. Stone is always after: Attention
must be paid.

The visual style of "Nixon" is positively sedate by Stone standards, a welcome
relief from the shrillness of "Natural Born Killers" and the historical
quicksand of "J. F. K." But this film's conception is more tacitly risky, since
Mr. Stone envisions a punishingly long (nearly three and a quarter hours)
re-examination of what much of his audience already knows. And Mr. Stone,
America's most strenuously subversive film maker, has the headstrong
intelligence to make it work.

In his capacity as rogue educator, he offers an exhaustive barrage of snippets
and re-enactments, with glimpses of everyone from Mao Zedong to Alger Hiss to
Helen Gahagan Douglas to well-known Nixon pets. Nixon's famous speech about
Checkers is lovingly recreated by Anthony Hopkins, who captures his character's
embattled outlook and stiff, hunched body language with amazing skill. As for
another family dog, even the unfriendliness of King Timahoe toward his master
telegraphs the film's view of Nixon as a lonely man.

Or as Henry A. Kissinger (uncannily impersonated by Paul Sorvino) puts it, "Can
you imagine what this man might have been had he ever been loved?" The
screenplay often indulges its taste for such soapy oversimplifications,
especially when it feels free to imagine how Richard and Pat Nixon talked to
each other behind closed doors. (Mrs. Nixon, played gracefully and touchingly by
Joan Allen: "I just wish you knew how much I love you.") That dramatic license,
reducing the characters to puppets, is as damaging as the film's free-floating
insinuation that Nixon's involvement in a plot to kill Fidel Castro during the
Eisenhower years led indirectly to President John F. Kennedy's assassination.
Mr. Stone has so much else at work here that he doesn't need this whiff of
intrigue. Besides, in the conspiracy department, Watergate is a hard act to
follow.

"That's not true either!" a stranger behind me kept remarking at one "Nixon"
screening. It doesn't matter whether he was right to complain. What does matter
is that the film is so loaded with composites and minor fictions that it
inevitably excites a certain alarm, though it hardly rivals "J. F. K." in that
regard. And Mr. Stone intensifies the accuracy issue with a newly published
companion volume (edited by Eric Hamburg) of Watergate tape transcripts, random
commentary (the essay by Alexander Butterfield, a crucial Watergate witness,
notes that he was asked to write about "anything at all" regarding Nixon). The
book includes a screenplay so ostentatiously annotated that it says more about
the film maker than about his subject matter. Look closely and learn that while
the film's Nixon refers to G. Gordon Liddy as "that fruitcake," the word Nixon
actually used on June 23, 1972, was "nuts."

But this portrait doesn't stand or fall on its research credentials. Which is
why it's fortunate that something changes midway through "Nixon": Mr. Stone's
compassion for his subject overwhelms his film's false moves. And the barrage of
undramatized, undigested data gives way to a much tighter and more artful
vision. Having ricocheted through Nixon's boyhood, college years, defeats in
1960 and 1962, his visit to China and bombing of Cambodia and his immersion in
the Vietnam War, the film starts snowballing its way to real dramatic power.

It achieves its full impact in its last hour as the noose of Watergate tightens,
creating a claustrophobic intensity and making Mr. Stone's embellishments look
insightful instead of arbitrary. By the time he stages a wrenching finale in a
White House that looks haunted, where every element of the beleaguered
President's world seems to conspire against him, Mr. Stone has brought this
enormous film into sharp focus. And "Nixon" finally achieves its hard-won tragic
dimension, even if the S-word (for Bard of Avon) has no real relevance here.
"Nixon" has ghosts and hubris, a lost kingdom and a fall from grace, but its
probing never penetrates the surface of this elusive man.

Instead, as it rounds up the usual suspects to reinvent the drama of Watergate,
the film enlarges Mr. Hopkins's haunted, overwhelmingly vivid Nixon by framing
him with secondary characters who seem like stray parts of his own tortured
psyche. Never have Mr. Kissinger, H. R. Haldeman (James Woods), John Ehrlichman
(J. T. Walsh), John N. Mitchell (E. G. Marshall), Alexander M. Haig Jr. (Powers
Boothe), John Dean (David Hyde Pierce) or even J. Edgar Hoover (Bob Hoskins),
however well and differently acted, seemed like such clear extensions of the
same personality. And each of them has occasion to think piquantly about how
Nixon's fortunes affect his own fate, not to mention the fate of the nation.

"This is about Richard Nixon," Mr. Ehrlichman says about dirty tricks, Watergate
and his boss, whom the film sees as plagued by lifelong, childhood-rooted
insecurities. "You got people dying because he didn't make the varsity football
team. You got the Constitution hanging by a thread because the old man went to
Whittier and not to Yale." Mr. Hopkins's Nixon has such bravado that he gets
away with talking to likenesses of Presidents Kennedy and Lincoln and echoing
these same thoughts.

The supporting cast of "Nixon," in which Ms. Allen, Mr. Woods and Mr. Sorvino
are shown off to best advantage, is immense and often wittily chosen, even if
many of the roles are barely walk-ons. (Or worse: the script features an
important role for Sam Waterston as Richard Helms, but he's not here.) From
Brian Bedford as Clyde Tolson, Mr. Hoover's companion (seen slyly reading
"Couples"), to Edward Herrmann as Nelson A. Rockefeller and Madeline Kahn as
Martha Mitchell, the film's cameos are steadily entertaining.

Blink and you'll miss Spiro T. Agnew. Elsewhere, Larry Hagman is cast to his
television type as a diabolical rich Texan, one of the film's composite
characters. Ed Harris makes a steely E. Howard Hunt. And Mary Steenburgen plays
Hannah Nixon as a demure Quaker mother with an inspiring and debilitating
influence over her son. This film's Nixon could be Norman Bates by the time he
recoils at his own obscenities on the Watergate tapes, exclaiming: "Do you think
I want all the world to see my mother like this? Raising a dirty mouth?"

"Nixon" has long since transcended the realm of ordinary biography by then.

"Nixon" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It
includes rough and undeleted expletives from the Oval Office and many other
settings.

NIXON Directed by Oliver Stone; written by Stephen J. Rivele, Christopher
Wilkinson and Mr. Stone; director of photography, Robert Richardson; edited by
Brian Berdan and Hank Corwin; music by John Williams; production designer,
Victor Kempster; produced by Clayton Townsend, Mr. Stone and Andrew G. Vajna;
released by Hollywood Pictures. Running time: 190 minutes. This film is rated R.


WITH: Anthony Hopkins (Richard M. Nixon), Joan Allen (Pat Nixon), Powers Boothe
(Alexander M. Haig Jr.), Ed Harris (E. Howard Hunt), Bob Hoskins (J. Edgar
Hoover), E. G. Marshall (John N. Mitchell), David Paymer (Ron Ziegler), David
Hyde Pierce (John Dean), Paul Sorvino (Henry A. Kissinger), Mary Steenburgen
(Hannah Nixon), J. T. Walsh (John Ehrlichman), James Woods (H. R. Haldeman),
Brian Bedford (Clyde Tolson), Kevin Dunn (Charles Colson), Fyvush Finkel (Murray
Chotiner), Annabeth Gish (Julie Nixon), Tony Goldwyn (Harold Nixon), Larry
Hagman (Jack Jones), Ed Herrmann (Nelson A.Rockefeller), Madeline Kahn (Martha
Mitchell), Saul Rubinek (Herb Klein) and Tony Lo Bianco (Johnny Roselli).


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Anthony Hopkins, arm raised, as President Richard Nixon, andPaul
Sorvino, left, as Henry Kissinger in "Nixon." (Sidney Baldwin/Cinergi Pictures
Entertainment)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

New Look At Nixon Era, By the Memos

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 18;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 679 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 19


The National Archives released a 50,000-page grab bag of long-classified
documents from President Richard M. Nixon's White House today -- no smoking
guns, but fascinating fragments, from a slew of favor-seeking memos by Senator
Bob Dole to an early draft of a plan for spying on left-wingers.

A glance at the files revealed the 25-year-old thoughts of several present-day
Presidential contenders: admiring notes by Patrick J. Buchanan, then a young
Nixon aide; querulous and commendatory letters from Mr. Dole, Republican
National Committee chairman from 1971 to 1973, and internal White House messages
contemplating setting Mr. Dole to work digging up dirt on the President's
political foes.

Letters from Mr. Dole, some quite stern, poured into the Nixon White House,
sometimes daily. They sought scores of patronage jobs for friends and
constituents, political favors ranging from executive clemency to 100th-birthday
telephone calls, and support for Mr. Dole's favorite causes, like the corn-based
gasoline additives made by a longtime sponsor, the agribusiness giant Archer
Daniels Midland.

They also sought responses to stunningly obscure inquiries from the Senator's
Kansas constituents: questions about car repairs, home-canning tips and
undelivered mail.

Mr. Dole did not always succeed in finding Administration jobs for his friends
and allies. "Kansans may yet land one appointment," he wrote tartly to a
Presidential assistant, Bryce Harlow, in April 1969. "We do have an inside track
on a janitor's job at the U.S.D.A. -- we lost out on the doorman."

In addition to seeking help, Mr. Dole also gave support. "I want you to know
that the good people of Kansas are most impressed with the Sunday morning
worship services and with the practice thus far of serving no 'hard liquor' at
White House functions," the Senator wrote Mr. Nixon in February 1969, two weeks
into the President's first term.

And he was hardly the only favor-seeker at the Nixon White House. Ross Perot
sought help with "Wall Street troubles," says a 1973 memorandum from Al Haig,
the general-turned-political-foot soldier. And 18-year-old John Kasich, now
chairman of the House Budget Committee, scrawled a five-page letter seeking an
internship. He was rejected.

The files also contain the glowing words of Mr. Buchanan, one of President
Nixon's youngest aides, as he watched the boss in action.

"The President entered about 8:30 A.M., looking surprisingly rested and even
tanned following his trip" to Europe, Mr. Buchanan noted on March 4, 1969. By
contrast, Senator Edward M. Kennedy looked "inordinately ruddy, as though he had
either been on the slopes for the weekend, or on the town for the night."

Two other members of the Republican Presidential field, Senator Richard G.
Lugar, then Mayor of Indianapolis and a favorite of Mr. Nixon, and Lamar
Alexander, then a rising star in Tennessee, also show up in the newly
declassified files, but only in passing.

For Watergate aficionados, the files include a June 4, 1970, memo to President
Nixon from an aide, Tom Charles Huston. It is the earliest record of a plan to
put American intelligence agencies to work spying on American groups "determined
to destroy our society" -- those opposed to Mr. Nixon and the war in Vietnam.
The existence of the "Huston plan," approved by Mr. Nixon but opposed and
eventually blocked by the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, J.
Edgar Hoover, became public during and after the Watergate scandal, which drove
the President from office in August 1974.

Nixon connoisseurs may also enjoy his November 1969 memorandum to his national
security adviser, Henry A. Kissinger. It refers to a suggestion from yet another
up-and-coming member of his Administration, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the future
New York Senator.

"What is your reaction to Moynihan's memo to me on the Harvard-Ivy League
elite?" the President asks. "Do you agree with his thesis that we should find
some way to 'communicate' with them because they will be the leader class in 10
or 15 years?"

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

At the Nation's Table

BYLINE: By MELISSA A. TRAINER

SECTION: Section C; Page 6; Column 1; Living DeskLiving Desk

LENGTH: 424 words



Seattle

Dinner? Catch Your Own

While many Seattleites prefer to buy their squid from a local fishmonger, a
growing number of hardy residents who like a bit of a challenge are catching the
elusive creatures from piers in the Puget Sound.

The Pacific species of squid, known as opal squid, is abundant in the sound's
salt waters from October to February. So during these cold and rainy months,
fanciers brave the elements and head for the sound in the dark of night to jig
for squid.

Jigging requires a fishing license and a few tools -- a light rod and reel, jigs
(store-bought or homemade lures whose glow or glitter fools the squid into
thinking they are food), a bucket and a halogen lamp to make the jigs glow,
attracting the squid, which feed at night.

It is common now to see dozens of bundled-up men, women and children -- most of
Asian descent -- shoulder-to-shoulder along the piers, rods in hand, peering
into the cold sound, waiting for the tug of squid wrapping their tentacles
around the jigs.

Michael Horton, an avid fisherman who, like other jiggers, moves from pier to
pier, wherever the squid happen to be, said: "You often sit out there in the
cold waiting and second-guessing yourself. Then when they hit, they hit hard,
and you can't get your line down fast enough."

On a good night, the daily limit of 10 pounds a person can be reached in about
half an hour. Depending on the size, that could mean a hefty few nights'
dinners: 50 and 75 squid. Because they feed on krill and move around a lot,
squid in the sound are considered safe to eat because they are not affected by
toxins as shellfish like clams and oysters can be, the State of Washington
Department of Fish and Wildlife said.

Dr. Kenneth Chew of the University of Washington School of Fisheries in Seattle
said it has always been known that squid were plentiful in the sound, but few
fishermen used them for more than bait until after the Vietnam War. "The
Vietnamese refugees knew how to jig for them," he said. "They would go out on
the docks and get enough to fill up five-gallon buckets. As a result, interest
increased, and now it isn't only immigrants who are jigging."

As more residents take up the sport, enthusiasts are learning that it is not
without its pitfalls. Maria Beppu, who has been selling jigging paraphernalia
with her husband, Jerry, at Linc's Tackle and Honda for 15 years, said that one
jigger who worked his way through the crowd a little too aggressively got nudged
right into the water.

MELISSA A. TRAINER

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Steve Desimone with his squid from the Puget Sound. (Doug Wilson
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Mario A. Procaccino, 83, Who Lost to Lindsay in 1969, Dies

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section B;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1219 words


Mario A. Procaccino, an immigrant's son from the Bronx who tapped the
resentments of disaffected New Yorkers from outside Manhattan in a colorful but
unsuccessful bid to wrest the mayoralty from John V. Lindsay in 1969, died
yesterday at Our Lady of Mercy Hospital in the Bronx. Mr. Procaccino, who moved
to Harrison, N.Y., a few years ago and spent his winters in San Juan, P.R., was
83.

Mr. Procaccino's death was caused by complications of diabetes that led to heart
failure, said his daughter, Marierose, of Harrison.

A stocky man with a pencil-thin mustache, the shrewd, tough, streetwise Mr.
Procaccino rose through the ranks of the Democratic Party to become its
standard-bearer in a race against Mr. Lindsay that was memorable for exposing
the alienation of many New Yorkers from the Manhattanites that Mr. Procaccino
dubbed "limousine liberals."

Although his law-and-order message was widely perceived as a thinly disguised
attack on black and Hispanic people, Mr. Procaccino bridled against what he
called "the efforts to brand me as a racist and a shoot-to-kill guy."

He said: "They try to turn me into an ogre. It's nonsense. I'm a progressive
Democrat, the same as I've always been. I want to be Mayor of all the people,
black and white, Jew and gentile, rich and poor. The only thing I care about is
whether you're a good guy or a bad guy."

Mario Procaccino was the self-proclaimed champion of the average man. He made
his definition clear: "I'll tell you who the average man is. He's the guy who
works hard all day and maybe comes home too tired to move, but he has to
moonlight anyway to pay his bills. He wants to educate his kids. He wants his
neighborhood to be peaceful and clean. He doesn't have a doorman. His kids go to
public schools. He rides the subways and the buses. He never burned his draft
card or a flag and he never will. He tries to play the game by the rules, and
for that he's getting pushed into a corner. That's who the average man is."

While other candidates in the mayoral primary spoke of the need for conciliation
and social vision and a better break for the city's blacks and poor and aged,
Mr. Procaccino, Comptroller from 1966 to 1970, was on the sidewalks of the white
middle- and lower-middle-class neighborhoods of the Bronx, Queens and Staten
Island, pounding home his theme:

"We must stop coddling the criminals and pampering the punks," he would roar.
"The do-gooders and bleeding hearts must stop handcuffing the police."

He liked to say, "It's safer to be in Vietnam than to be in New York at 3
o'clock in the morning." He often told his audiences what he would do if he
caught a burglar in his home: "I wouldn't run for the handbook. I wouldn't call
my lawyer. I'd just blow his brains out."

He proposed more severe punishment for repeat offenders, laws to treat "young
hoodlums as criminals instead of youthful offenders" and restoration of capital
punishment.

"I want to restore the rule of reason to this town," he said.

When the campaign ended, Mr. Lindsay, who was running for re-election as an
independent because he failed to win the Republic primary nomination, had
1,012,633 votes; Mr. Procaccino, the Democrat who thought throughout the
campaign that he was the front-runner, had 831,772, and John J. Marchi, the
Republican candidate from Staten Island, had 542,411.

Long after the tumult and the shouting, Mr. Procaccino lingered in the memory
for his sometimes wayward use of words. Besides "limousine liberals," he was
remembered for the time he groped to describe his fellow Democrat Frank O'Connor
and said, "He grows on you, like cancer."

When Wall Street threats prompted the Mayor to drop Mr. Procaccino's proposed
increase in the tax on stock transfers, the Comptroller was quoted as saying,
"Why must we always milk the public goat and never touch the sacred cow?" When
he shouted, "And I say to you, John Lindsay, the jig is up," his aides rushed to
tell reporters that Mr. Procaccino didn't mean anything racial; the word "jig"
referred to an Irish dance.

On another occasion, before a black audience, he declared, "My heart is as black
as yours," and when Mayor Lindsay began to needle him about his emotionalism,
Mr. Procaccino responded that some of history's greatest men were emotional:
"Moses, Jesus, Joe DiMaggio and Joe Namath."

After losing the mayoral race, Mr. Procaccino served as a special assistant to
Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller, was a Commissioner of Taxation and Finance, the
president of the State Tax Commission and a member of the Battery Park City
Authority. In recent years, Mr. Procaccino served as an administrative judge for
the state retirement system and maintained a law practice in association with
the firm of Fuchsberg & Fuchsberg.

Mr. Procaccino was a municipal and civil court judge, the Director of the
Mortgage Banking and Housing agency, a deputy comptroller and the chief law
assistant in the Bronx Supreme Court before being elected Comptroller in 1965.
He traced the origin of his political career to 1944, when he met Mayor Fiorello
H. La Guardia at a war-bond rally held by an Italian-American organization.

"I was speaking in Italian and had the crowd pretty excited," Mr. Procaccino
recalled. "They were shouting and cheering and standing up at the end." When he
saw the Mayor approaching the stage, Mr. Procaccino stopped talking, but Mr. La
Guardia signaled him to continue.

"When I finished, he got up in his usual flamboyant manner and came over to me,"
Mr. Procaccino said. "He planted a kiss on my cheek. 'Listen,' he says, 'I'm
proud to have some Italian blood in me. Stick around. I want to talk to you.'

"He asked me, 'What do you do for a living?' and I told him I was a lawyer. 'You
appeal to people,' he said. 'You ought to be in politics.' I said, 'I don't
belong to a club or anything.' 'I don't care about that,' the Mayor said. 'Call
me tomorrow.' "

Mr. Procaccino said he thought the Mayor was just being polite, so he did not
call the next day or the day after that. On the third day, the Mayor telephoned
him.

"You get over here," the Mayor said, and soon Mr. Procaccino, who had been
making $15 a week as a lawyer when he married Maria Piombino in 1941, found
himself an assistant city corporation counsel at a salary of $3,500 a year.

"You could live well on that," he said long afterward. "Our rent, for example,
was $37 a month, and that was for a nice apartment, four or five rooms."

Mario Angelo Procaccino was born in Bisaccia, Italy, 50 miles southeast of
Naples, on Sept. 5, 1912. He was the second of three sons of Angelo and Rosa
Procaccino, a shoemaker and hat maker, respectively. In 1921, when Mario was 9,
the family immigrated to the United States and settled in the Bronx, where Mr.
Procaccino spent most of his life, first in Fordham and later in Tremont.

He graduated from DeWitt Clinton High School and City College, where he was
president of his graduating class in 1935. He then went to Fordham Law School,
where he made the dean's list and was a member of the editorial board of The Law
Review before graduating in 1939.

Besides his daughter, Mr. Procaccino is survived by his wife, Maria, also of
Harrison, and two brothers, Dr. Anthony Procaccino of Pelham Manor, N.Y., and
John A. Procaccino of Yonkers.


NAME: Mario A. Procaccino

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mario A. Procaccino during his race against Mayor John V.
Lindsay. (The New York Times, 1969)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Liberties;
Nix 'Nixon' -- Tricky Pix

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section A;  Page 29;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 677 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


I thought Oliver Stone might go all the way, and have Anthony Hopkins play Nixon
as Hannibal Lecter.

Imagine Nixon in the Oval Office, listening to the "Goldberg Variations" and
savoring the prospect of eating John Dean's liver with some fava beans and a
nice Chianti.

Or perhaps a scene where he smiles frostily and sends his valet Manolo Sanchez
to fetch an impudent Bordeaux from the White House wine cellar. He is having Bob
Woodward for lunch.

But Oliver Stone wanted to make a sympathetic movie about a kindred paranoid
spirit. "It's a film that heals," he said from his car phone. "That's why we
play 'Shenandoah' at the end." So he does not present Nixon as a cannibalistic
psychopath. He merely portrays him as a pill-popping, Scotch-swilling, impotent
madman haunted by his role in C.I.A. plots to assassinate Castro that got out of
control and killed J.F.K.

(The mind reels that Alexander Haig is the most serene character in the movie.)

Evan Thomas, the author of "The Very Best Men," a history of the early C.I.A.,
says that his interviews and research into classified documents showed that
Nixon had no role in C.I.A. assassination plots, and added that it would be
laughable to accuse the C.I.A. of killing Kennedy, if so many people didn't
believe it, thanks to Mr. Stone.

Roger Stone, keeper of the Nixon flame, wearily notes: "Scotch wasn't even
Nixon's drink. He made a mean martini, though. He'd say, 'Do you want a silver
bullet?' "

Never mind that Oliver Stone has relied on speculation for his "Rosebud," as he
calls his antihero's obsession with the assassination plots. Many critics are
hailing "Nixon" as a new "Citizen Kane." Newsweek gushed: "The propagandist has
been replaced by a bold portraitist."

At a reception with the bold portraitist after a screening of "Nixon" at the
Kennedy Center, Bob Woodward observed, "I guess everybody gets the psychoanalyst
they deserve, and Nixon got Oliver Stone."

Perhaps every society gets the mythmaker it deserves as well. A culture that
confuses celebrity with value, historical knowledge with repressed memory, gets
Mr. Stone.

After the storm over "JFK," in which the director implied that Lyndon Johnson
and the C.I.A. were part of a conspiracy about President Kennedy's death, Mr.
Stone is trying to have it both ways. Wanting to be seen as historically
scrupulous, he hired Nixon aides as consultants and published a script with
footnotes.

But when asked about some blatant twisting of fact, he falls back on the
argument that it's just a movie. "It's a Nixon," he told USA Today. "It's not
the Nixon." (That's like saying, "I am not a crook," as opposed to "I am not the
crook.")

After you've seen enough "documentary replacements," as Mr. Stone calls his
morphing of actors with real footage -- Mr. Hopkins debating Kennedy and
pointing his finger at Khrushchev -- it just looks like any Nixon.

Hollywood has always mixed entertainment and history. In "Night and Day," Cary
Grant played Cole Porter as a devout heterosexual.

But Mr. Stone does not sugarcoat. He poison-coats, mixing fact and propaganda
with such skill that millions of impressionable moviegoers are left believing
that there has been nothing but Manichean darkness at the top. His talent as a
film maker does not make the situation better. Artful falsehood is more
dangerous than artless falsehood, because fewer people will see through it.

He gloms on to whole big sections of recent history and filters everything
through one unproven prism: that J.F.K. wanted to withdraw from Vietnam, and
that he was murdered for it by The System.

In 1992, some Times reporters had coffee with Nixon. He analyzed the political
landscape, predicting that the Iraqgate scandal wouldn't harm George Bush,
unless there were incriminating tapes.

"And I know something about tapes," he murmured drily. Poor Nixon -- all those
tapes, with all those juicy quotes and all that drama and wickedness, and still
Hollywood gets it wrong.

Oh, for the day when we won't have Oliver Stone to kick around anymore.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

For Most G.I.'s, Only Few Hints of Hate Groups

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1596 words

DATELINE: FORT CARSON, Colo., Dec. 15


For Bob, a burly white Army sergeant, the underground presence of white
supremacists at this prairie post is as clear as the Ku Klux Klan and Aryan
Brotherhood graffiti he says he sees scrawled on portable toilets on firing
ranges.

"It's a natural for them to recruit among soldiers -- that's where the guns
are," the 12-year Army veteran said as music boomed and dancers gyrated at an
off-post strip joint. Motioning to his chest, he said, "They might slip a few
extra rounds in their pockets."

But across town, managers at Power Rentals South, the company that maintains the
post's portable toilets, said racist graffiti were rare. Darrell Fox, the
assistant manager, said, "Occasionally, you see a swastika, but they are few and
far between."

The presence of graffiti is only one clue the Army is looking for as it embarks
on a worldwide hunt for white supremacists in its 510,000-member ranks. The
inquiry, announced on Dec. 12 after two white soldiers were charged in the
slayings of a black man and woman in North Carolina, has yet to yield results.

But in conversations with reporters at bases around the country, Army officers
and enlisted personnel mentioned only a few dark hints of hatred like the
elusive graffiti. For the most part, they supported the Pentagon position that
few soldiers actively participate in white supremacist groups.

"People are not going to come up to you and say, 'Hey, we're neo-Nazis, we're
with the Klan' -- it's subtler than that," Dennis Morgan, an Army specialist
from New Jersey, said this week at Fort Benning, Ga. "The Army does its best to
screen out the paramilitary and the right-wing types. But occasionally,
somebody's going to hook up with the wrong people."

Lieut. Gen. Anthony C. Zinni, commander of six Marine Corps bases in Southern
California and Arizona, said that the fight against white supremacy recruitment
should become part of military routine, similar to the military's ongoing fight
against racism and drug use, including sensitivity training.

"We haven't seen it where we are, but I'm really concerned about it," General
Zinni told reporters on Thursday. "We went through this in the early 1970's with
the racial efforts. It's never fixed. It's like drugs. It's continuous. You have
to stay on it."

Human rights groups welcomed the investigation, which the Pentagon said would
focus on violence-prone groups of long standing like the Klan, skinheads and
neo-Nazis. But they said the Army should expand its inquiry to the far-right
threat that gained attention after the Oklahoma City bombing last April:
anti-Government paramilitary groups.

Army troops are prime targets for recruitment by such groups, said Joe T. Roy,
director of the Militia Task Force for the Southern Poverty Law Center.

"They preach survivalism, training, stockpiling weapons," Mr. Roy said. "The
paramilitary mindset is attractive to veterans and active-duty personnel."

In June, Francisco Duran, an Army veteran who lived about 10 miles south of Fort
Carson, was sentenced to 40 years in Federal prison for raking the White House
with bullets from a Chinese assault rifle last year. Mr. Duran reportedly had
attended meetings of a local group, the Save America Militia.

As officers question soldiers, check personnel records and search barracks and
off-post housing for neo-Nazi paraphernalia, they are driven by the Army's
failure to act on Nazi leanings exhibited in the last 10 months by Pvt. James N.
Burmeister 2d, a 20-year-old member of the Army's elite Special Forces who was
stationed at Fort Bragg, N.C.

In February, Private Burmeister was reprimanded for wearing a Nazi medallion
under his uniform. In August, he lost his security clearance after fighting with
a black soldier. If his commanding officer had inspected a room he rented in an
off-post trailer, he would have found Nazi flags, skinhead magazines and books
on Hitler.

Today, Private Burmeister and a fellow soldier stand charged with murdering a
black couple in Fayetteville, N.C., near Fort Bragg, on Dec. 7; another soldier
faces related charges. Last week, Army investigators seeking to identify other
skinheads in uniform showed Fayetteville nightclub managers photographs of
Private Burmeister and friends giving Nazi salutes.

In the early 1990's, Timothy J. McVeigh, then a soldier stationed at Fort Riley,
Kan., encouraged his Army comrades to read "The Turner Diaries," a novel by
William Pierce that advocates armed attacks on the Government. Earlier this year
Mr. McVeigh was charged with masterminding the Oklahoma City bombing.

At the same time, the National Alliance, a white supremacist group led by Mr.
Pierce that is based in Hillsboro, W.Va., posted a recruiting notice on a
billboard outside Fort Bragg.

Despite such cases, military commanders say that white supremacist recruiting is
a small problem and maintain that the Army, whose membership is nearly 40
percent minority, has a proud record of racial integration.

Indeed, since 1990, only a handful of American military personnel have been
publicly linked to white supremacist acts -- largely stealing weapons for groups
or joining their clandestine ranks, according to the Anti-Defamation League of
New York and Klanwatch of Montgomery, Ala. In 1990, five Air Force policemen
were discharged for their involvement with the Ku Klux Klan at Carswell Air
Force Base in Texas.

But Abraham H. Foxman, national director of the Anti-Defamation League, said
such statistics did not tell the whole story. "It's a closed society, so,
therefore, a lot of incidents of a racist nature don't surface," he said. "It's
only when there is such a grotesque incident as these murders that the public
focuses on it."

And a few soldiers say there has been a long history of looking away.

Last week a marine based at Camp Pendleton, Calif., recalled accompanying a
group of marines to Tijuana, Mexico. Tattooed and dressed in skinhead attire,
they drank and chanted racist slogans on a town square, said the soldier, who
would give his name only as Josh. The incident apparently never came to the
attention of the marines' commanders.

Fort Carson, whose 17,000 soldiers make it Colorado's largest military
installation, seems to fit the national profile: a post with little visible
white supremacist activity.

Searching back to 1988, military officials found no complaint against a soldier
for white supremacist activity in the criminal files of Fort Carson or of the El
Paso County police.

The only entry in police files was a tip in 1990 that a soldier stationed at
Fort Carson was seen fraternizing with skinheads in Boulder, 90 miles north of
here. The tip was noted in a 1992 Pentagon report on gang participation within
the Army, but did not result in disciplinary action.

Around Fort Carson's commercial fringe of gun shops, pawn shops, used car lots
and strip joints, random interviews generally supported the perception that few
soldiers at the post were involved in extremist activity.

At Holey Rollers, a tattoo salon, Scott Toy said requests for white power
symbols like swastikas or lightning bolts were rare. "In three years," he said,
"I think I have only gotten three requests for racial tattoos -- and they
weren't military."

Military officials say that Army policy, heavy training schedules and frequent
reassignments help to curb soldiers from joining extremist groups off base. For
example, since July, the 3,500 soldiers of the Third Brigade Combat Team, which
is based here, followed this deployment itinerary: Trinidad; Colorado;
California; Guantanamo Bay, Cuba; Canada, and Kuwait.

"Joe, the military guy, is going to be out of here in two years," said Maj.
Timothy P. Edinger, the Fort Carson spokesman. "It's much more interesting for a
group to recruit Joe, the hardware store guy -- he's in the National Guard and
part of the community."

The armed forces do not allow "active" participation in extremist groups --
propagandizing, collecting money, attending rallies or leading a cell. "Passive"
participation like membership or receiving literature is tolerated.

Today the armed forces' biggest gray area involves the new right-wing
phenomenon, the paramilitary groups. With 20 such groups, Colorado ranks third
in the nation, after Michigan with 30 and California with 22, according to the
Southern Poverty Law Center.

Officials at Fort Carson said they did not know whether the El Paso County
paramilitary group attracted any soldiers here.

Ten miles east of Fort Carson, down a dirt road past trailers and junkyards, Mel
Bernstein presides over Dragon Arms -- a gun lover's paradise that includes a
firing range, a paintball range, a military vehicles museum and the county's
only store licensed to sell automatic weapons.

"The El Paso County Militia is my best customer," said Mr. Bernstein, who still
mourns the day last April when Federal agents raided his complex and confiscated
a Vietnam War-era armored personnel carrier. Mr. Bernstein, who comes from
Brooklyn and is a former tank commander, was vague when asked if Fort Carson
soldiers participated. "It's all kinds of people -- firemen, family people," he
said.

But the owner of a gun shop in Boulder said he was certain that some military
personnel took part in activities of local paramilitary groups.

"There is no doubt in my mind that you have active-duty people involved," said
Bob Glass, another New York native. "I've gone to a few militia meetings. There
are young men with very short haircuts, a military stature to them. Are they
active duty? You tell me."


LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 22, 1995, Friday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about soldiers around the country and their views about
white supremacists in the ranks misstated the Army assignment of Pvt. James N.
Burmeister 2d, who is charged in the killing of a black couple in Fayetteville,
N.C. He is a member of the 82d Airborne Division, not the Special Forces, at
Fort Bragg, N.C.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Fort Carson officials say they do not know whether soldiers
stationed there were attracted to local paramilitary groups. And Mel Bernstein,
a nearby gun dealer, was vague when asked about the matter last week. (Beth Wald
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 22, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section D;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1171 words


Always eager to ride coattails, home video established a connection this week
with "Nixon," the Oliver Stone film that opened on Wednesday. If "Nixon" is Mr.
Stone's take on the man, "The Real Nixon," a set of three videos to be released
on Tuesday by Central Park Media, is a carefully orchestrated but oddly
affecting effort by the former President to come across as a regular fellow.

The tapes are drawn from 38 hours of conversation between Richard M. Nixon and
Frank Gannon, an author and producer who spent four years with Nixon as a
researcher and writer immediately after the President's resignation in 1974.
"I'm a loyalist, but not a blind one," Mr. Gannon said recently.

The conversations, which were recorded in 1984, 10 years before his death,
covered the hot spots of the Nixon Presidency, from Vietnam to Watergate, as
well as personal matters. In no way, though, are they hardball interviews. Tough
subjects are broached -- for instance, Mr. Gannon mentions "stories that in fact
you have a loveless marriage, one of convenience and necessity" -- but Nixon is
allowed to reply unchallenged and often without follow-up questions.

Despite the deferential approach, CBS bought excerpts of Mr. Gannon's material
in 1984 and broadcast them on its news program "60 Minutes." The tapes'
producers were paid $500,000, which prompted charges of checkbook journalism. At
the time, Don Hewitt, executive producer of "60 Minutes," defended the
programming. "It is not probing, not tough, but it is an interesting and
revealing look at Richard Nixon," he said.

Watching the tapes, however, one wonders how revealing that is. The "60 Minutes"
broadcast focused on issues, but the three new videos dwell only on Nixon's
personal life. In "28 Days," for example, Nixon gives a detailed account of his
family's reactions as their world collapsed in the summer of 1974. In "Pat," he
enthuses about his marriage, and in "The Early Years," he reminisces about his
boyhood.

Mr. Gannon said he was interested in what he called "the quirky, psychological
stuff." Of course, what constitutes quirky is arguable. On the videos Nixon is
formal but relaxed, something of the natural raconteur, and gives the impression
that he wants viewers to know he is trying to be as candid as he can be about
himself. But one senses how difficult anything approaching openness must have
been for him.

One also notices parallels with the Stone film. In "28 Days," which at 85
minutes is the longest and most interesting of the tapes, Nixon refers to the
"impertinent" press and ideological flip-flops on Wall Street and notes the
moment, near the end of his Presidency, when his family noticed that weeds had
taken over the personal golf course maintained by "friends of the President."

In most of these recollections he seems almost breezily resigned, if prone to
flurries of the angry self-pity displayed by the Nixon character in the film
(played by Anthony Hopkins). "I was beyond being hurt," Nixon snaps at one point
in "28 Days," shaking his head defiantly.

Mr. Gannon, who spent several hours a day with Nixon when he worked with him in
the 1970's, said he got as close to the man as he could. "This is what he was
like when he was most unguarded," he said. "Which is to say, he's only peeled
off several layers of the onion."

The tapes are $49.95 for the set, or $19.95 each. Information: (800) 453-4000.

NEW VIDEO RELEASES


Burnt by the Sun
1994. Columbia Tri-Star. $97.51. Laser disk, $39.95. 134 minutes. Russian, with
English subtitles. No rating. Release date: Tuesday.

Nikita Mikhalkov's film, an Oscar winner in the foreign-language category this
year, explores the Stalinist terror of the 1930's with a sure Chekhovian feel
for how brutal new eras take over from more gracious ones. Kotov (Mr.
Mikhalkov), a retired army officer and hero, moves to the country with his young
wife, Marussia (Ingeborga Dapkunaite), and 6-year-old daughter, Nadia (Mr.
Mikhalkov's daughter, Nadia). But then comes Mitia (Oleg Menshikov), a
gregarious family friend but also the messenger of Kotov's doom. In the end, Mr.
Mikhalkov creates a film that is, as Caryn James wrote in The New York Times,
"exquisite, lyrical and tough-minded."
Mortal Kombat
1995. New Line. $102.65. Laser disk, $39.99. 101 minutes. Closed captioned.
PG-13.
 In the movie based on the video game, the special effects are the drama, and
the characters are, well, just there for the effect. Three plucky young battlers
team up to save the world from the evil sorcerer Shang Tsung, the master of a
hellish alternate reality called Outworld. The showdown, held as a kind of
martial-arts mini-Olympics, caps a film that "might be described as mythological
junk food" (Stephen Holden).

Dr. Jekyll and Ms. Hyde
1995. HBO. $98.31. 90 minutes. Closed captioned. PG-13.

When a chemist (Tim Daly) discovers that he's descended from Dr. Jekyll, he
starts fiddling around with his ancestor's formulas and turns himself into a
woman named Helen Hyde (Sean Young). That sets up the two for numerous gender
switches, which sometimes occur without warning and cause embarrassing and
sometimes mildly humorous situations. But the film has a split personality
problem of its own. Whereas Mr. Daly works cheerfully and is eager to please,
Ms. Young is humorless and overly kinky for a film that is a little "too intent
on literal-minded crotch-groping" (Janet Maslin).

KEEP IN MIND

A Russian's View Of Dreams and Reality

The films of the Russian director Nikita Mikhalkov, whose "Burnt by the Sun" is
to be released in video stores on Tuesday, often explore the clash between
romantic worlds and harsh political realities. Here are some available on tape.
None are rated.

AN UNFINISHED PIECE FOR A PLAYER PIANO. In Mr. Mikhalov's adaptation of
Chekhov's "Platonov," family affairs complicate a country weekend organized in
1910 by a general's widow. 1977. Various distributors. $59.99. 100 minutes.
Russian, with English subtitles.

A SLAVE OF LOVE. In 1917, an acting troupe making a film in the Crimean
countryside tries and fails to outrun the revolution. 1978. Axon. $59.99. 94
minutes. Russian, with English subtitles.

OBLOMOV. Helped by a friend, a passive and lazy Russian landowner gradually
struggles out of his languor to take some action at last in his life. 1981.
Various distributors. $59.99. Russian, with English subtitles.

DARK EYES. Having married into money, a romantic Italian bounder (Marcello
Mastroianni) is free to indulge various whims and follies, among them chasing
after a Russian woman he meets at a spa. 1987. Fox. $19.98. 118 minutes.
Italian, with English subtitles.

CLOSE TO EDEN. In Mr. Mikhalov's dark satire, a Mongolian shepherd and Russian
road builder form a friendship in Inner Mongolia, where the natural beauty of
the landscape is in danger of despoliation by Western materialism and junk
culture. 1992. Paramount. $89.99. 109 minutes. Russian, with English subtitles.

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

For the Victims of Communism

BYLINE: By DINITIA SMITH

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 543 words


There would be a Hall of Infamy with a piece of the Berlin wall, a re-creation
of the gulag and a Hall of Heroes with statues of anti-Communists like Ronald
Reagan and Andrei D. Sakharov. There would be a big statue of the Goddess of
Democracy. That's how a group of prominent conservatives envisions a proposed
$100 million Victims of Communism Memorial Museum, honoring an estimated 100
million people killed in this century because of Communism.

The group includes Lev E. Dobriansky, chairman of the Captive Nations Committee;
Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform, who also advises Speaker
Newt Gingrich on tax policy, and Zbigniew Brzezinski, the national security
adviser to President Jimmy Carter. Lee Edwards, president of the Victims of
Communism Memorial Foundation says fund-raising will begin in January. Mr.
Edwards is a biographer of Barry Goldwater and senior editor of The World and I,
a magazine owned by The Washington Times, founded by the Rev. Sung Myung Moon.
The foundation hopes to house the museum in the Old Tariffs Building in
Washington, and to open it by December 2000.

This isn't the first time there has been an attempt to build a memorial to
victims of Communism. Three years ago, a German entrepreneur said he was
planning a re-creation of the old East Germany, complete with empty stores,
gritty toilet paper and secret police. Last spring, a group in the Fort
Lauderdale, Fla., area said it was planning a theme park about the Berlin wall,
with visitors to be greeted by soldiers announcing: "Border patrol! Hand over
your ID's! Open the trunk!" Neither plan has been carried out.

The Washington group is taking its cue from the success of other Washington
attractions, including the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum and the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial. "I favor it for the same reason I favor the Holocaust
Museum," Mr. Brzezinski said. "Horrible crimes were committed in the name of
utopians and on the bones of people defined by race. Now another museum is to be
built for those defined by class."

Mr. Dobriansky said: "The Holocaust Museum deals with outright genocide. In our
case, it's only slightly genocide." But "over 100 million were slaughtered,
tortured or perished as a result of the Bolsheviks."

Three years ago, Representative Dana Rohrabacher, Republican of California,
introduced legislation in Congress, which was signed by President Clinton,
authorizing the National Captive Nations Committee to raise funds for a
memorial. The committee has lobbied for countries under Communism since 1959.

"There's a great deal of revisionist history going on; millions of bodies have
been airbrushed out of the picture," Mr. Rohrabacher said. "Kids today don't
even understand there's a Berlin wall. While I have no doubt there is a moral
equivalent between Communism and Nazism, there will be some controversy, I
imagine."

Indeed, Stephen Cohen, a Princeton University specialist in Russian affairs,
calls the proposed memorial, "the triumphalist victory of cold-war warriors."

"It's a political event," said Professor Cohen. "With this kind of hyperbole,
with money coming from people sermonizing against Communism, it's hard to
imagine it as a serious research center."

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Canadians Bearing Trees Invade Manhattan;
Evergreenery From the North For Sale at a Street Corner

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 29;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk;  Second Front

LENGTH: 987 words


A merry little street-corner forest stands at Seventh Avenue South and Perry
Street, one of scores of such emerald eruptions around New York City city. There
are Fraser and Douglas firs and, most popular and fragrant, balsam firs.

The magic is enhanced by the sudden appearance of the 200 or so trees here on
Dec. 1, and by their abrupt disappearance the day after Christmas. But it is the
Pan flute of Nicholas Cifarelli that is the enterprise's signature. He hails
each sunrise -- and most other turns of the clock -- with loud, clear tones of
musical celebration.

"I play for the pigeons, for the men and the women, for the trees," he said.
"For everybody."

Mr. Cifarelli, a garlic farmer, has come to New York for the fifth straight year
with two friends from the same little Canadian town to sell Christmas trees. One
is Hank Hastings, a sometime tree pruner, and the other Glen Palmer, who owns a
pizzeria.

Their hometown of New Denver lies beneath a glacier in the interior of British
Columbia and by a lake whose water is pure enough to drink. There are also
plenty of trees, but none have traveled the 3,500 miles to New York City.

The men have been recruited to sell trees from the much nearer Canadian
provinces of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, the principal source of local trees.
The New York City company that hired them is Kevin Hammer Christmas Trees, and
they said that it supplies many tree lots here, many operated mostly by
Canadians. Mr. Hammer, who the workers say now lives in Florida, once called
himself "a master of logistics."

The men say their boss told them he thinks Canadians are better fit to withstand
the cold. (He couldn't be found to confirm that observation.) A 1938 exemption
in the City Code allows Christmas tree-peddling without licenses.

The Canadians will not say how much they make, though they figure they sell 600
trees at prices from $10 for what amount to twigs to $100 for giants. And now
the tension is mounting: they received their last shipment of 50 trees on
Wednesday from a flatbed truck, and are now pushing to sell out by Christmas,
when their merchandise becomes worthless.

In the process, they have become a seasonal institution, visited by the same
customers each year. With a midwife, they exchange New Age medical tips. A woman
who cannot hear or speak has become a favorite, and they scramble to gather the
scraps of evergreen she likes to burn. Dogs are shamelessly flattered, despite
their not unharmless predilection for the trees.

The men have tried to be neighborhood helpers, once giving chase to a purse
snatcher. They get to know people visiting St. Vincent's Hospital across Perry
Street and watch parking meters for those visiting AIDS patients, sometimes
putting in their own money.

Their warmth has been reciprocated. People have given them bottles of wine,
homemade cakes and cookies and a mammoth hunk of beef Wellington.

Not that their work is easy. Last year, a Florida man, Glenn Walker, who for
years had come to the Bronx to sell trees, was murdered by local thugs who had
unsuccessfully demanded protection money. The Canadians can only shrug and say
nothing like that has happened to them.

But it does get cold. It snows and sleets. At least one man is on the street at
all times, while the other two may be asleep in the van. Their plastic-covered
shelter is scant help. Two finally joined a health club for a place to shower.

"I think they hire Canadians because New Yorkers aren't silly enough to live on
the street for a month," Mr. Palmer said.

Each has followed a different path to this chilly corner. Mr. Cifarelli, 58, was
born in Bayside, Queens, grew up on Long Island, and followed a spiritual trail
through California to 75 mountainous acres in British Columbia. There, he built
a house from rocks and wine bottles -- "wonderful light effects" -- and began
calling himself by the Indian name of Black Eagle. He lives happily without
phone or electricity and grows garlic for a living.

Mr. Palmer, 49, is from Toronto and went to British Columbia to recover from a
back injury in 1979. He never left, staying to set up a pizza business. Though
he said he regrets that he has no time to take in a Rangers hockey game in New
York, he makes a point of studying New York pizza, which he regards as the best.
On the first trip, he learned not to put oregano in the sauce, and on another
visit, to make white pizza without tomato sauce and with lots of ricotta cheese.
This trip he hopes to learn to make his own mozzarella.

Mr. Hastings, 49, left his native West Virginia during the Vietnam War to avoid
being drafted. He prunes trees, works in local theater and, as a hobby, collects
acorns from different ecosystems. He is eager to plant some New York varieties
in his backyard. Each day, he calls his 9-year-old daughter from the lobby of
St. Vincent's.

Perhaps the best that can be said is that these tree elves are there when you
need them. Diane Gargiulo, an investment banker, is going through a difficult
separation from her husband and agonized about whether she wanted a tree this
year. Then her brother called up to say that he and his two children were taking
her to get her one.

They went to the corner of Seventh and Perry. "These tree people had a sort of
joy about what they were doing, and they communicated in a lot of little
things," Ms. Gargiulo said. "What could have been really sad to me became
something joyful."

Courtney Costello, an actress, and her fiance also bought a tree, and were
pleased when Mr. Cifarelli the tree salesman offered to transport it to their
Greenwich Village apartment.

He carried the tree on his head, and spoke of how it reached toward heaven even
as his feet were firmly on the ground.

"When you get down to it, Christmas ultimately is kind of more a burden than a
joy," Ms. Costello said. "But my experience with these guys is a joyful thing."


LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Nick Cifarelli carrying the tree bought by Courtney Costello
and Ned Benkert, her fiance, to their Greenwich Village home. The farmer from
British Columbia spoke of how the tree reached toward heaven even as his feet
were firmly on the ground. Van, at Seventh Avenue South and Perry Street, from
which three Canadians sell trees during December. Hank Hastings with a cup of
coffee at 3 A.M. With nothing else to do at the moment, Mr. Hastings gets inside
a tree wrapper, as Richard McAllister and his dog, Max, pass by, Mr. Cifarelli
laughs and Glen Palmer watches. Glen Palmer framed by the tree wrapper. (pg.
29); Nick Cifarelli prepares to sleep in the van at 11 P.M. as Hank Hastings
gets up to sell trees during the night. (pg. 30) (Photos by Chang W. Lee/The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Q and A

BYLINE: By TERENCE NEILAN

SECTION: Section 5; Page 5; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 769 words



European Soccer
Q.  My husband and I would like to attend the 1996 European soccer championships
in England. How can we buy tickets? -- Claudia Genna relli, Brooklyn


A.  It's a complicated business.

The first of the 1.3 million tickets for the event initially went on sale by
mail in England last year to season-ticket holders at English clubs. This year
they were made available to the general public in England, with application
forms distributed through the Midland Bank.

Tickets on sale this way are intended for the English market. But if you have
friends in England you could try asking them to pick up a form and mail it to
Euro 96, Post Box 1996, Newcastle-under-Lyme, Staffs. ST5 1LE. The telephone
line for ticket information in England is (0178) 274-1996. Tickets cost from $24
to $208 each, calculated at $1.60 to the pound. Credit cards are accepted.

The championships will be held from June 8 to 30 in eight English cities. Each
of the 15 other countries that qualifies for the competition will be allocated
7,000 tickets, plus 11,000 for each of the two teams in the final.

Once Europe's demands are satisfied, governing bodies in countries that are not
taking part in the championships and have expressed an interest in getting
tickets can apply. Among them is the United States Soccer Federation, which is
referring all inquiries to the official inbound tour operator for Euro 96,
Gullivers Sports Travel, which is based in England but has offices in Vista,
Calif.

Gullivers is offering two packages, although it will not know for certain how
many tickets it will have available until Feb. 28. The company says refunds will
be made if enough tickets are not available.

Its top package, called the Grand Finale, for which the company says tickets are
assured, includes round-trip economy air fare from New York, six nights'
accommodations in luxury hotels, seats at a semifinal game at Wembley, London,
and the final game, also at Wembley. The price is $5,995 a person for two people
sharing a room.

The Affordable Euro 96 Package includes six nights' accommodation in either
rooms with private bath at the Kingswood Halls of Residence, part of London's
Royal Holloway College, or in three-star or four-star London hotels.
Accommodation prices at Kingswood start at $699 a person. Three-star
accommodation costs $895 a person for a double; the four-star option is $995 a
person.

Air fare is extra, and tickets are made available through a $395 add-on package,
which includes round-trip transportation to Wembley Stadium for the semifinal on
June 26 and the final on June 30.

More information: Gullivers Sports Travel, 973 Vale Terrace, Suite 202, Vista,
Calif. 92084; (800) 235-3158, fax (619) 941-2997.


Traveling to Vietnam
Q.  I plan to visit Vietnam in January. Is it true credit cards are not accepted
there? And that payment for hotels and travel by an independent traveler there
cannot be made in advance? What is the status of traveler's checks? -- J. S.
French, Franklin, Mich.


A.  The age of plastic has reached Vietnam.

American Express, Mastercard and Visa credit cards are accepted in some of the
leading hotels in Hanoi and Ho Ci Minh City, according to the Vietnamese Embassy
in Washington. And traveler's checks are beginning to make inroads.

However, if you are an independent traveler who is not part of a package tour,
or traveling with a group, hotel bills and travel costs within Vietnam must be
paid in Vietnamese dong or dollars.


Ramadan in Egypt
Q.  Please tell me how Ramadan, the Muslim month of fasting, will affect my
independent visit to Cairo and Luxor next February. Are there days on which
major sites, including bazaars, are closed? -- Barbara Pierson, Bellport, N.Y.


A.  Museums and other tourist sites might close an hour early during Ramadan,
from Jan. 21 to Feb. 21 next year, but according to the Egyptian Tourist
Authority, travelers are encouraged to visit during that time. The streets tend
to be less crowded during the day, and at night a festive mood takes over.

The first meal of the day for Muslims is served at sunset, so from 5 to 7 P.M.
people tend to be at home. At 7, however, they take to the streets until about 2
A.M., after consuming the second meal of the day, the tourist office said.

Because Ramadan is a period of charity as well as fasting, many of the rich in
big cities provide banquets in the streets for the poor, with some families
trying to outdo their neighbors in generosity.

Ramadan is followed by a three-day period of feasting and entertainment called
Eid.   TERENCE NEILAN

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Support for Reich

SECTION: Section 7;       Page 4;       Column 4;       Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 308 words


To the Editor:

"Opposing the System" comes in for some very severe criticism in the Nov. 26
Book Review. According to Francis Fukuyama, Mr. Reich's view that the corporate
system is responsible for most of our ills is "of course" not widely shared, and
shows him to have been asleep for a generation of changes. But I believe an
honest appraisal of corporate power and influence shows it is Mr. Fukuyama who
is asleep, or, worse, disingenuous.

For Mr. Fukuyama to be correct, we would have to imagine a world in which the
chief multinational C.E.O.'s wake up in the morning and plan their day in a
haphazard fashion, never making use of their enormous wealth and power (more
than many small countries possess) and the community of interests (I hesitate to
write "conspiracy") they share with similar economic entities. Common sense
tells us this is simply not the case, as is also shown by the fact that,
increasingly, we have the "best Congress and executive branch money can buy,"
bought by corporate lobbyists and campaign contributors who flood our Capitol's
corridors.

A corporation cannot be killed, even if it commits atrocities, and our entire
culture has been shaped for decades by what is good for corporate profits. The
strongest guys do indeed run our "schoolyard": hence Nafta, GATT, the Vietnam
and gulf wars are imposed on the common person, who has no effective input in
the matter. The large defense contractors and the nuclear industry make sure we
can kill everyone on the planet many times over and fight several wars at once,
thus insuring no money for schools and destitute people. And, yes, the media
faces on our TV know who signs their huge paychecks. Above all, the view that
capitalism is good for us has also been sold to us. Money runs the entire world.
Mr. Fukuyama, wake up!

KENNETH LAUFER
New York

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: GREENWICH VILLAGE;
Sixties Pioneer Trades Martial Art for a Healing One

BYLINE: By ANDREW JACOBS

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 7;  Column 1;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 463 words


In the late 1960's, Roberta Schine was studying modern dance and -- like most of
her peers -- protesting the war in Vietnam, agitating for civil rights in the
South and living "here and there" around the East Village. Then she visited a
friend's karate class.

"Dance suddenly struck me as incredibly bourgeois, and karate seemed like a
practical way to protect myself during civil disobedience," said Ms. Schine, a
52-year-old self-described "aging hippie" who went on to found one of the city's
first karate schools for women. Now, after 20 years of running the Karate School
for Women at 149 Bleecker Street, Ms. Schine will close her studio next week to
teach a far less martial art -- yoga.

Karate, she says, no longer fills a need in her life, and the drive toward
physical self-empowerment has been supplanted by a need for self-healing. Ten
years ago, Ms. Schine was found to have breast cancer.  Yoga, she says, helped
her deal with the pain and trauma of treatment.

Two decades ago, when Ms. Schine told her karate instructor about plans to start
her own school, he laughed, then forbade her to do so. Women, he said, do not do
that sort of thing. Not one to be deterred, Ms. Schine started the Karate School
for Women anyway but under a pseudonym: Florence Flowerpot.

In a field long dominated by men, she created a place for thousands of women to
kick, punch and spar with one another. "I can't tell you how much sexism and
abuse women had to endure in those early days," said Annie Ellman, executive
director of Brooklyn Women's Martial Arts.

Ms. Schine said she had survived three eviction attempts by her landlord and
harassment by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. (Her phone number was in the
pocket of Kathy Boudin, the Weather Underground leader, when Ms. Boudin was
arrested in 1981 in a fatal Brink's robbery.) "I guess the F.B.I. wasn't pleased
because I refused to talk to them," Ms. Schine said. "All I knew about this
woman was that she was a lovely, extremely passionate student."

Over the last few years, Ms. Schine, who has a second-level black belt, began
teaching yoga and meditation to women with breast or ovarian cancer. Now, she
will teach the healing arts full time.

Although saddened by Ms. Schine's early retirement, some of her karate students
are hoping to continue the school in another space. Her quirky teaching style
and acceptance of any student -- no matter what her level -- will be sorely
missed, they say. "There's no one like Roberta -- humorous and irreverent
without taking away the reverence for karate," said Betty Ann Bannon, a lawyer
who started at the school in 1978. "Besides teaching me to get a brown belt,
Roberta taught me self-confidence and taught all of us a sense of belonging."
A.J.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Roberta Schine at a karate class. (Morgan Gwenwald)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PRO FOOTBALL;
Amid Hail of Snowballs, Giants Suffer Meltdown

BYLINE: By MIKE FREEMAN

SECTION: Section 8;       Page 1;       Column 4;       Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1385 words

DATELINE: EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J., Dec. 23


It's a good thing Pat Riley didn't have to make his return to Giants Stadium
when he came back to New York. A number of fans decided to make snowballs and
then pelt players and others on the field throughout the Giants' game against
the Chargers today. Even the halftime marching band got a few snowballs in its
trombones.

Happy holidays. The nuttiness and sometimes utter display of ugliness almost
overshadowed San Diego's come-from-behind 27-17 victory over the Giants in a
game that mercifully ended the Giants' brutal 5-11 season and catapulted the
surging 9-7 Chargers into the playoffs. Down by 17-3 at halftime, San Diego
rallied and then broke a 17-17 tie in the fourth quarter when safety Shaun Gayle
intercepted a Dave Brown pass and returned it 99 yards for a touchdown.

"I'm disappointed in the team; I'm disappointed in the fans," said the Giants'
co-owner, Wellington Mara. "The referee would have been justified in calling the
game."

Surely, the Chargers aren't used to getting hammered with snowballs from their
fans. Beachballs, maybe, but not snow and ice. The San Diego bench was pelted
all day, and eventually no one went unscathed as thousands of snowballs from
some of the 50,243 fans blotted the field and almost completely covered one of
the end zones. The equipment manager of the Chargers, Sid Brooks, a Vietnam
veteran who didn't get so much as a scratch in the war, was momentarily knocked
out by a snowball that came flying out of the upper deck. That's a drop of
several hundred feet.

It got so bad that midway through the second half, the officials stopped play
and an announcement was made over the public address system that unless the
snowball throwing stopped, the game would be forfeited to the Chargers. At the
time the announcement was made, the Giants were still ahead, 17-10.

Both teams went to their respective sidelines and things calmed down somewhat --
but it never ended. In fact, Giants Coach Dan Reeves, who blasted fans
afterward, calling them "classless," was hit by snowballs as he walked off the
field for the last time this season.

No regular season National Football League game has ever been forfeited, but
this one came close.

"It sounds ridiculous to say that snowballs can distract you," said Giants
receiver Mike Sherrard. "But try getting hit by softball-size snowballs being
thrown from the upper deck."

Said Giants cornerback Phillippi Sparks, an unrestricted free agent: "If this is
the way it's going to be, I don't want to play in front of fans like that. I'm
disappointed in them."

Before today's game, the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority increased
security in an effort to cut off the type of problem that occurred. But a more
effective strategy would have been to clear out the snow that remained under the
stadium's 75,000 seats following Tuesday's and Wednesday's storms.

The final statistics read like this: 15 arrests (six for trespassing, two for
assaults and seven for improper conduct); 175 ejections for snowball-throwing
and 15 snowball-related first-aid cases, according to stadium officials. In
addition, 10 security guards were injured, either from trying to break up fights
or from getting hit with snowballs. Three of the injured security officers
required hospitalization.

John Mara, the executive vice president of the Giants, said the team was
contemplating revoking the season subscriptions of fans who were ejected for
throwing snowballs.

As of late Saturday night, stadium workers, armed with shovels, were attempting
to clear most of the remaining snow from the stands for the Jets game against
New Orleans on Sunday.

"It's classless; I've never seen anything like that," Reeves said afterward of a
crowd that was actually the second smallest of the season, with 27,303 no-shows.
"Majority-wise, we've got great fans. Unfortunately, it only takes several
thousand to turn it into something bad. There's just no respect for human beings
because you can seriously hurt somebody, which did happen. Someone got knocked
out on their sideline.

"Those things coming down from that high can cause a lot of damage.
Unfortunately, that is just the way our society is."

Eventually, the focus shifted back to the game. A San Diego victory meant the
Chargers were in the playoffs. A loss meant they had to depend on other teams
losing on Sunday. As for the Giants, a victory meant absolutely nothing. And
unfortunately for Giants fans -- the ones who weren't throwing snowballs, that
is -- it was the Chargers who played more inspired football. And their most
inspiring moment, without a doubt, was Gayle's 99-yard pick and run, which ended
with him celebrating in the end zone while being pelted mercilessly with
snowballs.

In the end, the Giants lost still another close one to put an end to a very
disappointing season. But earlier, it indeed looked as if they might play the
role of spoiler. They had knocked out San Diego quarterback Stan Humphries
(sprained neck) when he was sandwiched early in the game by defensive linemen
Jamal Duff and Michael Strahan. He instantly fell to the turf as his head
whipped back in a violent motion.

It was a scary moment as both Charger and Giant players gathered around
Humphries before he finally got up and walked off the field.

Gale Gilbert replaced Humphries but didn't do much. Meanwhile, the Giants made
it 10-0 on Brown's 3-yard scramble and 17-3 on Rodney Hampton's 1-yard run up
the middle. It was an impressive half for Brown, who both ran and threw well.

But then came the second half.  The Chargers ended up with 24 unanswered points
as the Giants began getting sloppy with the football, turning it over three
times. An 8-yard scoring run by Aaron Hayden followed by another 8-yard
touchdown run by Rodney Culver tied the score at 17 with just over nine minutes
left in the game.

The Giants drove the length of the field on their next possession and eventually
faced a second-and-goal on the San Diego 12-yard line. Brown took the snap and
looked at tight end Howard Cross the whole play, despite the two defenders
surrounding Cross. And just as Brown was releasing the ball, trying to force it
into the tight space around Cross, the Pro Bowl linebacker Junior Seau put a
serious hit on the quarterback.

"A guy got beat inside and Rodney had to step up," said Brown, referring to
Hampton. "Junior came in scot-free and hit my arm."

Gayle picked the pass off and then was off to the races. The only player close
to him as he raced down the field was Giants tackle Doug Riesenberg. A safety
will always outrun a big lineman. Just like that, it was 24-17 with a little
less than six minutes left in the game.

Up to this point in the contest, Brown had done reasonably well. But now he
seemed to completely fall apart despite the fact that Hampton, who had 60 yards
on 20 carries and one touchdown, was really cranking in the final 15 minutes.
(For the season, Hampton finished with a career-high 1,182 yards.)

So it was that the Giants, again driving down the field, gave up the ball one
more time. This time it happened when Brown, under pressure, fumbled the ball
away while trying to make something happen on a scramble. The ball was recovered
by linebacker Lewis Bush. The Chargers then got a 45-yard John Carney field goal
with 3 minutes 37 seconds left. That made it 27-17 and, essentially, the game
was over. San Diego was able to run out most of the clock and keep a wary eye on
the stands.

In the locker room after the game, Giants players said their goodbyes and talked
about the shock of how the season went so poorly. Reeves was obviously
disappointed as well.

"It's sad that we had the year we had," Reeves said. "It's disappointing when
you come in with the expectations we had and you don't come close to achieving
those. That hurts. And if it doesn't hurt anybody in this dressing room --
coaches, players, organization, everything -- you've got no chance to do
anything better."

Today, everything hurt, including the snowballs.




EXTRA POINTS

Coach DAN REEVES already had his season-ending meetings with the practice squad
and young free-agent players and will meet with the rest of the team on Sunday
morning. . . . Tackle JUMBO ELLIOTT had a pulled muscle in his back and missed
much of the second half.


LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Only the threat of a forfeit slowed the barrage of snowballs.
Security ejected 175 people for throwing snowballs, and the stands were to be
cleaned to prevent a similar incident today. (Associated Press); Chargers safety
Shaun Gayle (23) looking at plenty of open field on his 99-yard interception
return for a touchdown. He was pelted with snowballs in the end zone. (Barton
Silverman/The New York Times) (pg. 1); The game official Bob Wagner heading for
cover from a final snowball assault at the end of yesterday's game. (Reuters)
(pg. 2)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Notebook;
Oliver's World

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 667 words


Oliver Stone's new bio-fiction film, "Nixon," has a central feature in common
with his earlier movie, "JFK." Despite the titles, the real star in both works
is Mr. Stone's psyche. He has been belabored for misrepresenting the facts of
history, but that criticism does not really go to the most interesting
intellectual question about these films.

What are we to make of the mind that produced the movies? This brilliant film
maker has harnessed his great storytelling ability to an infantile political
intelligence. Like many people who have never watched government up close, Mr.
Stone needs a universal organizing theory. His is a monocausal world. Events
happen according to a secret plan devised by the C.I.A., with a little help from
a White House enabler like L.B.J. and the F.B.I.'s gay pranksters, J. Edgar
Hoover and Clyde Tolson. Had he lived in the 18th century, Mr. Stone would have
been convinced that the Masons were in charge.

Experience with the real world of elective politics, government and the military
services (and most assuredly the C.I.A.) disproves the myth of competence that
is central to Mr. Stone's theory of history. The nation's generals and its chief
spies may be mean enough to hatch the evil plans that Mr. Stone imagines for
them. But decades of history prove that they lack the managerial expertise to
carry them out.

So much for Mr. Stone's naivete about the mechanics of government. What about
the inner psychology, the belief system that shapes these films? In dramatic
terms, Nixon the Usurper is Mr. Stone's most magnificent creation, but the real
star of both films is the Missing Prince. Taken together, "JFK" and "Nixon"
represent Mr. Stone's effort to rescue John F. Kennedy from the facts of his
short life. Mr. Stone was too young to live in Camelot, so he serves by
laundering its legend.

In both films, Mr. Kennedy is absolved of blame for Vietnam. In "Nixon," Mr.
Stone goes further and invents a new chronology that saddles the hapless
protagonist with the full blame for Cuba and both Kennedy assassinations. Mr.
Kennedy's womanizing and his damaged marriage, the buying of votes in West
Virginia and Illinois are passed over as the youthful excesses of a charmingly
adrenalated preppie. Mr. Nixon is forced to grovel before the White House
portraits of both Lincoln and Kennedy. For admission to Mr. Stone's pantheon,
launching the Peace Corps is as good a ticket as saving the Union.

For all that, I enjoyed both films as the work of an artist of great ambition.
What films he might have made with a more sophisticated knowledge of Washington
or, for that matter, the collaboration of a screenwriter with a more complex
turn of mind. In "JFK," for example, Mr. Stone bit for the most obvious spin --
that Jim Garrison was right and everyone else was manipulated.

Actually, a far richer -- and more likely -- case can be built that Jim Garrison
was himself being manipulated in an effort to direct blame toward the C.I.A. and
away from organized crime. Consider these facts. Mr. Garrison was the prosecutor
in a corrupt town where the Mafia chieftain, Carlos Marcella, operated as if he
had nothing to worry about. Mr. Marcella and another Southern godfather, Santo
Trafficante, have both surfaced in investigations of the J.F.K. assassination.
Suppose they really were involved and that one of them knew a friendly hometown
D.A. who would trump up a trial that blamed the C.I.A. and a colorful gang of
New Orleans characters. But the possibility that Mr. Garrison was being used, or
was a crackpot, never crossed Mr. Stone's mind. In real life, politicians and
journalists look for such perverse angles. Myth making film makers do not. After
all, it is easier to make movies about a political world ruled by well managed
and utterly logical conspiracies than about the one that Mr. Kennedy and Mr.
Nixon actually inhabited -- the world of accident, incompetence and the
jerry-built conspiracies run by bunglers.   HOWELL RAINES

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PRO FOOTBALL;
Equipment Man Is Hit by 'Coward'

BYLINE: By DAVE ANDERSON

SECTION: Section 8;       Page 2;       Column 1;       Sports Desk

LENGTH: 555 words

DATELINE: EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J., Dec. 23


After 20 years in the Air Force, Sid Brooks retired as a senior master sergeant
in 1973 and joined the San Diego Chargers as an equipment man. He had served in
Korea and Vietnam, being named the Far East Airman of the Year in 1972 while
stationed at the Danang Air Base.

"One night in Vietnam, we got shelled," he recalled. "I got scared to death."

Still, in those two decades in the Air Force, the Chargers' 60-year-old
equipment manager never had a scratch. But yesterday, as he packed bags in the
Chargers' locker room at Giants Stadium, he had a small scab about an inch from
his discolored left eye.

"I was coming across in front of the bench," he remembered. "I didn't know what
hit me. The next thing I heard was the trainer saying, 'Stay down. Stay down.' "

Brooks had been struck near the top of his nose by a chunk of ice thrown from
the stands. According to Dr. Paul Black, the Chargers' team physician who
attended to him, the equipment manager was knocked unconscious.

"He was out for a few seconds," Black said. "He hit the ground like a ton of
bricks."

As he stood in the locker room now, about 20 minutes after the game, Brooks
talked easily but angrily.

"I don't even know who the coward is," he said. "I'd like to meet him face to
face."

But the Air Force veteran with 28 service medals didn't equate the incident with
a war.

"War is hell," he said, his tone more serious now. "This was just a coward's
act."

During his service years, Brooks lived in East Meadow, L.I., as a military
adviser for Air Force reserve programs.

"I'll bet the people throwing snowballs were not season-ticket holders," he
said, then he laughed. "After all those years in Korea and Vietnam, I didn't get
hurt until I came back here to New York. I'm sorry, I mean New Jersey."

When Brooks was face down on the artificial turf in front of the Chargers bench,
defensive end Chris Mims threw a big blue Chargers coat over him.

"Just seeing the man on the ground," Mims said, "it made me mad enough to go
into the stands after the guy who threw it, but we had to finish the game. I'd
know him if I saw him. Maybe I'll see him after the game. I hope so. It was like
he threw a baseball."

Bobby Ross, the Chargers' coach, had requested that the officials forfeit the
game.

"It really was dangerous," Ross said. "My main concern was for the safety of our
players and our equipment manager got hit in the eye. We could've had something
very serious happen there. The initial thing was to penalize, but they said they
couldn't do that, so then it was a case of whether or not to call the game."

Referring to Referee Ron Blum, Ross added: "I was just arguing to him about was
he ready to take the responsibility for the things that were happening. We were
like sitting targets. It really wasn't snowballs, it was ice. It was heavy ice.
It was a precarious situation that the league needs to investigate."

Dick Maxwell, a National Football League executive, issued a statement regarding
the Sunday afternoon game between the Jets and the New Orleans Saints: "The
league has already contacted the Jets, who will work with the sports authority
on taking proper procedures to better prepare the stadium to handle fans at the
game."

Hours after the Giants game, stadium employees were still removing snow from the
stadium.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sid Brooks, the Chargers' equipment manager, being tended to
after he was knocked out by a snowball. (Barton Silverman/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Finding Help In Leaps of Faith

BYLINE: By PAUL WISENTHAL

SECTION: Section 1;       Page 27;       Column 2;       Style Desk

LENGTH: 1596 words


TWELVE-YEAR-OLD Crystal Beyea's life seemed at a standstill four years ago. "She
was extremely shy and suffered a lot from asthma," her mother, Cindy Beyea,
said.

But that changed when Crystal read "Make Beliefs," a book that its author, Bill
Zimmerman, says is intended to spark the imagination and "help people find their
own magic."

Mrs. Beyea said, "I gave it to Crystal and she immediately began answering the
question-and-answer format that encourages the reader to imagine and let the
child within come out."

The exercise "made me feel that I was kind of special," said Crystal, whose
family lives in Readington Township, N.J.

Today, she writes weekly articles in The Hunterdon County Democrat, based in
nearby Flemington, on topics like posture, AIDS, light-up sneakers and the 911
emergency system. She says she hopes to inspire families in her rural New Jersey
bedroom community about 60 miles southwest of New York.

Fourteen-year-old Richard Belva of Dix Hills, L.I., who hopes to be a doctor or
writer, said that another book, "Where Does God Live? Questions and Answers for
Parents and Children" (Triumph Books, 1991), has helped him to cope with life's
problems. It was extremely helpful at the time of the death of his grandparents,
he said. The book is by Rabbi Marc Gellman and Msgr. Thomas Hartman, the hosts
of television and radio's "God squad" segments.

"I was very upset," Richard said, recalling his feelings at that time. "My mom
got me the book. It helped me to understand why my grandparents died."

Richard met Rabbi Gellman at the temple his parents attend. "The rabbi told me
to remember the good memories of them," Richard said.

Just 10 years ago, children's books with such overt religious, biblical or
spiritual themes would never have been published, let alone acknowledged as best
sellers. But in the last two years, sales of these kinds of books have shown the
fastest growth of any book category.

"Publishers and the buying public discovered a fresh interest in things
spiritual, a desire to belong to something large and meaningful," said Miriam
Pollack, the owner of Choices, New York's largest shop devoted to books on
recovery programs, at 220 East 78th Street.

More than 20 million books in the juvenile spiritual and religious categories
were sold in 1994, compared with 14.9 million in 1993, an increase of more than
34 percent, according to the 1994 Research Study of Book Publishing, produced
for the Book Industry Study Group, a nonprofit research corporation in New York.

The Tennessee-based Ingram Book Company, the book distributor, has experienced
most of that growth. "Sales of spiritual and religious books for kids rose
almost 10 percent the first 11 months of 1995," said David Troutman, a manager
for religious marketing at Ingram. "Some of our religious titles jumped from 25
percent to 105 percent over last year's figures."

Barnes & Noble has experienced "a solid 10 percent growth so far" this year in
the number of titles and the numbers of books sold in those categories, said
Lisa Herling, a spokeswoman for the company. Most of the sales of these books
occur between Thanksgiving and the end of the year, so the final 1995 figures
will not be available until early 1996, she said.

This increase in sales is being generated by parents and grandparents, Ms.
Pollack said.

Patricia Klein, a senior editor at HarperCollins in San Francisco who was a
former religion buyer at Waldenbooks, agreed. "With the recent growth of adult
religion books," she said, "parents are rediscovering their own spirituality,
becoming more comfortable with spiritual exploration, and in many cases
returning to formal worship services."

"Baby boomers' children watched their grandparents go to church or become
involved in some spiritual endeavor," said Robert Wuthnow, a sociologist and
director of the Center for the Study of American Religion at Princeton
University. "This stimulated many children to ask their parents about God and
their religious affiliation."

He points out that in the 1970's and 80's, baby boomers moved away from their
own parents' religions. Today, the very same people are searching for spiritual
answers and are much less concerned about which religious denomination these
answers come from.

"They discovered that something was missing in their lives and that their
children have a natural curiosity about spirituality," said Dr. David Heller, a
clinical psychologist at the Institute for Psychotherapy in Boston. "They didn't
like the values portrayed on TV. They didn't like the computerization of
America.

"The materialism of the 80's went too far, so today parents and grandparents are
pursuing spirituality for their kids, including looking toward literature for
help and guidance."

Based on her experiences with "Make Beliefs" (Bantam Books, 1992), Crystal and
some friends created their own newspaper at home. At the same time, she read
several other books by Mr. Zimmerman, including "Lifelines: A Book of Hope"
(Guarionex, 1990), which suggests that the reader use humor and faith to get
through life's rough spots.

"Death is very frightening," said Crystal, a seventh-grader. "A friend of mine
recently died of AIDS. This booked helped me deal with his loss. It renewed my
faith in God."

Crystal began writing for The Democrat in 1991. She credits Mr. Zimmerman's "How
to Tape Instant Oral Biographies" (Guarionex Press, 1992) with helping her
develop interviewing skills that she uses for her articles.

Despite her asthmatic condition, she joined the Y.M.C.A. gymnastic team. "These
books helped me find myself and develop my self-confidence," Crystal said.

Amy Peluso, 17, a senior at Minisink High School in Orange County, N.Y., said
she found her Roman Catholic faith challenged when her uncle died in August from
AIDS.

Reading spiritual books helped her to overcome her misgivings about his death,
she said. "It isn't fair that someone dies that you're very close to. I asked
myself, why does God put holes in the world like this. I tried to renew my faith
and my religion."

"I figured that God entrusts us with these holes to make the world a better
place," she said. "Dying isn't fair, but it's part of life and religion."

Richard noted that his reading has helped him intensify his faith in God. "My
faith has helped me overcome difficult decisions about school, friends and about
home," he said.

He offered this advice: "I think everyone should be brought up with religion,
any religion, no matter what. Strong faith helps young people feel better about
themselves and gives them moral guidance."


WRITERS ON SPIRITUALITY OFTEN TAKE THE PATH LESS TRAVELED

WRITERS on spirituality have followed different paths in their exploration of
God and religion. Some explore the spiritual domain outside organized religion;
some have followed the conventional routes.

Dr. David Heller, author of THE KID'S BOOK OF PRAYERS ABOUT ALL SORTS OF THINGS
(St. Paul's Books and Media, 1995) and ANGELS MUST GET THEIR WINGS BY HELPING
LITTLE ANGELS LIKE ME (Kensington Books, 1995), has said, "Children have a deep
need to always find God." Dr. Heller is a clinical psychologist at the Boston
Institute for Psychotherapy who has spent years studying spirituality among
children.

Phyllis A. Tickle, author of REDISCOVERING THE SACRED: SPIRITUALITY IN AMERICA
(Crossroad Publishing, 1995), says 12-step programs, like that used in
Alcoholics Anonymous, "have made it socially acceptable to share who you were
inside." Ms. Tickle is religion editor at Publishers Weekly, the trade
publication. She said that the Korean and Vietnam wars exposed thousands of
American fighting men and women to the rich spiritual philosophies of Buddhism
and other Eastern religions not seen before in America.

"When baby boomers became parents, they started to face the task of imparting
spiritual values to their children as they faced the uncertainties of the new
millennium," she said.

The most recent books of Bill Zimmerman, journalist turned author, are THE
LITTLE BOOK OF JOY and DOG-MAS: SIMPLE TRUTHS FROM A WISE PET (both Hazelden
Publishers, 1995). Mr. Zimmerman said writing spiritual books for families is
therapeutic for him. Growing up in a poor family in Brooklyn that experienced
chaos, confusion and family feuding, he used prayer to battle the demons of the
night. "I talked to God before sleeping," he said. "It helped me immensely."

The shock of losing his brother to AIDS and the death of his mother at the same
time led Mr. Zimmerman to record his positive thoughts, prayers and wishes for
the day. "I found I was more focused, less pessimistic and depressed, and able
to appreciate life's little blessings," he said.

Many children's spiritual books are not necessarily religious. They acknowledge
spiritual aspects of life and deal with the nature of God and the world at
large. Douglas Wood's OLD TURTLE (Pfeifer-Hamilton, 1992) celebrates earth's
creator through a creation: a turtle. The book, illustrated by Cheng-Khee Chee,
reminds young readers of all that is fragile on this planet.

A hit of the evangelical movement is Ruth Bell Graham's ONE WINTRY NIGHT (Baker
Book House, 1995). The book, illustrated by Richard Jesse Watson, tells of a boy
seeking shelter during a snowstorm from a kindly woman who tells him stories of
the Bible from the Creation to the Resurrection of Jesus.

Among stores that carry these books are: Choices, 220 East 78th Street;
Enchanted Forest, 85 Mercer Street, and the Star Magic Space Age Gifts stores.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Crystal Beyea, 12, credits inspirational reading with her
successes, including a column for The Democrat. (Norman Y. Lono for The New York
Times); Some popular religious and spiritual titles for children. (Naum
Kazhdan/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Military Puts New Emphasis on Safety

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 16;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1023 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 22


While public concern is focused on the safety of the 20,000 American troops
cautiously moving into Bosnia, the Pentagon is taking steps to prevent the more
than 1,000 deaths the peacetime military suffers each year from car crashes,
sickness, suicide and murder.

Far more American troops have died in training accidents than in combat every
year since the Vietnam War, underscoring the dangers inherent in the
high-technology, all-volunteer military even in peacetime, commanders say.

And for all the Pentagon's claims that it produces a highly trained, disciplined
force, the military is still a reflection of society, particularly the young
male population that is more apt to commit violent crimes. In each of the past
three years, more than 40 Army soldiers were slain, just below the national rate
of 9 homicides per 100,000 people, and roughly half the rate for major cities
like New York or Washington.

After a series of troubling incidents -- several fatal Air Force crashes, a
spate of suicides among troops serving in Haiti and an Army sniper attack at
Fort Bragg, N.C., that killed one soldier and injured 20 others -- the military
is redoubling efforts to raise safety standards and prevent violence in the
ranks.

Borrowing lessons from the life-insurance industry, the 101st Airborne Division
at Fort Campbell, Ky., adopted a "risk management" policy last year to spot
trends in traffic violations, alcohol-related offenses and child abuse and to
single out the highest-risk battalions for special help. In the pilot program's
first year, alcohol-related offenses declined by 35 percent and injuries and
accidents by 79 percent.

"The business we are in is risky, and while you can't get rid of all the risks,
you can prevent many things," said Brig. Gen. R. Dennis Kerr, a Vietnam and
Persian Gulf war veteran who heads the Army's human resources office and who is
now instituting the Fort Campbell program throughout the Army.

Noncombat deaths in the military have generally declined since the mid-1980's,
to 1,053 in the fiscal year ending Sept. 30 from 2,239 in fiscal 1986, as the
military has grown smaller and commanders have paid greater attention to safety.

Training accidents, like the crash of an AWACS radar plane in Alaska in
September that killed 22 troops, are less frequent now that commanders integrate
safety precautions into their planning for exercises and real operations.

A case in point is Bosnia. Bad weather and logistical problems have delayed the
arrival of the main body of American troops into Bosnia by at least a week, but
senior military officials say they would rather be safe than sorry.

"I consider it much more important right now that those deployments be conducted
safely and deliberately, and that we don't needlessly hurt people through some
accident on icy roads or foggy weather trying to meet some fictitious deadline,"
said Gen. John M. Shalikashvili, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

The rates of major crimes in the military, including murder, robbery and
aggravated assault, remain below national levels, although rape rates are
slightly higher in the Army. In response, the military is now turning the same
risk-reduction approach it used to address safety to combat violence within the
ranks.

In addition to directing a review of all major accidents and increasing emphasis
on all troops using seat belts off-duty -- roughly half of all military
accidents are car crashes -- the Air Force recently sent information to all
commanders and first sergeants on how to identify signs of troops with suicidal
tendencies. The Navy, Army and Marine Corps are taking similar steps.

"We are working the area of self-inflicted deaths very closely," said Maj. Chris
Geisel, an Air Force spokesman who said that suicide attempts nationally
increase around the Christmas holiday.

Army base commanders have always received periodic reports from their safety
experts, alcohol-abuse counselors and military police. But the new risk
management program at Fort Campbell marked the first time that the senior
commander, Maj. Gen. John Keane, had received a consolidated report on each of
the battalions in the 101st Airborne Division every 90 days.

The reports are graphically depicted by a "bull's eye" with a unit falling into
red (danger), yellow (caution), green (safe) or black (perfect) concentric rings
in 14 categories ranging from financial problems to suicide gestures to spousal
abuse.

The four riskiest battalions, as determined by the combined score of the 14
categories, receive special psychiatric counseling, financial aid, safety advice
or other assistance. "We're trying to integrate violence prevention into
everything we do," General Kerr said. "We don't want it to be just a reaction."

Army officials say they can deal with some problems, like alcohol-related
offenses, directly. "You get a D.U.I., you won't be in the Army very long," said
General Kerr, referring to charges of driving under the influence of alcohol.

But long-taboo subjects of discussion, like suicide, require more sensitive
handling. The Army, for example, has had 73 suicides so far this year, compared
with 80 for the same period last year. In general, the typical soldier
committing suicide is a married white man between 20 and 25 years old who shoots
himself.

The new Army program aims to teach commanders and senior sergeants how to spot
suicidal signals, from the end of a romantic relationship to financial problems.

The sniper attack and the slaying of a black couple this month in North Carolina
in which the suspects are two soldiers in the 82d Airborne Division, have jarred
Army officials to examine more closely hate and other violent crimes.

With more than 60,000 new recruits, from a variety of backgrounds, entering the
Army every year, commanders say they end up teaching values as much as military
tactics.

"Everyone comes to us with their own values and behavior, which are often
different from the Army's," General Kerr said. "We try to change people's
values, but that's difficult. We can try to make sure their behavior falls in
line."


LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  After peaking in 1992, the number of military personnel injured or
dying in active service has fallen steadily the last few years. Graph tracks
number of casualties, annually, from 1990 through 1995. Graph also shows
percentage breakdown of types of casualties during 1994. (SOurce: Defense
Department)
Graph: "A CLOSER LOOK: A Better Record for the Military"


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Tokyo Journal;
In Japan, Christmas Merrymaking Is for Lovers

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Dec. 24


Surrounded by Christmas decorations and holiday cheer, Tomomi Kimura paused
outside a department store and balefully explained that she was in a terrible
mood.

"I'm very jealous," she said, glaring at her older sister, who has the temerity
to have a boyfriend. Miss Kimura's problem is that she is 21 and unattached, and
there is no worse time to be alone and Japanese than Christmas.

Kurisumasu, as Christmas is called in Japanese, is not a national or religious
holiday in Japan, or even a family occasion. Rather, it is the most romantic day
of the year for young lovers, a bit like Valentine's Day but more so.

The importance of Christmas perhaps lies partly in the rare opportunity for
young people to be "ro-man-tik" in a country that traditionally was as openly
affectionate as a Toyota assembly line. The Japanese language, for example, has
more words for rice than for love.

Therefore, some Japanese men turn to self-help books and magazines to get them
through the Christmas holidays. This time of year, there are guides about how to
take a girlfriend to Christmas dinner, give her a Christmas present, and whisper
sweet nothings while driving her to a hotel to spend Christmas night.

"For a guy, Christmas is the best chance to get a girl into his hands," said
Miharu Horie, a 29-year-old teacher. "No girl would turn down a restaurant
dinner and a Christmas present. Of course, she might not want to go all the way
to a hotel room."

Ms. Horie knows first-hand the power of Christmas on a relationship. Last year,
her boyfriend took her to a hot spring resort for Christmas, and then gave her a
Christmas present: a pair of sneakers.

"I thought, sneakers?" she recalled. "But I tried them on anyway, because I'd
wanted a pair, and then I felt something under my foot. It was a Tiffany ring
inside the sneaker. I was really moved."

So moved, in fact, that she married the boyfriend this month.

Some Japanese men may have trouble telling their girlfriends they love them, but
they are not cheapskates. Haiko Ono, a 20-year-old university student, said that
she had dropped hints to her boyfriend that for Christmas he should buy her a
handbag costing $300 to $500.

"That's my idea of what he should spend," she said, beaming.

A survey at one department store, Printemps Ginza, found that women expect their
boyfriends to spend an average of $358 on a Christmas present for them, mostly
for jewelry. The women said they would spend an average of $214 on presents for
their boyfriends, with luxurious hand-knitted sweaters the most common gift.

"It's a way to get a woman, or a man," said Motoko Seki, 23, an economic
researcher. "Traditionally, Japan is an unromantic country, and people don't
express love -- so they just buy expensive presents. That's an exaggeration, but
you get the point."

This makes Christmas a costly holiday for a young man in love. On top of the
present, he may take his girlfriend to a nice Christmas dinner at a restaurant
or to one of the many Christmas shows that local hotels are offering.

The Hotel New Otani, for example, offers eight Christmas dinner shows at up to
$430 per person. Or there is the eight-course Christmas dinner offered in one of
the hotel's Western restaurants, for $390 per person.

Couples that can afford it often spend Christmas Eve or Christmas night in a
fancy hotel. The Hotel New Otani offers a Christmas special of a double room for
$340, including what is supposed to be a romantic gift of matching pairs of
pajamas.

Even for those who make the religious association with the holiday, it is with a
sense of romance.

"I'll be going out with my friends to a church on Christmas, because my
girlfriend has never been to a church," said Makiko Mori, a 23-year-old woman
working for a transport company. Asked which church she would go to, she said
blithely that any would do.

"It's nothing to do with religion," she explained. "But churches are romantic
places, with all that quiet and those stained-glass windows."

Christmas, even without its religious meaning, fits in well with Japanese
culture. Japanese are constantly showering presents upon each other, and in fact
New Year's gifts are far more common for society as a whole than Christmas
presents.

Indeed, the spread of Christmas throughout Asia is a tribute to the lure of
Western culture and to the power of retail stores in shaping social customs.
Shops pushed the concept of Christmas to peddle gifts, and now Christmas is
rapidly becoming an Asia-wide festival, from the fancy lights and decorations in
Singapore to the Santa Claus figures in front of occasional stores in China.

One of the most remarkable Christmas festivals is in Vietnam, where tens of
thousands of revelers parade on Christmas Eve through the center of Ho Chi Minh
City, formerly Saigon.

In Japan, of course, Christmas is festive only for those in love. On a day
devoted to couples, the most miserable Japanese are those who have no boyfriends
or girlfriends.

"I feel like a complete loser," said Ryo Tsuruta, a 24-year-old man who has no
date for Christmas this year. "There is only one Christmas when I'm 24 years
old, and I'm totally screwing it up. It's a waste of a whole year."


LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Christmas is rapidly becoming an Asia-wide festival. In Japan,
where it is not a national or religious holiday, or even a family occasion,
Christmas is a romantic time in which young people buy expensive presents.
(Nicholas D. Kristof/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Last Vietnamese Boat People

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 38;   Column 1;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 405 words


More than 20 years after the end of the Vietnam war, some 40,000 Vietnamese
still languish in holding camps across Southeast Asia, insisting that they are
legitimate refugees even after interviewers from the United Nations and local
governments have determined that they are not.

These Vietnamese are the wretched remnant of some million and a half Vietnamese
who braved death from storms, starvation and pirates to flee their oppressive,
impoverished and war-ravaged homeland in small boats during the 1970's and
1980's. Most were resettled in the West, the overwhelming majority of them in
the United States.

Tens of thousands whose claims to political asylum were denied have been
returned to Vietnam, voluntarily or forcibly. U.N. monitors have encountered no
evidence that any of these returnees have been persecuted. Those Vietnamese that
remain in Asian holding camps, more than half of them in Hong Kong, have
strenuously resisted efforts to return them home, insisting, in some cases with
justification, that their asylum claims did not get a fair hearing.

Now the Clinton Administration is trying to work out a plan with Hanoi that
would give these claimants the second hearing they seek. But first they would
have to return to Vietnam, where they would remain under United States
protection until their claims are decided.

The Administration plan is a decent solution for a tormenting problem and Hanoi
should give it full cooperation. If it is adopted, the Vietnamese claimants
would be wise to take advantage of it.

The Administration proposal was prompted by a House vote earlier this year to
cut off funding for U.N. efforts to send home Vietnamese who were not accepted
as refugees and monitor their treatment by Hanoi. The vote, which also held out
the prospect of new interviews for rejected claimants, disrupted voluntary
returns to Vietnam and touched off rioting in some of the camps.

In a world increasingly inhospitable to refugees, clear priorities need to be
set. The Vietnamese face far less danger than those fleeing more current
conflicts, like Turkish Kurds, Sri Lankan Tamils and ethnic minorities driven
from their homes in the former Yugoslavia.

Despite its historic obligations to anti-Communist Vietnamese, Washington can no
longer insist that other countries shelter them unwillingly and indefinitely in
camps. The Administration proposal is a fair and practical alternative.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 26, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Issue for Dole Isn't Courage, but Convictions

BYLINE: By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 2864 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 25


What catches the eye in Bob Dole's otherwise generic Presidential campaign
headquarters here is a huge black-and-white photograph of the candidate as a
fresh-faced G.I., his visored dress hat set at a jaunty 1940's "can-do" angle.

At first, the picture seems a throwback to an era that the campaign might prefer
to ignore, a poignant reminder that Senator Dole, at 72, whom Kansans have been
sending to Washington since 1961, is now old enough to be the father of some of
his rivals, and that his campaign is the last Presidential outing for the
generation of World War II.

But in the idealized world of campaign packaging, as the Dole team tries to find
a new way to present a man all too familiar after three national campaigns, the
Bob Dole in this half-century-old portrait is precisely the Bob Dole whom the
campaign wants to project -- energetic and indestructible, his character and
determination already forged by the mean poverty of his youth and about to be
burnished again through years of rehabilitation after near-death on a
battlefield in Italy.

Mr. Dole's gripping life story will form the heart of his campaign. The youthful
soldier he once was will be portrayed, not as a relic, but as the foundation of
the man who has led the Republicans in the Senate for almost 11 years, longer
than anyone else. He will be depicted as a decisive, experienced man of action
who, as he often says, can get things done.

The image is meant to contrast sharply with that of the baby boomer in the White
House, who was not born until 1946, a year after Mr. Dole had earned two Bronze
Stars, and who skirted service in his own generation's war. The message will be,
as Mr. Dole likes to put it, "It's time for adult leadership."

But before the campaign can play out these broad themes against President
Clinton, one hurdle remains: getting the nomination.

By almost any measure, Mr. Dole is far and away the leading Republican. In the
year since the campaign began to take shape behind the scenes, none of his
multiple challengers has shown any serious traction against him. With more than
$24 million in the till, 20 of the nation's 31 Republican governors working
their states for him and a deeper organization than he fielded in his two prior,
and failed, efforts for the Presidential nomination, Mr. Dole's candidacy
carries that enviable aura of inevitability.

"We're in control of our own fate," said William B. Lacy, deputy campaign
manager. "Short of some huge external force, which I can't even conceive of,
coming into play, if we run the right kind of campaign in the next several
weeks, we will be the nominee."

Still, the campaign is mindful that not a single vote has been cast, and that
Mr. Dole did run into trouble before, losing in the early primaries in 1980 to
Ronald Reagan and in 1988 to George Bush. Appearing to have a lock on the
nomination, while not actually having it, has left the Dole campaign in an odd
state of suspension.

Moreover, strategists for rival campaigns are hardly ready to concede. They say
that while Mr. Dole has kept his lead in the polls, his support is soft, his
favorability ratings are deteriorating and he is unelectable in November. He is
criticized as too old, too much the Washington insider, too interested in
brokering deals rather than fighting for principle, and too short on a rationale
for why he should be President. Moreover, the perception is that in the early
going he has been pandering to the right at the expense of the more moderate
voters he must count on next November.

In Eagerness to Deal, Some See a Liability

"The single biggest question voters have of Dole is whether he has convictions,"
said Linda DiVall, a pollster working for a rival, Senator Phil Gramm of Texas.
She said the current budget stalemate between the Republicans on Capitol Hill
and Democrats in the White House was hurting Mr. Dole because he appeared to be
the Republican most eager to compromise.

"He wants to play 'Let's Make a Deal' so that he can go out and claim the
nomination," she said, adding that this made him look craven next to Speaker
Newt Gingrich, who is standing with the Republican freshmen for the principles
that conservatives care most about.

James Carville, the Democratic strategist who helped engineer Mr. Clinton's 1992
race and will advise the President again, said the Dole campaign was torn
between the task of nailing down the nomination by winning support from
conservatives in the party, and the urge to start appealing to the broader, more
moderate electorate whose votes he will need in November.

"They feel the ball in their mitt and want to throw it to first, but are scared
that if they pull it out too fast, they'll drop it," he said.

Mr. Carville said he believed Mr. Dole was already trying to move to the center
with his recent statements on abortion and the ban on assault weapons, both of
which the public at large supports but most conservatives oppose.

Mr. Dole said recently on the NBC News program "Meet the Press" that at "one
time" he had supported a constitutional amendment to ban all abortion
unconditionally. He added, "I would not do it again," saying he supported a ban
that included exceptions for rape, incest and to save the life of the mother.
While his remarks were interpreted as a softening on an unconditional ban, his
aides said he had not changed his position, pointing to a 1992 interview on the
same program when he said he supported exceptions for rape and incest.

But a few days after the "Meet the Press" appearance, Mr. Dole refused to sign a
pledge to support the strict anti-abortion language in his party's national
platform, saying his record spoke louder than any pledge.

On assault weapons, Mr. Dole had written to the National Rifle Association
earlier this year to say that repealing the 1994 ban "is one of my legislative
priorities." But in an interview last week with The Boston Globe, he declined to
say whether he would vote to lift the ban. "This isn't a 'yes' or 'no' issue,"
he said.

Mr. Carville, aware that Mr. Dole has raised more money from special interest
groups than any other Senator, takes about two seconds to conjure up a potential
strategy against Mr. Dole.

"Is the country really looking for a 72-year legislative mechanic who has a good
record delivering for his contributors?" he said. "Someone who in 14 hours has
three different positions on abortion -- and they're running against us on
waffling?"

If the general election were held today, according to the latest CNN/USA
Today/Gallup poll, Mr. Clinton would beat Mr. Dole, 52 percent to 43 percent.
But Mr. Lacy predicted that once Mr. Dole became the nominee, he could start to
define Mr. Clinton as someone who has failed to keep his promises. "Right now,
voters are judging Clinton in a vacuum," he said.

Pushing the Character Issue, But What About Vision?

This weekend, a new Dole commercial in New Hampshire tries to fill that vacuum
by fleshing out the story of his life, including the hard times of his youth,
when the family lived in their basement in Russell, Kan., and rented out the
upstairs of their home for income.

The commercial, meant to convey Mr. Dole's grit and determination, focuses on
his long climb back toward wholeness after his 1945 combat injuries, when his
vertebrae were damaged by enemy fire as he tried to rescue a man in his platoon
who, it turned out, was already dead.

"Bob was paralyzed for a year," his wife, Elizabeth, says on a longer videotape
from which the commercial is taken. "He went away to war a star athlete, 190
pounds of muscle, and came back at 120 pounds, and some said he'd never get out
of bed. But they, the experts, didn't know what a man like Bob Dole was made
of."

After three operations, time in a body cast and years of rehabilitation working
out on a home-rigged pulley system, Mr. Dole regained most of his functions,
except for his right arm, which remains immobile, and his left arm, which is
only slightly better. A narrator describes the former second lieutenant as
"ready to lead like few men in our nation's history."

If the old war footage conjures up questions about Mr. Dole's age and stamina,
he has an answer.

"I tell people to follow me around," the tanned and fit-looking Senator growled
in his deep baritone the other day as he sat by a flickering fire in his Senate
office.

"I'm in good health," he added, despite surgery in 1991 for prostate cancer. "If
I felt my chronological age, that would be one thing. But everybody is living
longer."

Mention Bosnia and that war becomes all wars and he the universal soldier. He
melds his experience in Italy with the Balkans, Vietnam and the Persian Gulf,
and he is suddenly recalling an incident he says he nearly forgot: When he
toured the gulf in 1991 with President Bush, a soldier stuck $50 in his hand and
asked him to buy roses for his wife on their anniversary.

"Some guy gave me 50 bucks," Mr. Dole said, seemingly still amazed. "I came
back. We got the roses. I called her on the anniversary date." He paused. "He
gave me 50 bucks," he repeated, grinning, apparently feeling solidarity across
the decades with the gulf soldier and his romantic impulse.

Mr. Dole, who at one point during the interview reached with his left arm across
his lap to pick up his useless right arm and lay it on the armrest of his chair,
demonstrated his identification with soldiers again during the recent debate
over Bosnia, when he played a central role in winning over a reluctant Senate to
support the peacekeeping mission.

In an emotional speech in the Senate, his voice cracked as he spoke about the
Balkan-bound troops.

"This is not about a Democratic President and a Republican majority in the U.S.
Senate," he said. "This is about a lot of frightened young Americans."

The Bosnian mission is unpopular in Congress and with the public, and Mr. Dole
points to his role as evidence that he has convictions and puts principle before
politics. This underscores the tag line of his commercials: "Bob Dole: The
character and courage to lead America."

But some Republicans doubt this is enough to win the Presidency.

"Dole's greatest risk is that people think he is Bush in '92 all over again --
an older, establishment Republican without any vision," said William Kristol, a
Republican commentator and editor of a new conservative magazine, The Weekly
Standard.

"The Dole people think he can just beat Clinton on character and maturity, but
Bush tried that and lost. In '94, the Republicans beat him on ideology. Dole
needs to sharpen the contrast between where he would lead the country and where
Clinton would lead it."

Mr. Kristol, who was Vice President Dan Quayle's chief of staff, added: "Primary
voters want to continue the revolution of '94. Dole needs to convey that a Dole
Presidency would be a Dole-Gingrich alliance, and the best thing he can do in
the next few weeks is defend Newt vigorously."

Despite His Long Record, Public Still Has Doubts

Mr. Dole is already complaining that his record is being distorted by those
unfamiliar with it. But it seems odd that after four decades and 12,000 votes in
Washington, two runs for the Presidency and a failed bid as the Vice
Presidential nominee with Gerald Ford in 1976, the public still seems uncertain
of what Mr. Dole stands for.

One Dole adviser says this is because voters do not focus on someone until he
has won the nomination. But skeptics say voters formed their impressions of Mr.
Dole long ago -- first as President Richard M. Nixon's "hatchet man," then as a
split-the-difference compromiser in Congress. The picture was further obscured
this year when Mr. Dole made several gestures to conservatives.

In 1988, he refused to sign a pledge that he would not raise taxes; this year,
he signed that same pledge. Earlier this year, his campaign returned a
contribution to a group of gay Republicans -- a contribution that the campaign
had initially sought. Several weeks later, Mr. Dole said he had been wrong to
return the money because he opposes discrimination.

Even some who think Mr. Dole has shown conviction have their doubts. "I'll
always have a lot of respect for what he did in '85 when he led the Senate to
adopt a spending freeze budget, with no tax increases," said David Keating,
executive vice president of the National Taxpayers Union. "It was a masterful
job of leadership by Dole."

But then Mr. Keating added, "Dole's not afraid to do what needs to be done, but
certainly you always wonder about what Dole wants to get done."

In the interview in his office, Mr. Dole described himself as "conservative
forever, not right wing, not extreme, but conservative, mainstream."

He added: "My view is, on any of those things people say I've moved to the right
on, I've either made floor statements years ago or voted years ago." For
example, he said he had spoken out against violence in Hollywood long before he
did in May. " "So I don't see any change," he said.

Another hurdle, and perhaps his biggest, is that while Mr. Dole has generated
significant institutional support, he has not inspired much enthusiasm among the
public.

Mr. Dole said he had been thinking about this, and took some comfort in going
back and reading newspaper articles of Senator Robert F. Kennedy's 1968
Presidential campaign, which, as he described them, said "no enthusiasm, most
people would like another candidate."

"My view, all that disappears when you have a nominee," he added. "I find a lot
of enthusiasm out there. And Elizabeth finds a lot of enthusiasm. People aren't
jumping out the window, but that wouldn't be enthusiasm, that would be stupid.
So we try to keep them within bounds and keep them from getting too excited."

The Series

While most Americans have yet to focus fully on next year's campaign for the
White House, President Clinton and most of his Republican rivals have spent the
good part of a year building their political strategies and the images they want
to present to the country's voters. This series examines those efforts and the
political landscape at the start of the 1996 political season.

In Dole's Own Words

"It is critical to have a President who knows what made America great, who knows
what has been sacrificed to keep us free and who would do all in his power to
lead America back to her place in the sun. My friends, I have the experience. I
have been tested and tested and tested in many, many ways. I am not afraid to
lead, and I know the way."

-- Presidential announcement speech, April 1995.


"Those who cultivate moral confusion for profit should understand this -- we
will name their names and shame them as they deserve to be shamed. We will
contest them for the heart and soul of every child in every neighborhood in
America."

-- Speech on Hollywood, May 31, 1995.


"Haven't thought. If I get elected, at my age, you know, I'm not going anywhere.
It's not an agenda. I'm just going to serve my country."

-- To author Richard Ben Cramer, who asked Mr. Dole what he would do first as
President, 1995.


"I'm willing to be another Ronald Reagan, if that's what you want."

-- Speech to the Republican National Committee, June 1995.


"If students can discuss sports, music or drama at school, they should also be
allowed to voluntarily pray."

-- Campaign tape, fall 1995.


"Sometimes I kind of wonder: 'Well, jiminy, why can't I think like this guy? Is
there something wrong with me?' Then I think, 'Well, maybe not."'

-- Interview with The New York Times on Speaker Newt Gingrich, March 5, 1995.


"People are saying, 'It's your turn.' Didn't know people took turns in this
business. But there's a strong feeling in the Republican Party of when your time
has come."

-- Interview with The New York Times, March 5, 1995.


"She would probably if possible go back to her Red Cross role as president of
the American Red Cross, which I think makes a powerful statement for working
women who really don't believe that the spouse must sort of hang around the
White House all day waiting for something to happen."

-- Interview with The Des Moines Register on his wife, Elizabeth, as First Lady,
Dec. 17, 1995.


"So we say to those soldiers who may be on early duty there at 4 A.M. in the
morning, in the bitter cold -- from those of us in the warmth of the U.S.
Senate, free from any danger -- we are about to cast a vote. We are about to
cast a vote, Sergeant Jones or Private Smith, whoever it is, to indicate that we
support your efforts there. They may have some misgivings about why they are
there, and we may have some doubts." . . .

"It seems to me, not that I have any more insight than anybody else in this
body, but there is something about a relationship that you build up in the
service and you understand one thing: How important support is from America,
whether it is your family, whether it is your little hometown, whether it is
your state, whether it is the Congress of the United States." . . .

"So, it is up to us. If not now, when? This is the time to support American
forces."

-- Senate speech in support of troops in Bosnia, Dec. 13, 1995.

NAME: Bob Dole

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: CAMPAIGN '96: Presidential Contenders - First article of a series.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the front-runner for the Republican
Presidential nomination, is stressing his character and maturity. (Fred R.
Conrad/The New York Times) (pg. A1); Senator Bob Dole and his wife, Elizabeth,
greeted supporters on Dec. 8 in Concord, N.H., as they arrived to file for the
state primary. (Keith Meyers/The New York Times) (pg. D6)

Chart: "BIOGRAPHY"

Robert Joseph Dole

CURRENT JOB Senator and majority leader

BORN July 22, 1923, Russell, Kan.

EDUCATION University of Kansas, 1941-43; University of Arizona, 1948-49;
Washburn University, B.A. and LL.B., 1952.

RELIGION Methodist

MILITARY SERVICE Entered Army in 1943 as second lieutenant, released as captain
in 1948. Served as combat platoon leader with 10th Mountain Division in Italy.
Wounded 1945. Awarded two Bronze Stars.

MARRIED Mary Elizabeth Hanford since 1975.

CHILDREN Daughter, Robin, 40, from previous marriage.

MAJOR POSITIONS Kansas House of Representatives, 1951-53; Russell County
Attorney, 1953-60; United States House of Representatives, 1961-68; United
States Senate since 1969; Republican National Committee chairman, 1971-1973;
Senate majority leader, 1984-86; minority leader, 1987-94; elected majority
leader, Dec 1994. (pg. D6)


TYPE: Biography; Series

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 26, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The G.I. Families in Germany Soldier On

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 809 words

DATELINE: IDAR-OBERSTEIN, Germany, Dec. 25


Almost everything was right for the Camardelle family's Christmas celebration
this year. Colored lights blinked, wrapping paper littered the floor, children's
laughter filled the air and the aroma of a roasting turkey wafted through the
apartment.

But though Hazel Camardelle and her two daughters tried not to dwell on it, a
very important part of their Christmas was missing. The girls' father, Staff
Sgt. Jay Camardelle, shipped out to Bosnia last week.

At many American military bases in Germany, families celebrated this holiday
season under the pall of separation from loved ones. For them, the season's
traditional joys were mixed with fear, anxiety and uncertainty.

This afternoon at Strassburg Barracks, 100 miles southwest of Frankfurt, sounds
of celebration spilled from apartments along Abrams Alley and Bradley Boulevard.
By midday, garbage bins were crammed with boxes that until a few hours before
had held dolls, electric trains and other booty.

Inside some of these apartments, today was a last chance to say goodbye to
fathers or mothers who are about to board trains for Bosnia. At others, it was a
day to adjust to an ancient kind of loneliness.

If Mrs. Camardelle's place in Building 9046 was any guide, the absence of heads
of households here was not enough to turn Christmas into a sad occasion. She and
her two daughters shared the day with a neighbor, Pat Sullivan, whose husband is
also en route to Bosnia and whose two daughters are best friends with the
Camardelle girls.

As is perhaps inevitable when four young girls gather, Barbie was a dominant
presence as gift packages were ripped open. There were Barbie dolls, Barbie
homes, Barbie binoculars and a Barbie camera that was dropped and broken soon
after it was unwrapped, touching off a brief stream of tears. Santa also brought
costume jewelry, a computer game said to be educational, a Mariah Carey compact
disk and a makeup kit.

The girls are used to their fathers' being away on field training exercises,
sometimes for months at a time, and the full impact of the Bosnia deployment may
not yet have hit them. "I try not to worry that my dad's in Bosnia," said
Shelley Camardelle, 9. "I try to think that he's in the field for a long time.
If I think he's in Bosnia, then I get upset."

Shelley's sister, Jenifer, 11, and her pal Bridget Sullivan, 12, have decided to
write novels as a way of keeping their minds off Bosnia.

Jenifer is writing about a woman whose skill at magic tricks leads neighbors to
suspect she is a witch. Bridget's subject is a young woman who is kidnapped by a
pirate and then falls in love with him.

"With the fathers away, some things are definitely different," Mrs. Sullivan
said. "The older girls have a smart mouth, which they don't use when Daddy's
around. The younger ones whine more. Jamie's woken up a couple of times in the
middle of the night and told me, 'I thought Daddy was here.' I tell her, 'No,
he's not here.' We just hold each other for a while and then go back to sleep.
Kids can't say what they're feeling, and they have their own ways of expressing
depression and anger."

Mrs. Sullivan works at the base commissary as a way of earning spare cash and,
perhaps even more important, keeping her mind occupied.

She remembers her own childhood in New Orleans, when she spent part of every
morning at a church praying that her father, an Army pilot, would come home
safely from Vietnam. Now, although she has already had "a few boo-hoo sessions"
with Mrs. Camardelle, she feels prepared for the stress of the coming months.

"So far, I'm finding that the hardest thing to handle is the end of the day,
after the kids are in bed," she said. "That's usually the time I have with my
husband. You look for someone to talk to or just to cuddle up to, and he's not
there.

"I think there is a potential for danger in Bosnia. There's not supposed to be,
but there is. I just hope my fears aren't realistic and that everyone down there
will behave like they're supposed to.

"Before Phil left, he told me he felt he was just doing his job," she said,
referring to her husband, Specialist Philip Sullivan. "He told me, 'I signed the
papers. I said I was ready to do whatever my country needed me to do. Now
there's a job to do, and I'm going to do it.' "

Both women said that after periods of doubt, they have come to support the
mission their husbands are being sent to accomplish in Bosnia.

Mrs. Camardelle said her husband had brought the family together for a serious
talk about Bosnia's troubles and read them encyclopedia entries about Tuzla,
where he is to be based.

"If they can help the people down there to get things straight and get their
lives together, I'm all for it," she said. "I can't imagine living in the
conditions those people are living in. If they can help, that's great."


LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 26, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

GUARDSMEN FIGHT CUTS BY PENTAGON

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1429 words

DATELINE: FORT INDIANTOWN GAP, Pa.


On any given weekend, 5,000 citizen-soldiers from the Pennsylvania Army National
Guard's 28th Infantry Division assemble at this sprawling base to fly Cobra
attack helicopters, fire M-1 tanks and train for a war that many Army officials
say they will never fight.

Because of that, the Defense Department wants to eliminate roughly half of
110,000 Army National Guard combat troops, which includes the 28th Division, and
save hundreds of millions of dollars in such training and equipment. The
remaining National Guardsmen would be trained to drive trucks or manage
supplies, support skills that are lacking in the active-duty Army.

But this plan faces fierce opposition from the powerful National Guard lobby in
Washington and from more than two dozen state governors. For them, the National
Guard is a cherished institution -- the direct descendant of Colonial militia
protected by the Constitution -- one that the governors rely on in all sorts of
emergencies, ranging from hurricanes to riots, and one that they want to keep.

In the cold war, the Army kept a huge combat reserve in the National Guard as a
hedge against global conflict with the Soviet Union. Now the Pentagon is
questioning why it is spending more than $1 billion a year to pay, train and
equip National Guard combat troops who are part of the 386,000-member Army
National Guard, when military planners foresee no war big enough or long enough
to need them.

"There is a lot of the Army National Guard that's just irrelevant to our
strategy," said a senior Defense Department official. "It's kind of like a
welfare program for weekend warriors so guys can earn a little extra pay."

Congress has long shielded the National Guard and the Reserves from the deep
cuts that active-duty forces have absorbed. Since the Bush Administration, the
Pentagon has tried unsuccessfully to make deeper cuts in the National Guard.
From 1989 to 1998, the active-duty Army is to shrink by 36 percent, to 495,000
troops, but the Army National Guard will be reduced by only 20 percent, to
367,000 troops.

Gen. Colin L. Powell, the retired Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said in
his autobiography, "We managed some reductions, but could still save much more
money on the Guard and Reserves without hurting national security."

One reason for Congress to be so protective of the National Guard is that the
lawmakers' constituents reap many benefits from part-time salaries and local
armories.

"I feel very strongly that we should leave these divisions alone," said
Representative G. V. (Sonny) Montgomery, a Mississippi Democrat who is one of
the Guard's staunchest supporters. "They're a good buy for the taxpayer."

Indeed, Edward J. Philbin, executive director of the National Guard Association
of the United States, issued a thinly veiled threat to Defense Secretary William
J. Perry in a letter last August: "Since significant elements of the eight
National Guard divisions are located in 25 states, which control 363 electoral
votes, the precipitous restructuring could very well affect the 1996 elections."

The nation's Army reservists are divided into two groups: the 230,000-member
Reserve, which reports to the Army, and the 386,000-member National Guard, which
reports to state governors in peacetime and to the Defense Department in wartime
or for other military operations. Reserve forces cost about 25 to 80 percent of
what the military spends to maintain comparable active-duty troops.

The fight over the 110,000 combat guardsmen comes as the Pentagon is relying on
reservists to ease the strains on active-duty forces. Small groups of Army
guardsmen have joined the multinational peacekeeping force now based in the
Sinai. The Defense Department is sending 3,800 guardsmen and reservists to help
in the Bosnia peacekeeping operation, but they are support specialists, like
military police and civil affairs experts, not combat troops.

The United States has based its post-cold-war defense plans on the commitment to
fight two wars nearly simultaneously. As part of this planning, the Pentagon has
increased the training and equipping of 15 National Guard brigades so that they
can reinforce American troops quickly in the second of two regional conflicts.

Army officials say these National Guard brigades provide enough additional
firepower. The 110,000 National Guard troops in the remaining eight combat
divisions are not even included in the two-war plan.

Indeed, most of the eight divisions, many of whose lineage date to Colonial
militias, have not seen combat since World War II. Even the location of some
units seems out of date. The New York Army National Guard maintains two M-1 tank
companies on Staten Island.

With a surplus of combat power in the Guard and a shortage of support skills in
the active-duty Army, a senior Army panel is expected to recommend in March that
some combat units be converted to support forces. "We're looking to see how we
might make them even more relevant than they are today," said Deborah R. Lee,
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Reserve Affairs.

This would follow the recommendations made in May by an independent commission
studying ways to reduce redundancies in the military.

National Guard officials, however, do not trust the Pentagon. Relations between
the active-duty Army and Guard have been strained for years. Many guardsmen
complain that Army generals treat them as second-class soldiers, and many Army
officers view guardsmen as amateurs.

Any restructuring, Guard officials say, may just be a cover for the Army to cut
the Guard's troop levels. If the Defense Department "churns this witches' brew
without sober and deliberate consideration of the probable unintended
consequences, incalculable damage to the entire Army could be the result," Mr.
Philbin said in his letter to Mr. Perry.

The Clinton Administration largely gave up trying to fight Capitol Hill on the
reservist issue. But with budgets squeezing tighter, the Administration is now
trying to play hardball.

"It's not whether or not we need the Guard divisions," said Gen. Ronald H.
Griffith, the Army's vice chief of staff. "The real issue is within the
constrained resources of the Army, what do we need most?"

The Pentagon is particularly irked that it pays for most of the combat guards'
expenses, but guardsmen perform mostly state missions. In New Jersey, guardsmen
have treated homeless people. In Iowa, they helped flood victims. And in the Los
Angeles riots in the spring of 1992, National Guardsmen kept order.

Guard officials get defensive when asked to justify the combat divisions'
contribution to national security.

"I don't have the crystal ball," said Lieut. Gen. Edward D. Baca, chief of the
National Guard Bureau in Washington. "There were a lot of folks who said the
same thing before World War II, 'Where's the threat?' "

But that was before the all-volunteer military. And that was before the Defense
Department adopted a strategy for fighting wars quickly and decisively to avoid
casualties. National Guard officials seem to justify their mission today by
evoking exploits from the past.

"You're right, there is a nostalgia about it all," said Brig. Gen. Walter F.
Pudlowski, a Vietnam War veteran who is deputy commander of the 28th Division.
"Perhaps there is a greater leaning on history than in other units."

Amid the uncertainty, few here at wintry tank ranges and hangars lined with
Cobra attack and Kiowa scout helicopters doubt the abilities of the 28th
Division. Fifty-one percent of the division's 15,600 reservists served on active
duty, including many in the Persian Gulf war.

But the 28th Division, which dates to 1747 and is the Army's oldest
continuous-serving division, has not fought since World War II. Its biggest
missions in the last two years have been hauling fuel and salt to Philadelphia
in a snowstorm and training with Lithuanian troops.

In justifying their existence, division officials cite their presence in 88
communities throughout Pennsylvania, and the playgrounds and environmental
projects that guardsmen have volunteered to build.

But the question persists, What is your military role in the post-cold-war
world? And the answer comes back: a $1 billion insurance policy.

"People say there will be no World War III, so why do you need us?" said Maj.
Pete Roussell, executive officer of a Cobra helicopter squadron who sells
industrial water treatment chemicals as a civilian. "But if you dissolve units
like this, it would take years to rebuild that ability if you ever needed it
again."

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Army National Guard combat troops, which include the 28th
Division in Pennsylvania, are the targets of a Pentagon plan to cut back such
units to save money. At Fort Indiantown Gap, Pa., guardsmen in the 28th
Division, which dates to 1747, worked on a helicopter at a hangar last week.
(Keith Meyers/The New York Times) (pg. A16)


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Admiral in Bosnia Sees A Crucial Time for NATO

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A;   Page 2;   Column 3;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 920 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 22


Adm. Leighton W. Smith Jr. had been on the job for only 28 hours when he relayed
the orders in April 1994 to stage NATO's first bombing raid in the alliance's
45-year history.

Those air strikes against Bosnian Serb targets near Gorazde, after Serbian
forces had ignored a United Nations ultimatum to pull back from the besieged
Bosnian Government enclave, were a forceful debut for Admiral Smith as the
commander of NATO forces in Southern Europe.

Now as commander of the 60,000-member NATO force being sent to the Balkans to
insure peace in Bosnia, the admiral is in charge of the most complex
peacekeeping mission ever as well as the coordination of scores of civilian
agencies trying to help rebuild the war-ravaged nation.

The 56-year-old former Navy fighter pilot flew more than 280 missions over North
Vietnam and was awarded two Distinguished Flying Crosses. He was the operations
director for the United States European Command from 1989 to 1991, and so was
involved in support operations in the Persian Gulf war. Then he worked on
providing food and other aid in northern Iraq. Now the Bosnia operation poses
new, much more complicated political-military challenges to the 1962 Naval
Academy graduate.

"We're not here as a bunch of cowboys looking for a fight," Admiral Smith said
last week in Sarajevo, where he has moved his headquarters from Naples. "This
agreement was freely agreed upon by the leaders, and I believe that it is their
responsibility to insure its implementation."

In that interview, Admiral Smith underlined what the Bosnia mission means for
NATO.

"This is a defining moment for the alliance," he said of the operation, which
includes troops from 15 NATO nations as well as Russia and a dozen other
non-NATO countries. "One of the exciting things in this operation is that we are
associated with former adversaries. Working together will determine the future
that the military will be involved in."

Admiral Smith will work directly with the military leaders of Bosnia, Croatia
and Serbia to carry out the terms of the peace plan and will delegate oversight
of the daily ground operations to a Briton, Lieut. Gen. Michael Walker. Admiral
Smith will also work closely with Carl Bildt, a former Swedish Prime Minister
who will oversee all civilian activities in Bosnia. Admiral Smith reports
directly to another American, Gen. George A. Joulwan, NATO's military commander.

"He's traveled through the region extensively and knows all the actors," said
Gen. John M. Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

His knowledge was earned first-hand. It was Admiral Smith who directed NATO's
two-week bombing campaign against Serbian targets this summer, air strikes that
are credited with helping to drive the Serbs to the bargaining table.

In the months before the bombing campaign in August and September, associates
say Admiral Smith chafed at the caution of United Nations commanders who refused
to request large-scale air strikes for fear of retaliation against United
Nations peacekeepers on the ground in Bosnia. Both the United Nations and NATO
had to agree to bombing requests before air strikes could be carried out. "He
was one of the most frustrated guys I was around during that period," said a
former top aide to the admiral.

Admiral Smith occasionally clashed with his boss, General Joulwan. In early
September, during a pause in the NATO air strikes, the United Nations ground
commander, Gen. Bernard Janvier, met with the Bosnian Serb commander, Gen. Ratko
Mladic, and recommended extending the pause. Admiral Smith concurred. But NATO
diplomats were outraged, and General Joulwan overruled the admiral and resumed
the bombing.

Despite Admiral Smith's combat record and his Bosnia experience, the idea that
an admiral is directing NATO's first ground operation has some in NATO
grumbling.

But colleagues say Admiral Smith is well prepared for his post. A meticulous
note-taker who religiously keeps personal journals, he has tutored himself on
the intricacies of ground combat.

"He's put a lot of time into understanding how special operations and ground
units work," said Lieut. Gen. Anthony C. Zinni of the Marines, who served as
Admiral Smith's deputy in the European Command. "He's a voracious reader, and
it's hard to stay in front of him."

After attending the United States Naval Academy, he flew carrier-based
light-attack planes during the Vietnam War and quickly moved up the command
ladder.

He became captain of the carrier America in 1984, and subsequently mixed fleet
assignments with staff jobs in Washington. After the operations job in Europe,
he returned to the Pentagon as the Navy's chief strategist. He became the
principal author of the Navy's post-cold-war strategy that shifted the service's
focus away from its traditional open-water Soviet foe.

Born in Alabama in 1939, he is known to his friends as Snuffy, after the
hillbilly cartoon character, and his Southern expressions and wry sense of humor
sometimes baffle NATO colleagues. But his relaxed, open style usually wins out.

"We'd be in a meeting, and Smith would burst out, 'When are we going to fish or
cut bait?' " said a American officer who has worked for him. "The Turks, Greeks
and Dutch all around the table would go, 'Huh?' "

Adm. Stanley Arthur, who retired this year as the vice chief of naval
operations, said, "Snuffy plays his 'little country boy from Alabama' act, but
he's taking in all the information and distilling it."


LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                                  (New Jersey)

NEW JERSEY DAILY BRIEFING;
Attention! Maple Shade Mail

BYLINE: By TERRY PRISTIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 80 words

DATELINE: MAPLE SHADE


Jack H. Hagopian, of Cherry Hill, remembered how his spirits were buoyed when
strangers sent him holiday cards during his Christmas in Vietnam, in 1966.
Nearly 30 years later, Mr. Hagopian returned the favor, the A.P. reported. After
he put up a sign at his gas station asking for cards to be sent to United States
troops with the peacekeeping mission in Bosnia, he collected nearly 1,500 cards,
many made by children. They were flown to Germany last week.   TERRY PRISTIN

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Bernard Yoh, 74, Lecturer on Warfare

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 10;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 243 words


Bernard Yoh, a lecturer on psychological warfare and former underground fighter
in China and Vietnam, died on Monday at a nursing home in Bethesda, Md. He was
74 and lived in Rockville, Md.

He suffered a stroke, according to Accuracy in Media, a conservative media
watchdog organization of which he was director of communications.

Mr. Yoh was born in Shanghai and educated in Jesuit schools. During World War
II, he joined the underground to fight the Japanese occupiers of his homeland.
His group later became part of a United States Navy Sino-American Cooperative
Organization, which rescued American airmen downed on missions over
Japanese-held territory.

Mr. Yoh first arrived in the United States in 1947. In the late 1950's, he was
an adviser to President Ngo Dinh Diem of South Vietnam and helped form and equip
a counterinsurgency force, the Sea Swallows, operating behind Vietcong lines.

Returning to the United States in 1963, he settled in the Washington area and
commuted to Montgomery, Ala., to lecture on counterinsurgency and psychological
warfare at the Air War College. He joined Accuracy in Media in 1974..

Mr. Yoh is survived by his wife, Joan Thompson Yoh; their daughter, Yolanda Yoh,
also of Rockville; two sons and two daughters from an earlier marriage, Anthony
and Ann Yoh, both of Majorca, Spain, Augustine, of New York City, and Cecelia
Yoh Dorhra of Elmhurst, Ill.; 10 grandchildren and two great-grandchildren.


LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Going Home

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;  Page 7;  Column 6;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 83 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 27


The last 5,048 Vietnamese still living in a refugee camp here will be sent home
under an agreement signed on Tuesday that would bring to an end the 20-year saga
of boat people in Thailand. But whether the Vietnamese will go peacefully
remains to be seen.

The new agreement calls for all the Vietnamese living in the Sikkiu refugee camp
in northern Thailand to be returned to Vietnam by June 1996.

It was signed by Thailand, Vietnam and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE CONTENDERS;
Lugar Hones His Message, But the Delivery Needs Work

BYLINE: By JERRY GRAY

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 2991 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 27


Consider the resume: two-term Mayor of Indianapolis; United States Senator for
nearly two decades; former chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee;
three times on the short list to be the running mate of the Republican
Presidential nominee.

By a number of measures, Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana is among the most
qualified candidates ever to run for President of the United States.

"Everything a President Should Be," goes the slogan for his campaign.

Everything but charismatic, that is.

Despite his credentials, the brainy and statesmanlike Mr. Lugar remains
virtually unknown outside his home state. Polite, wordy and bland, he also
remains far back in the Republican Presidential pack, badly trailing Senator Bob
Dole of Kansas, Senator Phil Gramm of Texas and a host of other candidates who
are tougher-talking, more glib and more telegenic.

"I suppose for the purposes of a campaign," the 63-year-old Mr. Lugar conceded
in an interview the other day, "it might be more useful to get more of a
thunderbolt quality."

That lack of flash is not the only thing working against the Senator.  His
campaign is both underfinanced and understaffed, and he started many months
behind most other Republican candidates. When he finally did make the formal
announcement of his candidacy on April 19, it was all but drowned out by the
Oklahoma City bombing that very day.

Mr. Lugar has also bucked the times with his choice of a campaign theme. In a
period when tax cuts, a balanced budget and less intrusive government are issues
that resonate with the voters, he has opted to stake his candidacy on his
foreign policy experience in the Senate, where he was chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee a decade ago, served for much of the period since then as
the committee's ranking Republican and is now second among its majority only to
the current chairman, Jesse Helms. His quest is to persuade the American people
that their choice for President should be the candidate best able to lead the
country in the changing world of the post-cold-war era.

"Foreign affairs is not a strong suit for any of the rest of them," he said of
the other candidates. "They would prefer to talk about taxes and spending and
budgets. But the unique role for the President of the United States is Commander
in Chief, the person most responsible for the security of the country."

Mr. Lugar has been a leader in fighting for the United States and Russia to pare
their stockpile of nuclear weapons. He voted for this year's broadening of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and for the North American Free Trade
Agreement. And he voted to send American troops to Bosnia for the peacekeeping
mission there, after chiding President Clinton for not consulting Congress
before deciding on it.

"President Clinton must consult with Congress not just to mollify members," Mr.
Lugar said, "but to sharpen the focus in defining the mission of U.S. troops in
Bosnia. Maintaining peace and stability in Europe by ending the Balkan war is an
important U.S. interest. American security and trade depend on our strong
relationship with a peaceful and stable Europe."

The Sound Bite Wasn't Made for Him

Richard Green Lugar fairly personifies trustworthiness: dark suits, silver hair,
a quick smile, a firm handshake. His is a style that has won him a fierce
loyalty among the small army of former staff aides who form the core of his
Presidential campaign organization. His folksy manner has also made him an
enormous favorite with Indiana voters. In 1994, he became the first Indianian to
be elected to the Senate for four consecutive terms.

But cast alongside his Republican Presidential rivals in the glare of the
national spotlight, he appears wooden, bland.

"I wish that people were prepared to listen more and to accept more complex
ideas," he said. "But this, the sound bite, is the nature of the competition,
and I probably need to be better at it."

His personality and the issues he has chosen as the centerpieces of his campaign
-- foreign policy, terrorism and his proposal to replace the Federal income tax
with a 17 percent tax on retail sales -- mean that on the stump and in
interviews, he is far more likely to lecture than to deliver the snappy sound
bite.

"I favor abolishing the Federal income tax and all of the Internal Revenue
Service apparatus which has grown to collect and enforce the income tax," Mr.
Lugar tells listeners on the campaign trail. "Specifically, I propose to abolish
completely the Federal individual and corporate income taxes, capital gains
taxes, gift taxes and inheritance taxes all at the same time -- and, with them,
all of the tax loopholes which have been created for special interests."

Mr. Lugar's idea of replacing this slew of Federal taxes with a sales tax, much
like those that 45 of the 50 states now impose, has drawn cheers from crowds but
jeers from his opponents and a number of fiscal experts, who maintain that a tax
dependent on vigorous retail sales would be too unreliable a source of
Government revenue.

Dan Quayle Is Not His Favorite Indianian

It was shortly after the ticket of Ronald Reagan and George Bush was swept into
office in 1980 that the notion of running for President in 1996 first crossed
Mr. Lugar's mind. The idea took genuine root when Mr. Bush lost the White House
in 1992. Still, Mr. Lugar hesitated, watching and waiting for any move by Mr.
Bush's Vice President, Dan Quayle, a fellow Indianian who is better known and
has stronger political and financial ties.

When Mr. Quayle decided not to run, Mr. Lugar's decision was sealed.

Not that this was the last time that Mr. Quayle was heard from. In September,
the former Vice President accepted a post as chairman of Mr. Dole's political
action committee, Campaign America. Mr. Quayle insisted that this did not amount
to an endorsement of Mr. Dole, but Mr. Lugar thought otherwise.

"I do find it hard to understand why Dan Quayle would accept such a position at
this time," Mr. Lugar said then. "I had sought the support of my former Indiana
teammate in the Senate for my Presidential campaign and had accepted Dan
Quayle's explanation that he and President Bush had elected not to endorse
Presidential candidates prior to the primary elections and the convention."

Given his acknowledged shortcomings of style and his standing in the polls, Mr.
Lugar's prospects might seem daunting. But he and his strategists have a
scenario that carries him to the Republican nomination:

Mr. Dole, the front-runner, is slowed either by the weight of incessant attacks
from his rivals or by the kind of missteps that tripped him in two earlier runs
for the White House. The more moderate of Mr. Dole's supporters then shift their
allegiance to Mr. Lugar rather than to any of the remaining Republican
contenders, whom Mr. Lugar has described as "too dour, too draconian, too
mean-spirited" to win the general election.

"It is the right time for me to run, and it's the only time," the Senator said
during an interview in his Capitol Hill office, which looks like a wing of the
state museum of Indiana. There is a poster of the movie "Hoosiers," a popular
film that glorified the state's tradition of great basketball teams, along with
clocks and paperweights carved into the shape of Indiana and an array of
bric-a-brac stamped with the state's name.

"There's what I would basically call an open seat for the Presidency," Mr. Lugar
said, "a situation where a candidate from the other party is crippled, President
Clinton, and there is open competition on the Republican side."

But Mr. Lugar will have to overcome what even he concedes are long-shot odds and
a commanding lead by Mr. Dole.

"Under the scenario for me to be an alternative to Senator Dole," he said, "I
have to have recognition that approaches his, and I have not achieved that. So
ahead of me is an attempt to make certain that those people in those critical
states know who I am."

As part of that effort, voters in New Hampshire and Iowa got a dramatic
presentation of his message a week before Christmas, when his campaign began a
three-week, $300,000 run of television and radio commercials dealing with a
theme of his stump speech: nuclear terrorism.

In the advertisements, a terrorist group has threatened to detonate three
nuclear bombs in the United States.

"Nobody wants to talk about nuclear terrorism," Mr. Lugar says in the
commercials. "But hiding from it won't make it go away. All of us in the race
promise to balance the budget, cut taxes, shrink government. And with a
Republican Congress, any of us will do this.

"But the President never gets to that agenda if America isn't secure. What this
is about is electing a President you trust with your life."

Mr. Lugar says that there have been hundreds of reports of attempted nuclear
smuggling since the collapse of the Soviet Union and that in the last three
years "there have been at least 60 instances that involved seizure of nuclear
materials."

"From the tragedies of Oklahoma City and the World Trade Center to the first act
of nuclear terrorism requires but one small step," he says on the campaign
trail. "Suppose that instead of mini-vans filled with hundreds of pounds of the
crude explosives used in Oklahoma City and New York, terrorists had acquired a
suitcase carrying a 100-pound, grapefruit-size ball of highly enriched uranium.

"Assuming a simple, well-known design, a weapon fashioned from this material
would produce a nuclear blast equivalent to 10,000 to 20,000 tons of TNT, enough
to devastate a three-square-mile area. Most of the people of Oklahoma City would
have disappeared. In the case of New York, the tip of Manhattan, including all
the Wall Street financial district, would have been destroyed."

As quickly as Mr. Lugar raises that specter, he moves to dispel it, telling his
audiences that thousands of American and Russian strategic nuclear weapons have
been dismantled and destroyed because of legislation that he helped write.

What Might Have Been: 3 Chances for the Ticket

Mr. Lugar has made the short list for Vice President on the Republican ticket
three times. In 1972, Richard M. Nixon -- who once dubbed Mr. Lugar his
"favorite mayor," an accolade that turned into a political albatross after the
Watergate scandal -- passed him over in favor of the incumbent Vice President,
Spiro T. Agnew. Then Mr. Reagan considered him as a running mate in 1980 before
eventually settling on Mr. Bush.

The most stinging rejection, however, came in 1988, when Mr. Bush flirted with
the idea of asking Mr. Lugar to join the ticket but turned instead to Indiana's
junior Senator, Mr. Quayle.

Mr. Lugar's path to national politics began long before any of that, though,
when he was elected to the Indianapolis school board in 1964. Three years later
he was elected to the first of two terms as Mayor, an office in which he won
national acclaim, as well as praise from President Nixon, for consolidating the
governments of Indianapolis and suburban Marion County, an effort dubbed Unigov
that became a national model.

Hoping to use City Hall as a springboard to Washington, Mr. Lugar ran for the
Senate in 1974. But, saddled with the past support of Mr. Nixon, whom Watergate
forced from the White House that year, he lost to the incumbent Democrat, Birch
Bayh.

Two years later, he defeated a weaker Democrat, Senator Vance Hartke, and was
off to Washington. Even-tempered, soft-spoken and given to broad, toothy grins,
he has since acquired a reputation as "a Boy Scout," "grandfatherly," "the
thinking man's candidate" and "a statesman." He agrees with each of those
descriptions.

Mr. Lugar was Phi Beta Kappa at Denison University, a small liberal arts school
near Columbus, Ohio, where he received a bachelor of arts degree, and followed
that with a year at Oxford on a Rhodes Scholarship. The day he finished at
Oxford, he went to the United States Embassy in London and volunteered for the
Navy, in which he served from 1957 to 1960 as an intelligence officer at the
Pentagon.

When he left the Navy, he returned to Indianapolis to take over his family's
failing businesses -- a nearby 604-acre farm where he now raises soybeans, corn
and timber, and a farming machinery concern, the Thomas L. Green Company -- and
made them profitable.

Since 1968, when he took office as Mayor, he and his wife have issued annual and
very detailed income statements. Their 1994 statement reported income that makes
them moderately affluent -- a total from all sources of $177,595, including the
$135,000 Mr. Lugar earns as a Senator -- and a net worth of $1.7 million.

In 19 years on Capitol Hill, Mr. Lugar has amassed a conservative voting record
that ranks alongside that of Senator Helms; no one in Congress was more loyal to
President Reagan.

That record includes opposition to abortion except in cases of rape, incest or
threat to the life of a pregnant woman, and opposition as well to 1994
legislation safeguarding access to abortion clinics. Mr. Lugar also opposed a
nonbinding resolution favoring improved diplomatic relations with Vietnam and
voted against Mr. Clinton's national education program, Goals 2000.

But he has shown a stubborn independent streak on a number of contentious
issues.

An early critic of President Ferdinand Marcos's rule in the Philippines, he
persuaded President Reagan finally to withdraw his own support in 1986, a move
that led to the downfall of the Marcos regime. And he was out front in the
effort to impose sanctions against South Africa's apartheid Government,
organizing the campaign that led to the overriding of Mr. Reagan's veto of the
legislation.

Mr. Lugar's entry into politics came when he was at Denison University and
shared the presidency of the student body with a young woman named Charlene
Smeltzer.

"We knew each other," he said, "but we did not know each other well. And I found
myself in a very difficult situation, because Char had told her friends that she
was not about to be pushed around by any man. I realized I had a great deal of
diplomacy to do."

They eventually worked out their political differences, started dating each
other and, 39 years ago, married. They have four children and seven
grandchildren.

NEXT: Lamar Alexander, former Governor of Tennessee.

BIOGRAPHY: Richard Green Lugar

CURRENT JOB United States Senator from Indiana.
BORN April 4, 1932, in Indianapolis
EDUCATION Pembroke College, Oxford University, B.A. and M.A., 1956; Denison
University, B.A., 1954; Shortridge High School, Indianapolis.
RELIGION Methodist.
MILITARY SERVICE United States Navy, 1957-60, lieutenant junior grade.
Intelligence briefer to Adm. Arleigh A. Burke, Chief of Naval Operations.
MARRIED Charlene Smeltzer in 1956.
CHILDREN Mark, 36; Robert, 34; John, 31, and Davis, 30.
GOVERNMENT POSITIONS Indianapolis Board of School Commissioners, 1964-67; Mayor
of Indianapolis, 1968-75; United States Senate, 1977 to present.
OTHER MAJOR POSITIONS Management of the family's farm and food machinery
businesses, 1960 to present.

In Lugar's Own Words

 "Americans want a leader they can trust. The essence of Presidential leadership
is to make important changes in our country without dividing our country.
American prosperity requires that America be secure. To achieve this, we must
again have a President who understands and knows how to deal with the world
around us; a President who can and will act decisively to use American power and
influence to ensure America's safety well into the new century." -- from
Presidential announcement speech, April 19, 1995, Indianapolis

"From the tragedies of Oklahoma City and the World Trade Center to the first act
of nuclear terrorism requires but one small step. Suppose that, instead of
mini-vans filled with hundreds of pounds of the crude explosives used in
Oklahoma City and New York, terrorists had acquired a suitcase carrying a 100
pound, grapefruit-sized ball of highly enriched uranium." -- from campaign
speeches

"Americans are frustrated with political procedures. United We Stand members
have often charged that politicians choose to pander, not to lead. They sign
pledges when it seems expedient, and break them just as regularly. When I
announced for the Presidency, some political pundits in Washington said that I
was intelligent, a good and honest family man who would be President, but surely
won't be President, because I don't use wedge issues, negative campaigning, or
cynical pandering, which supposedly excites and moves voter opinion." -- from a
speech at the Public Policy Conference of United We Stand America, Aug. 12,
1995, Dallas

"I have been asked repeatedly by members of the national media about a quality
called 'charisma.' The pointed suggestion of the pundits is that a charisma
deficiency may be just as fatal to an aspiring politician as a vitamin
deficiency may be to any human being." -- from a speech before the Christian
Coalition, Sept. 9, 1995, Washington

"I celebrate life, and specifically the miracle of human birth. I oppose
abortion except in instances of rape and incest and when the life of the mother
is at stake." -- from a speech before the Christian Coalition, Sept. 9, 1995

"I am advocating nothing less than the ending of all income tax, the abolishing
of the Internal Revenue Service, and the substitution of a national sales tax."
-- from campaign speeches

"I know that people say I'm far too low-key, even that I'm dull." -- interview
with Time magazine, Oct. 2, 1995

The Contenders
TUESDAY Senator Bob Dole of Kansas.
YESTERDAY Senator Phil Gramm of Texas.
TODAY Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana.

Future articles will examine the political strategies and images of the other
Republican contenders and President Clinton, and the political landscape at the
start of the 1996 political season.

NAME: Richard G. Lugar

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 29, 1995, Friday

CORRECTION:

A biographical sketch of Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana yesterday referred
incorrectly in some editions to the date of his arrival in the Senate. It was
1977; his election occurred in 1976.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Senator Richard G. Lugar has a resume others would envy. (Fred
R. Conrad/The New York Times) (pg. A1); Senator Richard G. Lugar does best in
one-on-one campaigning, as on a recent visit to New Hampshire. (Associated
Press) (pg. D18)


TYPE: BiographySeries

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE CONTENDERS: Fifth article of a series;
For Dornan, Keyes and Taylor, Low Polls Can't Dash High Hopes

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 1;   Column 6;   National Desk

LENGTH: 3224 words


Every American Presidential campaign draws a handful of candidates whose odds of
reaching the White House are too absurdly long to calculate.

But whatever impels these politically impractical hopefuls to dream the
impossible dream, they often turn out to be the light ingredient that saves
Presidential contests from turning into endlessly bland heavy cake.

So it is in the 1996 campaign with the three Republicans who seem to face the
longest odds: Representative Robert K. Dornan of California, former Ambassador
Alan Keyes of Maryland and Morry Taylor, a Michigan industrialist.

From the start, most polls have had each man dragging along the statistical
bottom, with the support of just 1 percent or 2 percent of the voters. Day after
day, they struggle not only for votes but also for name recognition, with the
best parts of their campaign messages often co-opted by the stronger candidates,
leaving them mostly insignificant participants in the larger debate.

Yet, for reasons sufficient unto each, and thanks to participation in
open-to-all, nationally televised debates and to the sustaining lift from
matching Federal campaign money (and great personal wealth in one case), each
man presses on, insisting earnestly, but without discernable supporting
evidence, that his is a campaign destined to succeed.

That may be blind faith in one's self. But, given the soporific drone emanating
so often from the other, shorter-odds candidates, it is also a refreshing
relief, especially since each of the three long-odds contenders brings a special
campaign style and political touch to the race.

No other candidate in the contest can match the sharp-tongued, super-heated,
hard-right patriotism of Mr. Dornan, political incorrectness incarnate.

No other candidate makes more of the abortion issue than Mr. Keyes, an outspoken
opponent of abortion, and certainly none does it with more vigor, whether pro or
con.

And when it comes to financing a campaign with a personal fortune, other
candidates or would-be candidates may have more money, but none is a happy
spender like Mr. Taylor, who proposes to set the United States right by running
it like a big business for four years, then retiring to some sunny isle.

In alphabetical order, then, here is a look at the campaigns and blind political
faith of the three longest-odds candidates of 1996, beginning with Mr. Dornan,
black-belt master of the verbal rabbit punch and world-class conservative from
California's Republican heartland, Orange County.

For 'B-1 Bob,' It's Bombs Away

Mr. Dornan has almost no campaign money, no campaign organization, no campaign
advertisements and no campaign schedule. In fact, his most recent campaign
financial report shows debts totaling close to $180,000, while his current
roster of campaign directors and workers lists mainly family members. His latest
schedule shows him seldom venturing beyond the Beltway.

Worst of all, the other candidates treat him as though he does not exist, which,
politically, the polls come close to confirming.

Still, when it comes to waving Old Glory, praising the American fighting man and
defending motherhood, truth, justice and the American way -- his campaign themes
-- Mr. Dornan has a knack for grabbing a headline and serving notice, just
before he slips entirely off the political scope, that he exists, is still
running and is still out there somewhere.

In Mr. Dornan's bombastic, in-your-face view of the 1996 Presidential contest,
President Clinton is not just "a flawed human being" but is also "the most
corrupt man to ever sit in the Oval Office," a "draft-dodging adulterer not fit
to lace the boots" of the military men and women he commands.

The nation is "culturally poisoning" itself, the Congressman asserts. But if
voters put him in the Oval Office, he promises, the national moral decay will
end, along with "holocaust" abortions, "pro-active" homosexuality and personal
"irresponsibility."

"We are destroying this God-blessed nation," he says, "and I'm going to carry
that message: Faith. Family. Freedom."

Mr. Dornan, who represents the Garden Grove section of Orange County, the 46th
Congressional District of California, is 62 and has been in Congress for nine
invective-strewn terms. He has been welcomed by other conservatives for his vote
but is otherwise mostly a marginal player on Capitol Hill, too hot a partisan
for most colleagues to touch.

One of his most remembered achievements: getting himself banned from the House
floor for a day last January for overstepping the bounds of verbal good taste.
In a debate, he asserted that Mr.  Clinton had not only dodged the draft in the
Vietnam War but in so doing had also given "aid and comfort to the enemy."

"I say what I believe," Mr. Dornan offered to explain his nothing-held-back
assertion. "People who say I'm out of control mistake passion for temper."

But he has a temper, too.

A few years ago, while arguing about the draft and military matters with a Long
Island Democrat, then-Representative Thomas J. Downey, he suddenly grabbed Mr.
Downey by his necktie, gave it a yank and called him "a draft-dodging wimp."

Why?

"Because he is a draft-dodging wimp," the unapologetic Mr. Dornan replied.

Before he was a Congressman, Mr. Dornan was a news broadcaster and talk show
host. Before that, he was an Air Force fighter pilot after the Korean War
armistice, which may explain his high-octane passion for the military and, some
say, his obsession for talking about combat, though he himself was a peacetime
pilot.

Indeed, in the House he has been such an outspoken proponent of American
military might, including the development of the B-1 bomber, that colleagues
refer to him as "B-1 Bob."

Although the Dornan Presidential campaign seems to be going nowhere, at least in
conventional terms, the Congressman insists that he will campaign through the
Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary. At that point, he predicts, he will
begin to move up in the polls.

If he does not, he says, he will reassess his campaign and, if he concludes that
he cannot win, will run again for Congress. He may not be much when it comes to
raising money for a Presidential campaign, but he has been a formidable
money-raiser in his previous Congressional contests.

One way or another, Mr. Dornan vows, he will stay in the political pit,
delivering his verbal blitzes to the liberals and "pointy-heads" he blames for
causing a "moral meltdown" in the United States -- a meltdown he says he could
stop cold, if only the American people would give him the chance.

For Alan Keyes, It's the Message

The country's moral meltdown, particularly the decline of the family and the
rise of the "abortion culture," is also a campaign theme for former Ambassador
Alan Keyes, believed to be the first black Republican to seek the Presidency and
a man every bit as verbally nimble as Mr. Dornan -- but without the vitriol.

Mr. Keyes, who was Ambassador to the United Nations Economic and Social Council
and later a State Department official in the Reagan Administration, is, like Mr.
Dornan, a former talk show host. And, also like Mr. Dornan, he is running a
shoestring campaign, in and out of red ink, staffed almost entirely by unpaid
volunteers and without the benefit of expensive television and radio
advertisements.

But there the similarity with the Dornan campaign ends because, unlike Mr.
Dornan, Mr. Keyes, who is 45, spends most of his time on the campaign trail,
returning to his home, Darnestown, Md., only one day a week. And, unlike Mr.
Dornan, he draws enthusiastic, if modest, audiences, mainly packed with
opponents of abortion.

In a thunderous voice, inflected with churchly cadences and moral certitude, Mr.
Keyes, a Roman Catholic, not only denounces abortion but also contends that its
practice "epitomizes the corruption that is eating away at the moral heart and
spirit of American life."

From there he goes on to render a classic hard-right conservative condemnation
of affirmative action, state-run welfare and other liberal orthodoxy -- but with
a Keyes twist, honed in years of broadcasting, lecturing and writing.

In his view, big government, among other things, has been more damaging to the
black family than slavery itself, overriding individual merit and trapping many
blacks in what Mr. Keyes describes as "a quagmire of perpetual supplication."

Whatever can be said for or against this Keyes message, which the leading
Republican candidates generally ignore -- much as they ignore the Dornan message
-- there is no real dispute that Mr. Keyes, when it comes to stump performance,
is the going-away winner of the 1996 candidate oratory contest. His audiences
spend much of the time on their feet, cheering him on, particularly when he
swings into one of his arm-pumping, full-volume attacks on abortion.

Still, most polls show little or no movement in his campaign. And though he
expects to collect about $500,000 in Federal matching funds in January, there is
hardly any likelihood that the money, once $250,000 in campaign debts are paid,
will give him the lift he needs to come out of Iowa and New Hampshire with
saving political momentum.

Not to worry, Mr. Keyes insists, arguing that his is a "message" campaign and
that his message is helping to define the 1996 Presidential debate. Even if his
prospects for winning are dim, he says, he nevertheless intends to stay the
course to the end to guarantee his influence. And because he travels light, he
contends, he will have enough campaign dollars to do that.

His critics have another take on his campaign. They maintain that it is more
mercenary than political, designed essentially to increase his name recognition
with the general public so he can resume his talk show by the end of the
election year, lecturing and writing with the possibility of bigger earnings.
That is exactly what he did in 1992, they say, after the second of two
unsuccessful runs in Maryland for a seat in the United States Senate. The first
run was in 1988.

True or not, in the 1992 contest Mr. Keyes did, in fact, use campaign money to
pay himself a monthly salary of $8,500 -- technically legal, but politically
questionable. His explanation: He needed the money because he was "not a wealthy
man"; thus, the issue was "practical" rather than "moral." But Mr. Keyes insists
that the issue this time is totally moral for him -- the salvation of America --
with practicality and personal finances given no consideration.

"I can't promise you that Alan Keyes will be the next President of the United
States," he says. "But I can promise that we're going to raise the standard high
in this country, and we're going to make it so clear and so unequivocal that we
will be like a lightning flash across the landscape of American depravity. And
we will show the way back home."

For Morry Taylor, It's Perot Redux

The Morry Taylor campaign bears not the slightest resemblance to the Dornan and
Keyes campaigns, except in one respect: It is not making any significant
political headway, either.

Mr. Taylor, a multimillionaire rim and wheel manufacturer from Grosse Point
Farms, Mich., is making a Ross Perot-style run for the White House -- financing
the campaign with $15 million from his personal fortune of $40 million or so,
disparaging professional politicians and the inside-the-Beltway culture and
promising, if elected, to run the Federal Government the same tough way he runs
his company, Titan Wheel International.

All that is missing is the Texas twang.

"If you voted for Ross Perot, you'll love Morry Taylor," he says. "I despise
politics. I'm a businessman."

If elected, he says as he tours the country in a fleet of $75,000 Airstream Land
Yachts, he will balance the Federal budget within 18 months, starting with the
wholesale dismissal of one-third of the bureaucrats. The names of the unlucky
ones will be picked at random by computer.

"Sure, there'll be some chaos for a few months," Mr. Taylor concedes. "But
things'll settle down. It's real simple."

After that, he promises, he will go after the lobbyists, Congressional pensions,
political action committees and as many other special interests as he can find.

He also promises, if elected, to dismantle the Internal Revenue Service and levy
a flat 17 percent tax on incomes above $35,000.

The State Department?

"Dynamite it."

The Voice of America?

"Put it on top of a mountain, or something."

Law and order?

"Bring back the whip."

If that seems a blunt, gruff approach to government, it is, nevertheless,
vintage Morry Taylor.

A 51-year-old self-made millionaire who started out as a welder in a tool and
die shop and ended up as the nation's biggest manufacturer of industrial wheels
and rims, Mr. Taylor is known for running no-frills shops, with his eye always
on the bottom line.

Employees who fail to meet his standards are quickly shown the door -- too
quickly, some say. He counters that he wants only respect and a good profit
margin, not love.

On the shop floor, the workers call him "the Grizz," as in grizzly bear. In
fact, his workers were the first to urge him to run for President, telling him,
tongues not entirely in cheek, that with his no-nonsense way of getting things
done he would probably get himself elected and, if so, could maybe bring some
managerial sense to Washington.

Thus far, Mr. Taylor has spent more than $5 million on his campaign, much of it
on a staff of 40 professionals and on a series of professionally prepared
television advertisements running in Iowa and New Hampshire. But unlike Steve
Forbes, the multimillionaire publisher who is also running and financing his own
campaign -- and making some progress in the polls -- Mr. Taylor has very little
to show in the way of returns on his investment, to use his kind of
businessman's analogy.

He is still on the bottom in the polls, with Mr. Dornan and Mr. Keyes, trying to
crack 3 percent. Perhaps worse, for a man who claims to hate politics but
nevertheless has a politician-size ego, the candidates leading the pack are
paying him no mind.

In January, Mr. Taylor plans to put on a new advertising blitz in Iowa and New
Hampshire to break him loose from the bottom of the pack. If that fails, he
plans to reassess his candidacy, and perhaps quit.

"If I don't win," he tells those who already see him as doomed, "then I'm $15
million poorer and I head for warmer climes and enjoy the rest of my money. I
don't see this as a second career."

BIOGRAPHY: ROBERT KENNETH DORNAN

 CURRENT JOB United States Representative
 BORN April 3, 1933, in New York City.
 EDUCATION Attended Loyola University, Los Angeles, 1950-53; Loyola High School,
Los Angeles.
 RELIGION Roman Catholic.
 MILITARY SERVICE Air Force pilot, 1953-58; reserves and National Guard pilot,
1958-75.
 MARRIED Sallie Hansen in 1955.
 CHILDREN Robin, 40; Robert, 39; Theresa, 38; Mark 37; and Kathleen, 35.
 GOVERNMENT POSITIONS Member, United States House of Representatives from Orange
County, Calif., 1977-83 and 1985 to present. Currently on Committee on National
Security and Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence.
 OTHER MAJOR POSITIONS News broadcaster and talk show host in California,
1965-76.

BIOGRAPHY: ALAN LEE KEYES

 CURRENT JOB Radio talk show host, columnist, lecturer.
 BORN Aug. 7, 1950, in New York City.
 EDUCATION Harvard University, B.A.; Ph.D. 1979; Cole High School, San Antonio.
 RELIGION Roman Catholic.
 MILITARY SERVICE None.
 MARRIED Jocelyn Marcel in 1981.

CHILDREN Francis, 12, Maya, 9, and Andrew, 6.
 GOVERNMENT POSITIONS Ambassador to the United Nations Economic and Social
Council, 1983-85; Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization
Affairs, 1985-87.
 OTHER MAJOR POSITIONS Resident scholar, American Enterprise Institute, 1987-89;
president, Citizens Against Government Waste, 1989-91; interim president,
Alabama A&M University, Huntsville, 1991.

BIOGRAPHY: MAURICE MANNING TAYLOR JR.

CURRENT JOB President and chief executive officer, Titan Wheel International,
Quincy, Ill.
 BORN Aug. 28, 1944, in Detroit.
 EDUCATION Attended Michigan Technological University, 1968-69, high school in
Ellsworth, Mich.
 RELIGION Roman Catholic.
 MILITARY SERVICE Army reserves, 1966-69.
 MARRIED Michelle Callahan in 1975; first marriage ended in divorce.
 CHILDREN Katherine, 17; Anthony, 26, and Maureen, 25, from previous marriage.
 GOVERNMENT POSITIONS None.
 OTHER MAJOR POSITIONS Engineer, General Motors, 1969; wheel salesman, late
1970's; started tire and wheel business in 1983.

The Contenders

TUESDAY Senator Bob Dole of Kansas.
WEDNESDAY Senator Phil Gramm of Texas.
THURSDAY Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana.
YESTERDAY Former Governor Lamar Alexander of Tennessee.
TODAY Representative Robert K. Dornan, Alan L. Keyes and Morry Taylor.

Future articles will examine the political strategies and images of the other
Republican contenders and President Clinton, and the political landscape at the
start of the 1996 political season.

In Their Own Words

Dornan

"We have a polluted public marketplace. We have a debased culture in Hollywood
that ridicules and assaults religion, tears valor and hope and virtue out of our
country. We have a cultural meltdown." -- Announcement speech, Washington, April
13, 1995

"Freedom. It's not just freedom for this country. We have an obligation to
extend liberty and freedom where we can, where we are able, even at some loss of
life to our young men and women. We must extend democracy, freedom and virtue
wherever we can around the world." -- Announcement speech, Washington, April
13.1

 "I would make my White House closer to Andy Jackson, without the bravado and
the booze, to John F. Kennedy, without squandering precious hours chasing
women." -- Interview, June 27, 1995.

Keyes

"Today civil rights groups defend affirmative action by arguing that it cures
past discrimination. They do not see that no one can cure a past injustice with
another injustice, and that it patronizes American blacks because it presumes
that blacks cannot succeed on their own. When there is such an acute moral
crisis in this country, defending affirmative action is a waste of time and
energy." -- News conference, Chicago, April 12, 1995.

"Gun-ban advocates substitute things for people. But it doesn't wash. It is the
human moral will that saves us from violence, not the presence or absence of
weapons. Do you know how you control violence? You root it out of the human
heart. End the violence in the abortion clinics. Purify the heart, and you won't
have to worry about the weapons." -- Statement, Oct. 23, 1995

Taylor

"Our government is the largest business in the world. We can't count on
politicians to mind our business. ... If you want change in Washington, send
someone who is not a member of the club." -- Interview, Aug. 10, 1995.


"The professional politicians talk about balancing the budget in 7 years or 10
years. I'd do it in 18 months. Government and business are the same when it
comes to managing people." -- Interview, Oct. 11, 1995.

"We have bad management every place. In business you fail. But you can't let the
government fail." -- Interview, Dec. 17.

NAME: Robert K. Dornan; Alan Keyes; Morry Taylor

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Robert K. Dornan. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times); Alan
Keyes.; Morry Taylor. (Associated Press) (pg. 1); Representative Robert K.
Dornan of California is long on bombast but short on money.; Alan Keyes brings
crowds to their feet with his energetic attacks on abortion.; Morry Taylor wants
to run the country like a business for four years, then retire. (Photographs by
The Associated Press) (pg. 7)

TYPE: Biographies; Series

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Lives They Lived: J. William Fulbright;
The Scholar's Senator

BYLINE: By Roger Rosenblatt;   Roger Rosenblatt is a contributing writer to The
New York Times Magazine.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 33;  Column 2;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 468 words


A POET TOOK A SWING AT ME IN A DUBLIN PUB for arguing that barristers looked
stupid in wigs; I hit a sheep with my car in Connemara. I probably was not what
J. William Fulbright had in mind when he thought up the Fulbright scholarship
program in 1945 to create intellectual good-will ambassadors.

Luckily, there have been about 250,000 worthier grantees to bring up the average
-- among them Alfred Kazin, Derek Bok, Eudora Welty and Aaron Copland. Of all
the valuable things that Fulbright did with his life, including getting the
United Nations started and standing up to Joseph McCarthy, the invention of the
Fulbright program gave him the most satisfaction, and best represented his view
of America's role in the world. At Fulbright's memorial service on Feb. 17,
President Clinton, his Arkansas friend and disciple, quoted Fulbright as saying
he wanted to build in people what he called "a capacity for empathy" and "a
distaste for killing other men."

The inspiration for the scholarships was born when Fulbright was a Rhodes
scholar at Oxford in 1925. Before he went to Europe, the former football
halfback from Fayetteville had never seen a major city. He envisioned his
program as not only the conventional broadening experience, but also a
peacemaking enterprise -- a bold idea after World War II, when "mutual
understanding" was often misconstrued as a code phrase for Communist influence.

Fulbright sneaked his scholarship bill past his colleagues by tacking it on as
an amendment to a bill about disposing of U. S. wartime properties in Europe.
Afterward, Senator Kenneth McKellar of Tennessee, sore at being circumvented,
told young Fulbright, "Don't you know it's very dangerous to send our fine young
boys and girls abroad and expose them to those foreign isms?"

It wasn't the know-nothings alone who were leery of Fulbright's program. Only
someone as fiercely intelligent as Fulbright could have promoted so lofty an
ideal in Washington without being dismissed as ridiculous. In a way, his
intelligence was his principal gift as a politician. It enabled him to
articulate and rationalize contradictions that would have brought down lesser
minds. He sponsored the Gulf of Tonkin resolution, which ratified our commitment
to the war in Vietnam, then opposed Lyndon Johnson on the war. He voted against
civil rights legislation while arguing for global brotherhood. He seemed removed
from political life, and he often appeared to work at being isolated -- another
oddity for such a militant internationalist.

In 1996, the 50th year of the program, Congress is expected to cut its funds,
and thousands of alumni are hustling for money to keep the program afloat, out
of gratitude to the man for whom it is named. They all call themselves
Fulbrights, but there was only one.


LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Building "a distaste for killing other men": Fulbright in 1961.
(Philippe Halsman)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Lives They Lived: Les Aspin;
Vietnam's Student

BYLINE: By R.W. Apple Jr.;   R.W. Apple Jr. is the Washington bureau chief of
The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 32;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1355 words


AT ONE TIME OR ANother during the mid-1960's, most of the best young talent in
the State Department and the Pentagon found its way to Saigon and the provincial
capitals of South Vietnam. Many of the names are household words today, at least
in households inside the Beltway: Anthony Lake, now President Clinton's national
security adviser; Richard C. Holbrooke, who has been struggling to bring peace
to Bosnia; Peter Tarnoff, the No. 3 man at State; Frank Wisner, Ambassador to
India; John Negroponte, Ambassador to the Philippines, and Les Aspin, who became
the Clinton Administration's first Secretary of Defense.

They all learned lessons from Vietnam. On my first foreign assignment, in my
first war, I did, too. Everyone did, including military people like Colin L.
Powell and John McCain, who shook off the effects of five years in an enemy
prison to win election to the House and the Senate, and journalists like Frances
FitzGerald and Stanley Karnow, who wrote histories of the war, and Ward Just,
who wrote novels about it. Impatient with if not contemptuous of the Washington
crowd that David Halberstam derisively called the best and the brightest, we
were sure we could do better if we ever got the chance.

Any idiot, we told each other, knows that you don't get involved in a war in a
place you don't understand.  Not, surely, against a genuine national hero like
Ho Chi Minh. Not, surely, in terrain where American firepower and technological
superiority count for relatively little. And not, surely, without developing
broad domestic and international support beforehand.

Now it looks more complicated. Thirty years on, it is evident that in our way,
we were as arrogant as any of the sages of the 1960's. We were right about
Vietnam, I still think, but it has sometimes been as hard for us to see that the
Persian Gulf and Somalia weren't Vietnam as it was for Johnson, McNamara and
Westmoreland to see that Vietnam wasn't World War II or Korea. And as the years
have gone by, it has become increasingly clear that the lessons of Vietnam are
as ill defined and ambiguous as the war itself was.

Les Aspin was the first of our crowd to die. Trained at Yale, Oxford and the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, he may have been the brainiest of the
lot. He was certainly the most committed to the commonweal. He lavished his
analytical skills on defense issues for a quarter-century, as a Representative
from Wisconsin, chairman of the House Armed Services Committee and Defense
Secretary. Yet he embodied the contradictions of the war, says his friend Dick
Holbrooke, "and he could never really distill the lessons of Vietnam into a
strategy, although the war was the seminal experience of his life."

I saw a fair amount of him in Vietnam. One of Robert S. McNamara's Whiz Kids, he
shuttled between the Pentagon and Saigon on no evident schedule. He never did
break the local code, any more than anyone else did, but he was always great
company, a beaming, convivial figure at our parties and at the restaurants where
we hung out, like Aterbea and the Guillaume Tell (where they drilled minute
holes in the bottoms of fancy bottles of wine, drained off the expensive stuff
and substituted some cheaper concoction).

More than most people, Aspin lived for his work. Big, shambling, disheveled, he
talked national security day and night, but he did it so engagingly that it
never occurred to people to be bored, even if they were more interested in runic
poetry than nuclear throw-weights. "Whadda ya know?" he would call out whenever
he spotted a chum. Always, to everybody, "Whadda ya know?" In Washington, he
became a familiar figure in Kay Graham's and Polly Fritchey's dining rooms. He
was so disorganized that once he forgot to provide anything to eat for a
bewildered bunch of us whom he had asked over for the evening. His wife and,
after they split, a succession of girlfriends despaired of bringing order into
his helter-skelter existence, but they loved him all the same. Like many others,
they were devastated when he died of a stroke at 56.

He was an out-and-out dove when he was elected in 1970 to represent the little
Wisconsin cities of Racine and Kenosha and Janesville. But his 22 years on
Capitol Hill gradually made him more conservative, and he broke with his party's
leadership in the 1980's on issues like the MX missile, aid to the contras and,
most important, support for George Bush's decision to fight in the gulf. He
almost lost his post as chairman as a result.

During that phase, Aspin seemed to have doped things out pretty well. Just
because air power couldn't cut supply lines in the jungles of South Vietnam, he
insisted to me one night, didn't mean that it wouldn't work in the sands of
Saudi Arabia. He was right. When the Air Force had finished, Saddam Hussein and
his armies had no fight left in them.

BUT ASPIN'S TOUCH, Always more ruminative than executive, deserted him when he
moved into the big office at the Pentagon. He got a bum rap for failing to
reinforce American troops in Somalia. His mistake did not cause America's
misadventure but did make it worse. He carried the can for Bill Clinton, who has
always been suspect to soldiers, on the question of homosexuals in the military.
Nevertheless, the President concluded that Aspin lacked the confidence of the
generals and, as Aspin himself said, decided that Aspin had been wrong in trying
to tackle the tough questions first. Less than a year after taking office, he
was eased out.

Aspin worked hard to develop new policies for a new world, taking on unpopular
issues like the shrinking of American armed forces and the threatened
proliferation of nuclear weapons. But to tell the truth, he never seemed quite
sure when and where to apply American power in the post-cold war era. He had
that in common with most of his contemporaries. Bosnia, which epitomizes the
1990's as surely as Vietnam epitomized the 1960's, struck him as a problem with
no solution. That approach resulted in a failed, do-nothing policy, which
President Clinton finally abandoned.

Perhaps, as Ward Just suggested in an appreciation he wrote for Newsweek, Aspin
was never made for the job, though he seemed a natural for it. Just argued that
he "viewed internal contradiction as a natural condition of life, not a
situation to be mastered but one to be pondered." Like Adlai Stevenson, one of
his heroes, Aspin liked to look at all five sides of a triangle.

The questions that bedeviled Aspin have not been answered. Nothing approaching a
national consensus on Bosnia has emerged.  Nor have we found any workable,
widely accepted definition of the national interest in the post-cold war era,
and with Aspin gone, no top-ranking official seems to be working on one. The
collapse of the Communist threat has, paradoxically, made it harder, not easier,
for the United States to decide where to draw the line.

Les Aspin and his generation of policy makers concluded as young men that the
United States had taken a stand in the wrong place in Southeast Asia. They fared
well enough later in life where American interests remained clear, as in the
Middle East and Russia. But the old rules provided little guidance in China, in
Haiti, in Somalia and in Bosnia, and they dithered, determined not to repeat the
mistakes of their elders but unsure exactly what the mistakes were.

Aspin was crushed when he was forced to leave the Pentagon. But he swallowed
whatever bitterness he felt, stoically attending Rose Garden ceremonies for not
one but two successors. (The first one, Bobby Ray Inman, pulled out almost as
soon as he was nominated.) When friends suggested that he had been ill treated
by the President, Aspin demurred and stuck up for Clinton and his policies. Ken
Adelman, a fellow member of the arms-control priesthood, asked Aspin a few weeks
before he died whether he felt like a fall guy. "Sure," he answered, his sunny
disposition intact, "but that's the President's right -- to find expendable
people and change them when things go wrong."

But Les Aspin was not expendable, and he will not soon be replaced.


LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Seeing all five sides of the triangle: Aspin in 1976. (Teresa
Zabala/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

William Prochnau's War

SECTION: Section 7;   Page 4;   Column 2;   Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 587 words


To the Editor:

I greatly admire H. D. S. Greenway's work as a journalist, so when I read his
review of William Prochnau's "Once Upon a Distant War" (Nov. 19), about young
American correspondents in the early days of the Vietnam War, I was startled to
find him ascribing to me beliefs and motives I never entertained -- so startled
that I bought a copy of the book and read it. My suspicion was confirmed. It is
not so much Mr. Greenway who has erred as the author himself.

Mr. Prochnau seems to have drawn heavily, but damningly out of context, on a
report I wrote for President John F. Kennedy after returning from an emergency
mission to Vietnam in 1963. The mission's purpose was to investigate -- and if
possible defuse -- a dangerous confrontation between the South Vietnamese
Government of Ngo Dinh Diem and the American establishment in Saigon on the one
hand and, on the other, several of the Saigon-based American correspondents
covering the war. Their lives were in danger. I protested to Diem his
Government's harassment and threats of violence against American reporters and
persuaded him to abandon his decision to arrest two Associated Press
correspondents (Malcolm W. Browne and Peter Arnett), as Mr. Prochnau reports
correctly, and also to reinstate the credentials of an NBC correspondent who had
been ordered to leave the country.

The report I wrote for the President put the blame where it belonged, in
Washington. It said: "The press problem in Vietnam is singular because of the
singular nature of the United States involvement in that country. . . . The
problem is complicated by the longstanding desire of the United States
Government to see the United States involvement in Vietnam minimized, even
represented as something less than in reality it is." It urged the relaxation of
"strictures still imposed [by Washington] on American press coverage of the
situation." It also prescribed "a more relaxed attitude on the part of U.S.
officials to the reports and assessments of the U.S. press."

Mr. Prochnau omits such basic parts of the document, and by using a few snippets
out of context turns it 180 degrees around. For one example, he singles out my
mild criticism of the occasional behavior (but not the war reporting) of some of
the American correspondents, the ascription to them of "localitis," and my
suggestion that officials stop treating them as enemies and outcasts, in a way
that prompted your reviewer to accuse me of proposing to "co-opt" the press, as
if that were remotely possible. On the contrary, what I urged was a
forthcomingness and civility on the part of American officials that might help
induce "a degree of mutual confidence between American authorities and American
correspondents." That surely is not a malign objective. Far better, I maintain,
than the then prevailing American military's ritualistic misleading of the press
about the progress of the war and American Embassy officials' contemptuous
stance toward the correspondents whose dispatches displeased them. Public
disillusionment with our presence in Vietnam would surely come, I told President
Kennedy, if those practices were not changed.

In asking the Book Review to correct the record, I do not mean to disparage
"Once Upon a Distant War." As editor of a 21-volume history called "The
Vietnamese Experience," I am familiar with virtually every one of the deluge of
books written about that bloody tragedy, and I place this one among the valuable
ones.

ROBERT MANNING
Boston

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

William Prochnau's War

SECTION: Section 7;   Page 4;   Column 2;   Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 398 words


To the Editor:

As H. D. S. Greenway correctly noted in his review of William Prochnau's "Once
Upon a Distant War," the book contained some inaccuracies. As one of the
subjects of the book, I would like to note a few others.

Most of Mr. Prochnau's slips of the cursor were trivial. (For example: I've
never had red hair. During the time covered by Mr. Prochnau's book I regrettably
owned no Wagner recordings and therefore couldn't have played his works. And
although I did tack a photograph of a severed hand to a wall of the Associated
Press office I headed, I certainly did not carry off the gruesome battlefield
relic in the flesh.) But there were a few more substantive misunderstandings,
apparently based by Mr. Prochnau on his extensive interviews with David
Halberstam, then of The New York Times. The supposed rift between Mr. Halberstam
and me that forms one of the running themes of Mr. Prochnau's book begins with
my denying Mr. Halberstam office space, including access to A.P. news files and
sources. In fact, this had nothing to do with a clash of strong wills between
Mr. Halberstam and me; in denying him space in our tiny office I was merely
implementing the policy of my employer, The Associated Press. It would have been
highly improper for a news agency supported by its members and subscribers to
grant special status to the correspondent of a single news organization -- even
of The New York Times (which I myself later joined). All the other newspaper and
broadcasting subscribers to the A.P. could rightly have charged us with
discrimination, violating A.P. membership agreements.

More important: Mr. Halberstam is frequently quoted by Mr. Prochnau as if he
were speaking for Neil Sheehan and me, although our personal experiences and
views were by no means identical. In particular, Mr. Sheehan, Mr. Halberstam and
I are said to have strongly supported the American intervention in Vietnam,
merely calling into question the efficacy of America's tactics and strategy.
This may have been true of Mr. Halberstam and Mr. Sheehan, but by early 1963 I
was personally convinced that the United States had neither a legitimate nor a
sustainable role as a belligerent in Indochina. The conscientious reporter, of
course, sets aside personal views when reporting events, and tries to emulate
the detachment of a camera lens.

MALCOLM W. BROWNE
New York

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

What Is Public Investment?

SECTION: Section 3;   Page 24;   Column 1;   Money and Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 340 words


To the Editor:

"Washington, Watch What You Wish For," Nov. 19) reported the second thoughts of
a lot of economists about budget balancing. It noted the importance of
distinguishing between Government investment and current consumption; this is
not now part of the Federal budget but clearly should be. There is a world of
difference, however, between the Government's investing in services, like
education and health, and buying new fixed assets. The former are expected to
produce direct benefits, just like an investment in business research, while the
latter are justifiable only when they satisfy a direct demand or, better still,
sustain or create jobs; a business only invests in machinery when it expects to
work more efficiently or turn out a new and better product.

B-2 bombers and much of the rest of military hardware are such "machinery" but
fail such a test; most of the stuff was useless pork when built, contributing
mainly to nuclear overkill. A lot of it must now be decommissioned or destroyed,
or has become obsolete; meanwhile, it sits in a warehouse or silo.

When a business has such "assets" that are useless or no longer exist, they must
be written off in one lump, crucially affecting such otherwise welcome budget
reinterpretations as those of Robert Eisner. And when the stuff has been bought
by going into debt, the road to Chapter 11 lies open. Unfortunately, a huge
proportion of United States public investment has been exactly of this kind and
is thus at the root of many present troubles. During the Reagan and Bush
Administrations, $2.4 trillion was spent on the military while, by no
coincidence, $1.9 trillion was added to the national debt. In effect, the cold
war, like the Vietnam War earlier, had been put on credit; that, rather than the
social safety net or what's left of it, will be the true "poison pill" for our
descendants.

JOHN E. ULLMANN
Hempstead, L.I., Nov. 24

The writer is professor emeritus of management at Hofstra University and is an
industrial engineer.

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Balancing the Budget, L.B.J. Style

BYLINE: By Joseph A. Califano Jr.;   Joseph A. Califano Jr. was President Lyndon
B. Johnson's assistant for domestic affairs and Secretary of Health, Education
and Welfare in the Carter Administration.

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 9;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 589 words


With Speaker Newt Gingrich nuking the Great Society at just about every
opportunity in the budget debate and with President Clinton omitting Lyndon B.
Johnson in just about every list he recites of great Democratic Presidents, both
might be surprised to learn that the last time the Government collected more
money than it spent was in fiscal 1969, the year of L.B.J.'s last budget.

How Johnson and Congress got there might be instructive to today's
balanced-budget gladiators.

L.B.J. spent the political capital accumulated in his Presidential landslide to
push through Congress some 200 pieces of Great Society legislation. This
included Medicare, Medicaid, and aid to education.

Then in the 1966 midterm elections, the Democrats lost 47 seats in the House and
3 in the Senate. Though the Democrats still controlled both houses of Congress,
the liberal majorities were gone, and conservatives read the debacle as a
mandate to put the brakes on the Great Society programs. Their leader was Wilbur
Mills, the powerful conservative Democrat who was chairman of the House Ways and
Mean Committee.

In his 1967 State of the Union Message, Johnson asked for a 6 percent surcharge
on individual and corporate taxes to finance the rising costs of the Vietnam War
and to expand social programs. Mills promptly demanded deep cuts in domestic
spending before he would allow hearings on any tax increase. Initially, Johnson
resisted but by late 1967 he signaled his willingness to accept $2 billion in
reductions in domestic spending. His concession angered liberal Democrats, but
it only whet Mills's appetite for more cuts.

Mills aimed his general criticism at Johnson's Great Society, but his
nonnegotiable target was Aid to Families With Dependent Children, the welfare
program passed under Franklin D. Roosevelt. Mills proposed an amendment freezing
benefits so as to limit the number of out-of-wedlock children eligible for
payments.

Johnson called Mills to the White House. At a meeting I attended, the President
argued that the freeze was unfair. No one could predict how many children would
be on welfare, he said, and besides they were poor and innocent. But Congress
adopted Mills's freeze on payments and went home for Christmas without
increasing taxes.

By 1968, L.B.J.'s need for a tax increase was even more acute. So was pressure
from conservatives to slash domestic spending. They demanded a $6 billion budget
cut as the price of a tax surcharge. Johnson was willing to settle for $4
billion.

The exchanges got testy. L.B.J. accused Mills and the House Republican leader,
Gerald Ford, of "courting danger" by holding up "a tax bill until you can
blackmail someone into getting your own personal viewpoint on reductions." Mills
was furious but didn't back down.

Finally, Johnson accepted a Congressional mandate to cut $6 billion from
domestic spending, and Congress eased the freeze on welfare payments and gave
him not a 6 percent but a 10 percent tax surcharge.  As it turned out, Congress
was unable to cut even $4 billion in domestic spending, and Johnson refused to
make any reductions beyond those voted on Capitol Hill.
 Today, President Clinton is resisting a tax cut and battling pressures to cut
social spending. Mr. Gingrich isn't backing down on cuts in social spending. We
don't know what the result will be. But 27 years ago, with each side giving in a
little, L.B.J.'s final budget delivered a $3.2 billion surplus and preserved
Great Society programs aimed at the most vulnerable Americans.

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
How to Set a Peace Table

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 859 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WHEN Syrians and Israelis sat down last week to try to make peace, they did
without the traditional trappings of diplomatic discourse -- a formidable table
separating the sides, name plates, microphones and an opening photo-op.

Instead, their American hosts seated them cheek-by-jowl in a cozy room around a
circular mahogany table, with only a centerpiece of white tulips dividing them,
while a wood fire glowed in the hearth. Outside, cows grazed on a snow-streaked
pasture and a few white-tailed deer scampered from a copse of bare trees in the
frosty Maryland countryside.

Versailles this was not. Purposely so.

Never mind that River House, a secluded retreat at the Wye Conference Centers,
was hired from the Aspen Institute, that negotiators slept in luxury bedrooms
with telephone voice mail, and that the cows belonged to the University of
Maryland's agricultural program. The bucolic ambiance, like the deliberate
informality, was intended to break down the kind of barriers of mistrust and
distance between negotiators that can wreck deal-making even after two
Governments have decided they want a deal.

Such studied mood-making is a technique popular these days with Americans as
they try to broker deals in intractable conflicts. It includes encouraging
first-name informality, walks in the woods and bans on both neckties and
reporters.

On the simplest level, this makes common sense. It's hard to dislike your
adversary when he asks you to pass the butter.

The Norwegian Foreign Minister Johan Jorgen Holst, who died early last year,
proved the value of this approach in 1993, throwing in hearty home-cooked meals
when he invited Israelis and the Palestine Liberation Organization for a
succession of secret talks at farmhouses, hotels and his own home. These talks
produced the agreement for mutual recognition between Israel and the P.L.O.,
laying the ground for Palestinian self-rule.

"If the results are positive, it's a little difficult to argue with them," said
Casimir Yost, director of Georgetown University's Institute for the Study of
Diplomacy. "I do think that when negotiators can get people into the room and
away from telephones and the press, and can work through issues in a systematic
sort of way, that can at least enhance prospects for success."

The strategy was not invented in Washington. When World War I ended, some
details of the peace were thrashed out in quiet Swiss or Italian hotels with
alpine vistas. "In those days, diplomats never took their ties off," a
Government historian recalled, "but to the extent they could relax, that's where
they went." The Versailles peace conference was a full-dress affair, of course,
but even there some key decisions were worked out in private.

A more recent precedent for the Syrian-Israeli talks, which continue this week,
was the marathon negotiation at Camp David in September 1978 that paved the way
for peace between Egypt and Israel. For more than two weeks, President Anwar
el-Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel paced and argued
in the sylvan seclusion of the Presidential retreat in the Catoctin mountains.

Then there was Dayton, Ohio, where the leaders of Serbia, Bosnia and Croatia
initialed their peace accord in November. The Clinton Administration ruled out
the Wye conference site then because it didn't want the visitors commuting into
Washington to pitch their respective positions on television. So it opted for
the protective custody of Wright-Patterson Air Force Base near Dayton, where
Serbia's President, Slobodan Milosevic, protested that he had been "locked up
like a monk" (he became a regular at the officers' club).

Seasick in Malta

The attempt to choreograph the right atmospherics can backfire, as happened in
1989, when the Bush Administration chose sunny Malta to talk arms reduction with
Mikhail Gorbachev. The two leaders were to have visited each other aboard their
warships anchored offshore. But an unanticipated storm kicked up seas so rough
that American officials donned medicated seasickness patches. Mr. Gorbachev
declined to join Mr. Bush aboard his pitching American cruiser, the Belknap,
preferring a Russian ocean liner moored dockside.

President Clinton's press secretary, Michael D. McCurry, contends that this
President "is better at 'in-your-moccasins' diplomacy." Like the crafty
matchmaker of "Hello Dolly," the Administration tries to make its clients feel
at home while they size one another up. When President Milosevic balked at one
last-minute detail last month, his American interlocutors poured him another
stiff whisky and the deal got done. At the Syrian-Israeli talks last week,
smoking was allowed in deference to Syria's chain-smoking Ambassador, Walid
al-Moualem. The Syrians rejected an American proposal to don sweatsuits, the
Israeli newspaper Yediot Ahronot reported, but they did remove their neckties.

"It does seem to work," said Glyn Davies, the State Department's deputy
spokesman. "Creating a diplomatic negotiating biosphere, you kind of seal them
in and hope that you create a chemical process that might not occur in the
capitals."

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The cozy room in Maryland. (Reuters); At the Paris talks that
began in 1968 on the Vietnam War, the United States suggested six table shapes.
North Vietnam refused them, preferring a plain circle (not shown). (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 270 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

McVEIGH'S MIND: A special report.;
Oklahoma Bombing Suspect: Unraveling of a Frayed Life

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 1;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 4652 words


He rented movies, playing one about a Colorado football team over and over. He
wore a favorite T-shirt with a quotation from Thomas Jefferson. He once changed
cheap motels so he could watch the X-rated Spice Channel. He always washed the
dishes.

These seemingly ordinary activities are little pieces of the puzzle that is the
greatest remaining mystery of the case charging Timothy J. McVeigh with blowing
up the Federal Building in Oklahoma City, killing 168 people:

Why would he do it?

The movie is "Red Dawn," a cult classic of the far right, in which the football
"Wolverines" take to the mountains as guerrillas to battle invading Soviet
paratroopers.

The T-shirt declared, "The tree of Liberty must be refreshed from time to time
with the blood of patriots and tyrants."

And the solitary motel room and neatly stacked dishes were just part of a
compulsive, lonely life marked by frustration, an obsession with guns and a
growing anger at the Federal Government that finally led him, prosecutors say,
to pack a rented truck with more than two tons of explosives and set it off last
April 19, a strange guerrilla in his own land.

The main outlines of Mr. McVeigh's life -- his obsession with weapons, his
failure to become an Army Green Beret, his rage at a Federal raid that left some
80 Branch Davidians dead in Waco, Tex. -- became known in the days after he was
charged with the worst terrorist act in American history.

But the story that is now emerging -- based on interviews with his former Army
buddies, Federal investigators and others involved in the case, as well as
people who met him along his tortured path -- is a psychological portrait of his
deterioration through the years, stoked by his increasing immersion not only in
the outlaw world of the far right, but also in an alienated strand of popular
culture.

The interviews and a detailed reconstruction of events suggest that his wrath
evolved from three sources: First there was Mr. McVeigh's own stunted
personality and immediate frustrations. He was never able to overcome a sense of
abandonment by his mother, who left the family when he was a boy; nor could he
ever find a home outside the Army. Second was his overwhelming obsession with
guns, blending into far-right politics that saw the Government trying to disarm
and betray its citizenry, fueled by a radical new information network of
videotapes, short wave radio, computer networks, newsletters and, perhaps above
all, a venomous novel called "The Turner Diaries." Even mainstream movies fed
his angry politics. And, as the first two factors converged, he saw a series of
events in the real world that, in his isolated, self-reinforcing world, served
to confirm his apocalyptic vision.

He was not alone in his political development. In the two and a half years
between Mr. McVeigh's Army discharge and the Oklahoma bombing, three seminal
events -- the Federal raid on a white supremacist's cabin at Ruby Ridge in
Idaho, the Waco raid, and the passage of the Brady gun control bill -- spurred a
flurry of activity on the far right. This spawned an armed paramilitary movement
in February 1994, only seven months before Mr. McVeigh began carrying out his
bomb plot, the authorities said. The paramilitary movement vowed to resist the
Government and publish manuals on forming underground guerrilla squads. Mr.
McVeigh was just a little ahead of the curve.

A reconstruction of the events leading up to the bombing suggests that Mr.
McVeigh's demons finally became unbearable in late August 1994 after Congress
passed the Omnibus Crime Bill, outlawing 19 types of semiautomatic assault
weapons.

"What will it take?" he wrote in exasperation to his former Army buddy, Michael
Fortier, in an effort to spur him to action.

Within weeks, Mr. McVeigh and another Army friend, Terry L. Nichols, embarked on
a flurry of activity that prosecutors said included stealing dynamite and
detonator caps from a Kansas quarry, buying fertilizer for explosives, renting
storage lockers under false names and robbing an Arkansas gun dealer at shotgun
point -- accusations that form the core of the Government's indictment of both
men. Mr. McVeigh and Mr. Nichols have pleaded not guilty; their trial is
expected to take place in the spring.

At first glance Mr. McVeigh, whom prosecutors say is the masterind, seemed
utterly ordinary. At Star Point Central High School in upstate Lockport, N.Y.,
he was so withdrawn that his classmates sarcastically voted him "most talkative"
in the yearbook and former teachers did not remember him. Everybody who met him
described him the same: quiet, polite, neat. Yet, as commonplace as this seems,
criminologists say, these traits are often the stuff of serial killers,
terrorists and other solitary murderers.

"There are the same kind of characteristics," said John Douglas, recently
retired as head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's psychological profile
unit. "Asocial, asexual, a loner, withdrawn, from a family with problems, strong
feelings of inadequacy from early in life, an underachiever."

There was one thing: Guns.

Guns were the entire focal point of the 27-year-old Mr. McVeigh's life. He read
about them, kept them stashed wherever he lived, constantly cleaned them and
fired them in his free time. They were virtually his only topic of conversation
and, eventually, the basis of his beliefs.

"This obsession with weapons -- a form of power -- is an overcompensation for
deep-rooted feelings of inadequacy," said Mr. Douglas, the model for the F.B.I.
analyst in the movie "The Silence of the Lambs."

"They compensate for a while by talking the talk, but after a while they have to
go out and do something about it," he said. "Typically the time for violence is
in the mid-20's. They look in the mirror and see they're going nowhere fast.

"This is an easily controlled and manipulated personality. They are looking for
something to hang their hat on, some ideology. They have difficulty fitting into
groups, but they are more mission-oriented, more focused."

It is a personality that a Seattle forensic psychiatrist, Kenneth Muscatel, has
described as the "Smerdyakov syndrome," after the scorned half-brother in
Dostoyevsky's "Brothers Karamazov" who listens to the other brothers inveigh
against their father until, finally, he commits patricide.

The Early Years
One Young Life, Two Major Traumas

Mr. McVeigh's young life appears to have been scarred by two traumas: His mother
walked out on his family when he was a boy; and, after seeming to find a home in
the Army, he washed out of his dream of joining the elite Special Forces.

After Mildred (Mickey) McVeigh left, apparently bored with her husband, Bill, a
stolid night-shift worker in an auto plant, a loyal union man who enjoyed
bowling, Mr. McVeigh almost never spoke of his mother again.

But once, when he was talking to an Army buddy, John Kelso, the resentment
surfaced over his mother's leaving his father.

"I just remember him calling his momma 'that no-good whore, a slut,' words like
that," Mr. Kelso recalled. "He thought the world of his sister in New York, but
he never had anything good to say about his mom. He didn't have contact with his
mom. I know there was a problem there, but it wasn't discussed much."

Mr. McVeigh was clearly bright. He did so well on standardized tests that he won
a State Regents scholarship his senior year. But he did not go to college, and
soon dropped out of a local computer school. He found work as a security guard,
where he startled colleagues by brandishing a huge Desert Eagle pistol out of
his car window and showing up one day wearing crossed bandoleers of ammunition.
He looked, one of his co-workers remembered, "like Rambo."

But on May 24, 1988, the tall, skinny, awkward youngster joined the United
States Army and embraced its regimented, tightly ordered life. His uniform was
always pressed, his boots always shined, and he was made a sergeant when his
contemporaries were still privates.

Mr. McVeigh, Mr. Kelso said, played by the rules of the Army and was comfortable
with them. "The whole thing is," Mr. Kelso remembered, "he couldn't have a good
time."

And, in basic training he fell in, fatefully, with Mr. Nichols, another lonely
young man from a similarly troubled background. Mr. Nichols, recalled his former
wife, Lana Padilla, "really needed a good friend" and he found one in Mr.
McVeigh.

As it had for Mr. McVeigh, the Army gave Mr. Nichols a chance to excel for the
first time in his life. At 33, Mr. Nichols was far older than the rest of the
recruits, but he more than held his own at running and push-ups. Because of his
age, the drill sergeants made him the recruit platoon leader. And after recruit
training, he was assigned a coveted job as the driver of the company commander's
Humvee.

Like Mr. McVeigh, he relished, perhaps most of all, the most petty details of
Army life.

"He kept that vehicle immaculate," his captain, George Hutchinson, recalled. "He
took Armor All and really did the tires. After he washed the vehicle, he'd wipe
on baby oil to make it shine."

Michael Fortier, who has agreed to plead guilty to lesser charges in the bombing
in exchange for providing the major testimony against his two former Army
buddies, recalled that Mr. McVeigh "was like a puppy with Nichols because
Nichols was a platoon leader."

John Douglas, the former F.B.I. agent who specialized in psychological profiles,
put it similarly. "These two are birds of a feather. Each feeds off the other's
inadequacies."

But, after less than a year, Terry Nichols was granted a hardship discharge when
his wife divorced him, leaving him to care for their 7-year-old son, Josh.

Mr. McVeigh went through the Gulf War with the First Division -- the Big Red One
-- manning his gun as the Bradley charged across the immediately crumbling Iraqi
defenses. He was awarded a Combat Infantry Badge and a Bronze Star.

He seemed on the verge of attaining his dream -- becoming a Green Beret, a
member of the Army's storied Special Forces -- when he reported to Fort Bragg,
N.C., in April 1991 for a 21-day assessment and selection course.

He washed out the second day.

Mr. McVeigh was different then; he had lost heart, his buddies said, and soon he
took an "early out" from his re-enlistment.

And he began to drift.

"These people are comfortable in a structured environment, they do very well,"
said Mr. Douglas, the F.B.I. expert. "But outside of a structured environment,
without that rigidity, he just can't survive. On the other hand, he's probably
doing fine now in jail. I bet they would say he's a model prisoner."

Back home in upstate New York, Mr. McVeigh found work again as a security guard
for about a year beginning in early 1992. His supervisor at Burns International
Security Services, Lynda Haner-Mele, called him "Timmy" because, she said, "he
seemed more like a child to me than an adult man."

"He didn't really carry himself like he came out of the military," she
remembered. "He didn't stand tall with his shoulders back.  He kind of slumped.
He was a very, very thin man -- almost like anorexia. He was the thinnest person
I've ever seen. He was so thin. God, he was thin.

"He didn't talk about his home life. He didn't talk about any kind of
girlfriends. He just wasn't an open type of person. He was a loner, a follower,
not a leader."

One of the places where he worked was the Niagara Falls Convention Center; Ms.
Haner-Mele found she could only post him at the back door.

"He wasn't a person I could trust to put in a high pressure area," she said. "If
someone didn't cooperate with him, he would start yelling at them, become
verbally aggressive. He wouldn't be able to react to that, where he had to think
and react in a split second. But he was very good if you said, 'Tim, watch this
door. Don't let anybody through.' "

As if to assert some kind of control, and perhaps even establish a home, Mr.
McVeigh was extraordinarily neat and tidy, a trait that struck his landlords and
everyone who met him in his wanderings.

Toward the end of his Army duty, he shared an off-base house near Fort Riley
with Mr. Kelso and another soldier, Richard Cerney. Off-duty, without the
authority of his sergeant's stripes, Mr. McVeigh was the butt of the others'
jokes. "He was such a nerd," Mr. Kelso recalled, it was easy to get under his
skin.

One thing astonished Mr. Kelso: "We moved there, and two days later, McVeigh
went out and bought a new stove and a new refrigerator."

He washed all the dishes, because he was the only one who actually prepared
food; the others ate at fast-food joints or just dug directly out of boxes and
cans. When he moved out, he took the stove and refrigerator with him.

"I remember him always saying Cerney was a slob," Mr. Kelso said.

When he moved into the Canyon West trailer park in Kingman, Ariz., in June 1993,
the manager, Bob Ragin, said he was "an ideal tenant" who cleaned up a previous
renter's mess and bought new furniture. The only problem came when he tried to
wash some drapes, melting their rubberized lining.

At Mr. Fortier's funky trailer home in Kingman, where he sometimes crashed,
crowded in with Mr. Fortier's wife and infant daughter, Mr. McVeigh would cook,
wash and stack the dishes, then resentfully berate the Fortiers for
slovenliness.

For five or six months, he lived in a small, coffee-colored house set among
scrub brush at 3436 Hunt Street in Golden Valley a rustic area outside Kingman.
Charles Johnson, who bought some firewood from him there, remembered, "It was
clean and extremely bare, like a temporary living quarters."

What Mr. Johnson did not notice were the guns hidden all over the house.

Even the Army did not have enough guns to keep Mr. McVeigh happy. He constantly
read gun magazines and he went target shooting on weekends, once producing a
target of a terrorist holding a hostage.

"He was just a gun freak," recalled Mr. Kelso.

And there was one other thing everyone who knew Mr. McVeigh agreed on: He never
had a girlfriend. He was so monumentally unsuccessful with women that it became
a standing joke in the unit.

"A lot of guys teased him," remembered Mr. Barnett, the Bradley driver. "He
never had any luck with girls. He was nerdy. He used to say, 'Man, I got to go
get me a girlfriend,' but he never had any luck."

Mr. Kelso suggested that one of Mr. McVeigh's problems was that he only had one
topic of conversation: guns.

Perhaps the only woman who had a passing interest -- "I've always been attracted
to tall, skinny guys," she said -- was Catina Lawson, now a college student, who
met Mr. McVeigh at a party. It didn't last.

"He would talk about the Government a lot," she said, remembering how his face
reddened when he got mad. "Usually, the topic was brought up by him. He would
shoot off his mouth and just bitch about the Government.

"He also talked about Hitler; this is what made me angry. From what I remember,
he said he didn't necessarily agree with all those Jews being killed. But he
said Hitler had the right plan. I think he was talking about when Hitler tried
to conquer the world, how he went about it, little pieces at a time.  He thought
that was admirable. I didn't like him after that."

Sexual frustration often is an underlying factor in the type crime Mr. McVeigh
is accused of, said Mr. Douglas, the F.B.I. profiler. "Frequently there is the
same pattern of sexual inadequacy. Look, for example, at David Berkowitz, the
'Son of Sam.' "

The Movie Fascination
A Lone Warrior Finds Some Company

Mr. McVeigh was also finding a new kind of home in the mutant militaristic
culture that has grown up in recent years out of the alienation and distrust of
Government spawned by the Vietnam War. The sociologist James William Gibson, in
his book "Warrior Dreams" (Hill & Wang, 1994), describes that world and its
reflection in a series of striking changes in popular culture.

The traditional American war movie, for example, the kind Vietnam veterans often
describe in their memoirs as inspiring them to enlist, was essentially a saga of
socialization, the tale of how a disparate group of raw recruits united to fight
an evil enemy in a just national cause and return as heroes. Vietnam, though,
spawned a new, disillusioned, cynical model both in movies and paperback novels.
Typified by the Rambo series, the new archetype is a lone warrior, or perhaps
small band of outlaw commandoes, betrayed by their own government and turned
renegade.

Mr. McVeigh was an avid consumer of this new genre.

"Red Dawn" a 1984 film directed by John Milius, was the movie Mr. McVeigh loved
most. He watched it over and over. Not surprisingly, it is a cult film of the
far right. The Arizona Patriots, a survivalist group arrested by the Federal
Bureau of Investigation in 1986 just before they embarked on a scheme to rob
armored cars to finance their bombing of power plants, dams, synagogues and
abortion clinics, watched "Red Dawn" in their primitive encampment on a V.C.R.
powered by a portable generator.

As the movie begins, invading Soviet paratroopers drop onto a small-town
football field. Led by the quarterback, a band of teen-agers escape into the
mountains and transform themselves into guerrilla fighters, mounting ambushes
and spray-painting "Wolverines" -- their team's name -- across the tanks they
have blown up. Political messages are woven through the narrative: The Soviet
commander tells a subordinate to go to sporting-goods stores for the gun
registration forms that will enable them to identify and disarm potential
resisters; politicians -- the mealy-mouthed mayor and his son, the student body
president -- betray the town and their comrades.

In a fascinating subtext, the Communist colonel emerges as a not unsympathetic
figure. He is a warrior, but, as the guerrillas keep striking and more Soviet
troops are sent in, more-rigid generals are put above him. When a helicopter
team kills a teen-age girl among the guerrillas, they want to inflate the body
count to a dozen. The colonel walks among the lined-up bodies of his men, and
says he has seen this before -- "in Afghanistan." He turns bitterly to one of
the new generals, saying, "I have become like you -- a policeman." As the
football players stage a last, desperate, spectacular raid, the colonel has the
leaders in his gun sight. He drops his rifle and waves them on, saying "vaya con
dios."

In fact, the colonel is portrayed as the mirror image of American Green Berets
sent to Vietnam, trained to organize insurgent guerrillas but used instead to
suppress them.

Oddly, another favorite movie of Mr. McVeigh was "Brazil," a dark 1985 comedy
directed by Terry Gilliam of the Monty Python ensemble.

"Brazil" depicts an Orwellian future controlled by a gray "information
retrieval" bureaucracy. But the marvelous sets depict a technology gone haywire,
where nothing works right. A man is wrongly arrested and executed because a dead
fly falls on a printer typing an arrest warrant, changing the name to his.

A major role is played by Robert De Niro as a kind of outlaw repairman, a
renegade figure who bursts in like a commando, with a ski mask and pistol, and
illicitly fixes the constantly malfunctioning air-conditioning ducts. The
character's name is Tuttle; it is the same name Mr. McVeigh used as his alias on
his mail drop and along the gun show trail.

The last movie Mr. McVeigh rented in Kingman, "Blown Away," was the story of a
mad bomber.

A Novel as Bible
Turning Repeatedly To 'Turner Diaries'

Mr. McVeigh was an avid reader, his barrack mates recalled; he devoured Soldier
of Fortune and Guns & Ammo magazines, the genre of paperback novels about
survivors of apocalyptic war and lone commandos that are part of the post-
Vietnam culture described by Mr. Gibson and, above all, "The Turner Diaries," a
venomous novel by William L. Pierce, a former physics professor and official of
the American Nazi Party.  " 'The Turner Diaries' was Mr. McVeigh's bible," said
a person closely involved in the case.

Mr. McVeigh's reading, which he pressed on his sister, Jennifer, among others,
also included Spotlight, the newsletter of the anti-semitic Liberty Lobby,
Patriot Report, a far-right Christian identity newsletter that would later
declare the Oklahoma bombing a plot by "the real hate groups," namely the F.B.I.
and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, to crack down on armed
paramilitary groups, and a strange document titled "Operation Vampire Killer
2000."

Written by Jack McLamb, a former Phoenix police sergeant, it seeks to enlist
police and military personnel against "the ongoing, elitist covert operation
which has been installed in the American system with great stealth and cunning."
It continues, "They, the globalists, have stated that the date of termination of
the American way of life is the year 2000."

Incoherent and almost impossible to follow, "Vampire Killer 2000" contends that
the "New World Order" plotters include: the Order of the Illuminati,
international bankers, the United Nations, the "Rothschild Dynasty," the
Internal Revenue Service, CBS News, Communists, the Yale secret society Skull
and Bones, "humanist wackos" and, possibly, aliens from outer space in
Unidentified Flying Objects.

"For the World Elite to truly enjoy their 'utopian' Socialist Society," it says,
"the subject masses must not have the means to protect themselves against more
'voluntary compliance.' When one grasps this logical position, there is no
longer any question about it: THE GUNS WILL HAVE TO GO."

Three specific events confirmed Mr. McVeigh's view of a runaway government out
to take his guns: the Ruby Ridge raid (Aug. 22, 1992); Waco ( April 19, 1993),
and the passage of the Brady Bill in November 1993, mandating a five-day waiting
period for the purchase of guns.

Others felt the same way.

"It is no coincidence that the militias began forming shortly after the passage
of the Brady Bill -- the third event, after Weaver and Waco, that built the
foundation for the movement," writes Kenneth S. Stern, in a forthcoming book on
the paramilitary movement, "A Force Upon the Plain," to be published in January
by Simon and Schuster.

"Those who would regulate guns were cast as tyrants who were coming for people's
guns first," he wrote. "The government had to disarm citizens in order to
subjugate them. The United Nations could march in and take over America; loyal
Americans could be sent to concentration camps."

Both Mr. McVeigh and the paramilitary movement were "developing in the same time
line," Mr. Stern said in a telephone interview. "I would date the first
functioning militia as February of 1994 in Montana, and then spreading to
Michigan and other places."

The impact of the paramilitary movement was dramatically increased by new
communications technology, particularly the Internet and short wave radio
broadcasts. And, Mr. Stern added, the new movement drew from established
ideologues like Louis Beam, a Ku Klux Klan and Aryan nation leader who advocates
a "leaderless resistance" of tiny, independent cells that "state tyranny" would
find more difficult to control.

"No one need issue an order to anyone," Mr. Beam has said. "These idealists
truly committed to the cause of freedom will act when they feel the time is
ripe, or will take their cues from others who proceed them."

By the early fall of 1994, as Mr. McVeigh was getting and storing his
bomb-making material, the Michigan Militia was mailing out a 12-page catalogue,
with a sniper camouflaged in a tree on the cover, offering instruction kits for
starting up paramilitary groups, back issues of newsletters on topics like
"emergency food storage" and "proper weapons caching." There were tapes of
"patriotic hit songs" like "Watch Out for Martial Law" and "Wheresoever Eagles
Gather" (the Randy Weaver Ballad), military manuals on guerrilla warfare and
baseball caps with a paramilitary motif.

Mr. McVeigh had long since resigned his membership in the National Rifle
Association, protesting what he felt was a namby-pamby position on the
regulation of assault rifles. As the bill banning 19 types of semi-automatic
assault weapons was being debated that August, he read the regular feature of
Guns & Ammo magazine, a column titled "2d Amendment" headed "Freedom's Last
Stand -- Are you willing to fight for your guns?" It was topped by the Jefferson
quote about the tree of liberty and the blood of patriots and tyrants that was
on his favorite T-shirt.

"We cannot hope to prevail against a tyrannical government armed with fully
automatic weapons when we are reduced to bolt actions or worse," the author,
Stephen Weaver, wrote.

By now Mr. McVeigh was living -- and not alone -- in a world of mysterious black
helicopters, where Mongolian troops were secretly training in the mountains for
the pending takeover and the United Nations plan for dividing up the country was
confirmed by a child's map on the back of a cereal box. He quoted John Locke and
told people the Army had planted a computer chip in his buttock to control him.

Early this year, Mr. McVeigh stayed at the Hill Top Motel, a nondescript place
just off Route 66 in Kingman. But as the day for the bombing neared, he checked
into the Imperial Motel, equally nondescript, just a few steps away but with the
Spice Channel on its cable TV. He stayed from March 31 to April 12, rarely
leaving his room, the door locked, the blinds drawn, said the owner, Helmet
Hofer.

As his compatriots, Mr. Fortier and Mr. Nichols, began to weaken on carrying out
the bomb plot, Mr. McVeigh showed them "Armed and Dangerous" (Hill & Wang,
1987), a book with a chapter on the Order, a rightist band from the mid-1980's
that modeled itself on the "Turner Diaries' " leadership, a priestlike band with
gray monks' robes and ritual oaths.

The author, James Coates, intended the book as a warning. To Mr. McVeigh, it was
a goal: The Order robbed some $3 million from armored cars, donating much of it
to white supremacist groups, ran a counterfeiting ring and gunned down a Jewish
talk show host, Allan Berg, in Denver before being broken up by the F.B.I. The
book, with its Mohave County Library stamp, was found in the F.B.I.'s search of
Terry Nichols's house in Kansas.

So what, finally, was on Mr. McVeigh's mind?

Perhaps the answer is best found in his favorite book, "The Turner Diaries."
Eerily, a bombing almost exactly like that in Oklahoma City occurs early in the
narrative, when the hero Earl Turner and his group pack a truck with a homemade
bomb mixed from fertilizer and fuel oil and set it off at F.B.I. headquarters,
killing 700 people. They hope it will be "propaganda of the deed" to inspire
others to revolt against the government for outlawing private ownership of guns.

Earl Turner reflects on what he has done:

"All day yesterday and most of today we watched the TV coverage of rescue crews
bringing the dead and injured out of the building. It is a heavy burden of
responsibility for us to bear, since most of the victims of our bomb were only
pawns who were no more committed to the sick philosophy or the racially
destructive goals of the System than we are.

"But there is no way we can destroy the System without hurting many thousands of
innocent people -- no way. It is a cancer too deeply rooted in our flesh. And if
we don't destroy the System before it destroys us -- if we don't cut this cancer
out of our living flesh -- our whole race will die.

"We have gone over this before, and we are all completely convinced that what we
did is justified, but it is still very hard to see our own people suffering so
intensely because of our acts. It is because Americans have for so many years
been unwilling to make unpleasant decisions that we are forced to make decisions
now which are stern indeed."

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Timothy J. McVeigh was an avid reader and consumer of the new
genre in movies and paperback novels. Typified by the Rambo series, the new
archetype is a lone warrior who has turned renegade. (pg. 24)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
