
                               1 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 1, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Research on Birth Defects Shifts to Flaws in Sperm

BYLINE: By SANDRA BLAKESLEE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1795 words


AFTER three decades of efforts to discover how a pregnant woman's environment
can affect the health of her fetus, researchers are turning their attention to
fathers.

The new research, much of it in early stages, suggests that certain substances
can cause genetic mutations or other alterations in sperm that lead to permanent
defects in children.

These include familiar birth defects like heart abnormalities and mental
retardation as well as less familiar ones like childhood cancer and learning
disorders.

The new findings may force health authorities and occupational safety experts to
rethink or expand regulations intended to prevent birth defects that have
limited women, but not men, from jobs considered hazardous to the fetus.

Each year in the United States, at least 250,000 babies are born with physical
birth defects while thousands more develop behavioral and learning defects that
appear to have a genetic component. The cause of 60 to 80 percent of birth
defects is not known, although many scientists suspect that environmental toxins
play a role in a sizable number of them. The male contribution may be
substantial, researchers now say.

Society has focused on the mother and fetus because they are easier to study,
said Dr. Devra Lee Davis, a scholar in residence at the National Academy of
Sciences who edited a recent book on biological markers in reproductive
toxicology.

Since thalidomide vividly demonstrated that drugs a woman takes during pregnancy
can harm her fetus, scientists have discovered more than 30 drugs, viruses,
chemicals and other substances that can cross the placenta and cause structural
damage to the fetus. Researchers estimate that another 900 chemicals are toxic
to human development.

As a result, some American companies have developed fetal protection policies
that banish women of child-bearing age from the factory floor, even if they do
not intend to have children.

Animal experiments and human epidemiological research had previously linked
men's exposures to certain substances with birth defects in their children, said
Dr. Donald R. Mattison, dean of the School of Public Health at the University of
Pittsburgh. Most of the earlier research has been ignored, he said, because
scientists could not identify any possible biological mechanism to explain it.

Scientists also held to what some refer to as a "macho sperm theory of
conception," the idea that only the fittest sperm were hardy enough to go the
distance necessary to fertilize an egg. In fact research now shows that tiny
hairs in the female reproductive tract move sperm along whether they are healthy
or defective.

"You don't have to be Sigmund Freud to figure out there are cultural factors to
say why we have paid so much attention to the female and so little to the male,"
Dr. Davis said.

The tools of molecular biology are now pointing to plausible mechanisms in which
damage to sperm could lead to birth defects, said Dr. Marvin Legator, a genetic
toxicologist at the University of Texas Health Sciences Center in Galveston.
Scientists can pluck single diseased genes from cells, examine the hundreds of
newly discovered proteins in sperm, place special markers on sperm to follow
their development and watch how chemicals interact with sperm proteins and DNA.

Vulnerability of Sperm

Researchers have found several childhood cancers that primarily arise from new
mutations traced to sperm, never to eggs.

They believe defects may originate during the division of the cells that
generate sperm cells. Cells are most vulnerable to genetic damage when they
divide beacuse they are more likely to absorb and metabolize toxic substances
than are quiescent cells.

Eggs do not divide; all eggs a woman has are present before birth.

By contrast, next to the cells in developing fetus the stem cells that produce
sperm are among the most rapidly dividing cells in the human body. Moreover,
researchers now realize that the barrier between blood vessels and tissue in the
testes is very thin, allowing many toxic substances to enter testicular
structures and seminal fluid.

Animal studies have identified more than 100 chemicals that produce spontaneous
abortion or birth defects in offspring fathered by exposed males, said Dr.
Mattison. Among them are alcohol, opiates like heroin and methadone, gases used
in hospital operating rooms, lead, solvents, pesticides and a variety of
industrial chemicals.

In some instances, litter size is greatly reduced or the offspring are deformed.
In other cases, the young animals appear healthy but cannot negotiate mazes as
well as control animals.

One case pending before the United States Supreme Court involves restrictive
work rules intended to protect women of childbearing age from exposure to lead,
which can cause neurological defects. But in one recent study, Dr. Ellen
Silbergeld, a toxicologist at the University of Maryland in Baltimore, exposed
male rats to relatively low levels of lead, equivalent to amounts encountered by
many factory workers. The male rats' offspring showed defects in brain
development, even if the female rats were not exposed to lead at all, Dr.
Silbergeld said.

Other scientists have conducted scores of epidemiological studies looking for
links between a father's occupation and birth defects in children. They have
found numerous associations:

Wives of men exposed to vinyl chloride and waste water treatment chemicals have
more miscarriages. Welders who breathe toxic metal fumes develop abnormal sperm,
even after exposure stops for three weeks.  Firemen who are exposed to toxic
smoke have an increased risk of producing children with heart defects.  Several
studies have found that fathers who take two or more alcoholic drinks a day have
smaller than average infants.

A British study recently found that men exposed to low levels of radiation at a
single nuclear power plant had a higher than expected number of children with
leukemia. The greater the exposure, the greater the risk. Some American
investigators claim to have found a link between fathers' exposure to the
defoliant Agent Orange in Vietnam and a variety of birth defects in their
children. Both studies are controversial, and large Government-sponsored studies
on Agent Orange have failed to confirm the link.

A spate of new research is finding that some rare forms of childhood cancer are
closely linked with the father's genes and occupations. Garage mechanics, auto
body workers and other men exposed to hydrocarbons, solvents, metals, oils and
paints have a four to eightfold increased risk of having children with Wilm's
tumor, a kidney cancer. Fathers who work with lead have an almost fourfold
increased risk of producing such children.

An abormal gene associated with a rare eye cancer, retinoblastoma, can be
inherited from a parent who already carries it, or it can arise as a spontaneous
mutation in the parent's egg or sperm. Researchers are finding that the
spontaneous form seems to always stem from a mutation in the father's sperm,
said Dr. Merlin Butler, pediatrician and genetics expert at Vanderbilt
University in Atlanta.

Similarly, a genetic disorder called Prader Willi syndrome stems from errors
found in the father's chromosomes, said Dr. Butler. The syndrome has been linked
to children of men who work with solvents and hydrocarbons.

But epidemiological studies cannot prove cause and effect, said Dr. John Peters,
an epidemiologist at the University of Southern California. In real life, people
are exposed sporadically to combinations of substances that might interact, he
said. A child can encounter toxic chemicals by contact with the father's
clothing.

Unlike the case of thalidomide, in which the association was unmistakable, the
findings linking a father's occupation and birth defects are statistically
significant but not dramatic, Dr. Peters said. He said at least a dozen of the
recent studies are particularly well done and "strongly suggest" that fathers
contribute to birth defects, including childhood cancers. To show more dramatic
associations, he said, scientists would need to study hundreds of thousands of
people over many years.

Molecular biologists are conducting experiments that may explain the mechanisms
involved, said Dr. Andrew J. Wyrobek, a researcher at the Lawrence Livermore
Laboratory in Livermore, Calif. Methods are being developed to detect sperm with
missing or extra chromosomes, study chromosome regions that tend to get shuffled
around in the presence of chemicals, locate single gene mutations and identify
how chemicals might attach themselves to proteins or DNA within sperm.

Ultimately it will be possible to follow sperm from their earliest formation
through fertilization, explaining how and where damage occurs, the researchers
said. For example, if the stem cells that give rise to sperm suffer permanent
genetic mutations, errors would always be present in a significant number of
sperm. It should be possible to pinpoint such mutations.

If toxins are drawn to specific regulatory genes because of a chemical affinity,
then specific patterns of genetic damage could result. For example, a solvent
might attach itself to a master gene that determines the fate of many subsequent
cells in heart tissue. Heart defects would be a common outcome of exposure to
the chemical. Other chemicals could affect sites that determine whether genes
are expressed. Yet others could induce transposable elements in chromosomes --
regions that naturally jump around -- to break or form harmful combinations.

In another case, which has been shown to happen in laboratory experiments, a
chemical attaches itself to a protein within the sperm head. Upon fertilization
the chemical is carried into the egg where it could exert an effect on the
earliest stages of embryo growth.

Researchers used to think of sperm as being relatively simple, stripped-down
vehicles for carrying male DNA into an egg, said Dr. Anthony Bellve, a Columbia
University urologist who is a leading expert on sperm genetics. But new research
shows that each sperm head contains 300 to 400 novel proteins. Each sperm
membrane contains another 300 to 400 proteins. It is entirely possible, said Dr.
Bellve, that these proteins exert powerful influences on early embryogenesis.

According to Dr. Silbergeld, lead could have such an effect by attaching itself
to zinc binding proteins found in sperm, fetuses and adults. Tiny amounts of
lead in an early embryo, she said, could alter zinc pathways and affect brain
development.

While scientists explore such mechanisms, people should not panic, Dr. Mattison
said. But it may make sense to clean up the work place for fathers as well as
for mothers.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Marvin Legator, a genetic toxicologist at the University of
Texas Health Sciences Center. (University of Texas)

Diagram (pg. 36)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 1, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Quayle Draws Ovation on Visit to the Troops

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 666 words

DATELINE: IN EASTERN SAUDI ARABIA, Dec. 31


Vice President Dan Quayle told American troops in Saudi Arabia today that if
American military force was used against Iraq, it would be "quick, massive and
decisive."

"You will do your job and then go home to your loved ones," he said.

The Vice President received an enthusiastic welcome as he toured American
military installations in the Persian Gulf, and a 10-minute speech today to
thousands of marines was greeted with a standing ovation and loud cheers.

The warm reception for the Vice President was a relief for military officials
who had said privately that some soldiers might react with little enthusiasm
because of the questions surrounding Mr. Quayle's military record during the
Vietnam War.

Just Glad He Came

Chief Warrant Officer Tom Ducan of Atlanta, a marine, said he believed that "a
lot of troops don't even know anything about" the dispute over Mr. Quayle's
decision to serve in the Indiana National Guard during the Vietnam War.
"Besides, we're just glad the Vice President cared about making this trip."

Mr. Quayle was able to avoid service in Vietnam by using family connections to
enter the Indiana National Guard, and his military record became an issue in the
1988 Presidential campaign.

As he met today with thousands of front-line American troops, the Vice President
took the opportunity to defend the decision he made in 1969 to serve in the
reserves. "I served in the Indiana National Guard and I am proud of it," he said
in a meeting with reporters.

Lieut. Col. Sam Graves, a 44-year-old Army reservist who has been in Saudi
Arabia since Dec. 9 as a public information officer, was Mr. Quayle's commander
in the 120th Public Information Detatchment in Indianapolis in the 1970's, and
he met privately with Mr. Quayle for about 10 minutes today.

'Exactly the Same Person'

"I haven't seen him in a while, and he was exactly the same person as he was" in
the Guard, Colonel Graves said, describing the Vice President as "hard-working
and really sincere."

Mr. Quayle's tour, by helicopter and military truck, also took him to the Army's
Third Armored Cavalry Regiment, which is closer to the border than any unit in
the gulf.

In his speech today at a desert airbase known as MAG-13, or the Marine Aircraft
Group Forward, Mr. Quayle told the marines that the Bush Administration
questioned whether economic sanctions would ever be sufficient to force Iraqi
occupiers out of Kuwait.

"You have been patient enough, and so has President Bush," Mr. Quayle said. "Our
message is simple: Saddam Hussein, either get out of Kuwait peacefully or leave
by force."

"The American people support you and Operation Desert Shield," he continued.
"They know that unless Saddam Hussein is stopped today, a nuclear-armed Iraq
will control most of the world's energy supply tomorrow."

'Get the Job Done'

After the 10-minute speech, one member of the audience, Lance Cpl. Mike Frye,
20, of Cottontown, Tenn., said that the Vice President "kind of got the point
across about how people here feel. We don't want to sit around. We want to get
the job done and go home."

At the airfield, Mr. Quayle spoke with Capt. Dino Peros, a marine pilot from
Yuma, Ariz., who is the operations officer for a squadron of fighter jets
stationed there. Under military reporting rules, the exact location of the
Marine base cannot be identified.

"Sky's quiet?" Mr. Quayle asked.

"Sky's quiet," Captain Peros said. "They know we are here."

"They don't come up at all, do they?" Mr. Quayle asked, referring to the Iraqi
pilots stationed only a few hundred miles away.

"Not this way," the captain replied. "Obviously they don't come down here in the
territory, but they are up around." The marine said he and other pilots
occasionally liked to fly north near the Kuwait border and "check out" the Iraqi
fighters.

"Check them out?' the Vice President asked. "How do they look?"

"Not as good as we do, sir," the pilot replied. "We are ready."


LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 1, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

KHMER ROUGE GET MORE CHINA ARMS

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 738 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 31


Despite public assurances by China that it has stopped sending military aid to
the Khmer Rouge guerrillas since September, Chinese arms continue to flow across
the Thai border to all the opposition factions fighting the Phnom Penh
Government, including the Khmer Rouge, senior Western diplomats say.

It is impossible to tell whether these Chinese arms left China after September,
the diplomats say. The arms supplies, they say, could represent shipments that
were already on the way or had been previously warehoused in Thailand.

In any event, the diplomats say, the arms supplies seem intended more to keep up
morale among opposition fighters as the peace process drags on into the dry
season, when fighting usually intensifies, than to have a significant effect on
the balance of forces.

China, like the Soviet Union, had previously said that it would stop all arms
supplies in the context of a comprehensive peace settlement, but that it would
not do so unilaterally.

Last month, a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman, Li Zhaoxing, said, "Since the
five member countries of the Security Council adopted the five documents on
Cambodia, China has not provided any military assistance, including weapons, to
the Cambodian resistance."

U.N. Council Offers Plan

The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council agreed on the
framework for a comprehensive peace plan for Cambodia on Aug. 28. The permanent
Council members include China, the United States and the Soviet Union, the main
proxy powers of the conflict, as well as Britain and France.

Fighting the Vietnamese-installed Government in Phnom Penh, led by Prime
Minister Hun Sen, are three opposition organizations that have formed a loose
alliance: the Communist Khmer Rouge, under whose regime more than a million
Cambodians died from 1975 to 1979; the followers of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, and
the Khmer People's National Liberation Front of Son Sann, which groups rightists
who overthrew Prince Sihanouk in 1970 and who were ousted by the Khmer Rouge in
1975. The Khmer Rouge were driven from power in 1979, after the Vietnamese
invaded.

China has been the main backer of the Khmer Rouge, which has the strongest
guerrilla army, and the two other guerrilla groups. The Soviet Union has backed
Vietnam and the Cambodian Government. The United States gives nonmilitary aid to
Prince Sihanouk's followers and to the Khmer People's National Liberation Front,
but has withdrawn diplomatic support at the United Nations for the coalition of
rebel groups.

"There is movement of arms, but we don't take it too seriously," a senior
Western diplomat said. "Partly it's a definitional problem. Did the Chinese stop
shipping that day? Some may have been already at sea, and some in warehouses in
Thailand, now being delivered."

Hurting Beijing's Image

But because China had announced a halt in shipments, he said, any supplies make
Beijing look bad.

The Associated Press reported on Saturday that Western intelligence figures said
the Khmer Rouge were loading "trucks and trucks of new Chinese ammunition" in
violation of Beijing's pledge to stop military aid.

As usual, an Asian diplomat said, military claims and developments in Cambodia
have to be evaluated in the context of the negotiations, which have been
faltering.

In a conference on Sept. 9 and 10 in Jakarta, after a secret summit meeting
between Vietnamese and Chinese leaders, the Cambodian Government and the three
guerrilla factions agreed to accept the United Nations peace framework in its
entirety.

But since their September meeting, the four parties have been dragging their
feet. With the support of the Khmer Rouge, Prince Sihanouk first rejected any
role for himself on a Supreme National Council that would represent Cambodian
sovereignty in a settlement. Then he insisted on being chairman of the council
but said Mr. Hun Sen could not be the deputy chairman. Later he rejected any
role for himself once again.

The United Nations plan calls for the national council to have a largely
symbolic role. United Nations officials would monitor, control and, if
necessary, run five important ministries -- finance, interior, defense, foreign
affairs and information -- and insure that the elections for a new government
are free and fair.

A meeting of the Cambodian factions this month in Paris, to discuss a draft of
the peace plan, was inconclusive.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 1, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Washington Talk;
Presidency on the Brink Of a Make or Break Year

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 726 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 31


George Bush begins the new year with his Presidency poised between success and
failure. The country begins it with bated breath.

Should the crisis in the Middle East turn into a blood bath, or become the kind
of prolonged stalemate that Mr. Bush has promised to avoid, it could prove as
damaging to him as Vietnam proved to Lyndon B. Johnson. If weeks or months of
heavy American casualties would hurt, so would further disruption of oil
supplies, which would force up gasoline prices and damage the already weak
economy.

Like Lyndon Johnson, President Bush could find it devilishly hard to deliver
either of the two things that matter most to the American electorate -- peace
and prosperity. That's why the next few months, in the plain words of Senator
Bob Dole of Kansas, look like "make or break time for George Bush."

The prospect of another crippled President, one would think, would cast a pall
over Washington, to say nothing of the prospect of war. But no real anxiety
grips the capital. In fact, the most notable things about the city as the final
hours of 1990 slipped by were empty sidewalks, silent telephones and offices
vacated hours before quitting time.

Most policy makers have found little reason to cancel vacation plans, even
though Jan. 15, the date after which the United Nations has authorized the use
of force against Saddam Hussein's forces in Iraq, will arrive in a matter of
only two weeks.


"If there is a sense of crisis in this city," said a State Department official
who has spent the holidays here, "I haven't been able to find it. The prevailing
mood seems to be, 'Something will turn up to get us out of this.' No one can say
what the something will be, but that doesn't stop them from thinking it will
come."

Mr. Bush himself would appear to share the city's hunch that Saddam Hussein will
decide to withdraw from Kuwait at the 11th hour and make a big American
offensive unnecessary. In a year-end interview, he told Time magazine, "My gut
says he will get out of there."

But the President also conceded, "I do not have that much of a feel." And there
are powerful Washington figures who fear that Mr. Bush may be heading for
trouble. Mr. Dole, Republican, tough-minded and usually a hawk, is one of them;
he said over the weekend that "the American people are not yet committed to war"
and urged that another effort be made to arrange a meeting between Mr. Hussein
and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d in Baghdad.

Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, a moderately hawkish Democrat who heads
the House Armed Services Committee, also warned that the American public was
uneasy. They "want to make sure," he said, "that we've tried every alternative
before going to war."

The lack of electricity in the air, the President's comments and Mr. Dole's and
Mr. Aspin's remarks all suggest that at least one more round of political and
diplomatic activity is likely before any final decision to fight.

It is hard to believe, for example, that a meeting with Mr. Hussein will be
passed up simply because of a disagreement on dates, especially with the home
front as nervous as it seems to be. It is hard to believe, likewise, that Mr.
Bush will opt for force without at least trying to win Congressional
authorization for such a move in a resolution similar, perhaps, to the one the
United Nations Security Council approved late last month.

According to his aides, Mr. Baker will travel to Europe and to the Middle East
in the next 10 days to consult with leaders of countries allied with the United
States in the gulf. He could easily head for Baghdad on short notice. And the
European Community is planning some sort of peace effort of its own, which would
involve assurances to Baghdad about "what would happen if Iraq leaves Kuwait,"
as one minister put it.

The White House insists that there will be "no negotiations." So the Iraqis and
the Europeans talk instead about "establishing a dialogue."

Whether it will work is far from clear, because no one -- not the other Muslim
leaders, not the intelligence-agency psychiatrists and certainly not George Bush
-- is sure what Saddam Hussein's state of mind is. But with two weeks to go, the
situation does not yet look hopelessly stalemated, and most of official
Washington, at the dawn of a new year, does not yet look upon war as inevitable.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Reviews/Television;
President and Mrs. Bush and an Amiable David Frost

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 696 words


"No price is too high to pay to stop Iraqi aggression," George Bush declares in
"President and Mrs. Bush Talking With David Frost." The first half of tonight's
hourlong program, at 8 on Channels 13 and 49 and at 10 on Channel 21, gives the
President, who concedes that eloquence is not his strong point, an opportunity
to make as coherent a case for his policy in the Persian Gulf as he has yet
offered on television.

Under the placable questioning of David Frost, Mr. Bush cites graphic examples
of Iraqi atrocities in Kuwait from a recent Amnesty International report as
evidence of the "clear moral case" against Iraq; asserts that Saddam Hussein
would have moved on Saudi oil fields if not stopped; says he is not convinced
that sanctions alone will bring the Iraqi ruler "to his senses," and promises
that if war is necessary, it will not be another Vietnam and that American
ground troops will not remain in the region after Iraq departs or is driven out
of Kuwait, although measures must be taken to control Iraq's military prowess.

The interview is the first of a new PBS series, "Talking With David Frost," that
will be shown once a month through June; future interviewees will include
Margaret Thatcher and Robin Williams.

In tonight's meeting, filmed last month, Mr. Frost and Mr. Bush, in matching
armchairs, face each other in the Oval Office. They seem at ease together, pals
who have got used to chatting under the camera's eye. A fire adds its warmth to
the occasion, and a bowl of flowers is in evidence.

The interviewer leads but never presses. For example, when Mr. Frost raises an
uncomfortable point -- why "some in the West" were slow to recognize President
Hussein's intentions -- he does not get personal about the Bush State
Department. He broaches disputed matters, such as whether air power alone can
compel Iraq to back down and whether the White House needs the authority of
Congress to start a war, but does not get unpleasant about demanding hard
answers. "I would leave it somewhat hypothetical," Mr. Bush says about seeking
Congressional approval, and Mr. Frost leaves it.

He has a way of picking up the President's thoughts and returning them to him.
"It's genocide in a way," Mr. Frost says of the reported ravaging of Kuwait, and
the President does not demur. The closest Mr. Frost comes to an adversarial note
is in a few questions about Washington's new amity with Damascus, when he asks
whether the United States is now treating Hafez al-Assad, the Syrian President,
as it recently treated Mr.  Hussein, on the principle that the enemy of our
enemy is our friend. Mr. Bush says he had "a good talk" with Mr. Assad in Geneva
and emphasizes their "common ground."

After a brief intermission, during which Barbara Bush accepts Mr. Frost's
invitation to deliver a commercial for her husband's concern about race
relations and her own efforts on behalf of literacy and AIDS patients, the
President is back, and the conversation turns to the Administration's record on
such advertised priorities as education, crime and drugs. "It's going all right,
it's going all right," says Mr. Bush; Mr. Frost goes onto the next question.

The President predicts that the recession, if one wishes to use so definite a
term, will be mild and the country will come out of it "in not too many months."
He reminds Mr. Frost of the 1981 economic downturn, from which the nation
recovered "and everybody lived happily ever after."

Mr. Frost daringly asks whether the President's hope for a kinder, gentler
nation is not contradicted by his opposition to new taxes for social programs.
The President reiterates his confidence that economic growth, not Federal
spending, is the key, despite the demands of "the political left."

The hour ends with George and Barbara Bush together, agreeing on the importance
of family and faith. They make a comfortable couple. "What does prayer give you
both?" Mr. Frost asks, as though he were trying to be Bill Moyers. Mr. Bush says
it gives strength, and reveals that Mrs. Bush prays while lying in bed and not
on her knees. The camera moves away on a note of mild inspiration and deep
contentment.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
Broadening the Choice

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 754 words


New Year's Day is a time for optimism, however illusory; so as 1991 begins it
may be no more than wishful thinking to see the faint possibility of averting
war in the Middle East.

Still, despite all the tough talk and the military preparations, two hopeful
possibilities are visible as the year begins:

Foreign ministers of the European Community, which includes indispensable U.S.
allies, will meet this week to consider a last-gasp effort to persuade Iraq to
withdraw from Kuwait.

James Baker, the Secretary of State, may make a final visit to Persian Gulf
nations before Jan. 15, the withdrawal date set by the U.N. That keeps open the
possibility that he may yet meet with Saddam Hussein in Baghdad.

President Bush has insisted that at such a meeting Mr. Baker would only
emphasize the fact that if Iraq doesn't withdraw, it faces war with the U.S.-led
coalition. But it's hard to see how the Secretary could avoid talking about the
larger situation -- or why he would want to -- if Mr. Hussein brings it up.

Washington still insists that such a meeting could not take place as late as
Jan. 12, the date specified by Mr. Hussein; but that makes sense only if Jan. 15
is regarded as a "date certain" on which war must begin if Iraq refuses to
withdraw. In fact, Jan. 15 is not a deadline, but a starting point; any time
after that date, according to the U.N. resolution, sanctioned military action
may be taken to force the withdrawal.

American military leaders have said publicly, moreover, that their forces will
not be ready for attack on Jan. 15. Mr. Bush brashly says he'll order an attack
then anyway, if he chooses; but he'll hardly want to explain the casualty lists
that might be attributed to an ill-prepared and untimely attack.

Congress still might take or at least consider some action that would stay Mr.
Bush's impatient hand. Thus, it's by no means certain now, nor will it be on
Jan. 12, that an attack will begin immediately after Jan. 15. So it's likely and
desirable that one way or another, Mr. Baker soon will confer directly with Mr.
Hussein, particularly since the President himself originally said -- no doubt
with the inattention to language that often mars his performance -- that such a
meeting could take place any time up to Jan. 15.

And anyway, can it ever be too late to try to avert war?

The European initiative, meanwhile, signals no retreat from coalition insistence
that Iraq must withdraw from Kuwait. Those who will take part, however, will
seek to find a way to achieve that goal without war; in doing so, they
apparently plan to consult directly with Tariq Aziz, the Iraqi Foreign Minister,
a diplomat widely admired in the West. That conceivably could facilitate a
Baker-Hussein meeting.

The Europeans are acting not least because of the failure, so far, of the U.S.
and Iraq to agree on a date for Mr. Baker and Mr. Hussein to meet -- a failure
reminiscent of the disagreement on "the shape of the table" that for so long
delayed negotiations in Paris to end the war in Vietnam.

The Europeans also wish, as Mr. Bush surely must, to leave unexplored no
possibility of a peaceful Iraqi withdrawal. To that end, direct talks between
Mr. Baker and Mr. Hussein seem vital, since it hardly can be said that every
possibility for peace has been exhausted if no such exchange takes place --
particularly if prevented only by disagreement on the date.

These may be weak reeds to lean upon in hope that war can yet be avoided; and
Washington's official attitude does not encourage optimism. Mr. Baker's possible
visit to the gulf nations, for example, is not being described as a search for
peace but as a mission to make sure all is ready for war.

In discussing why the Administration is not "perturbed" by the European
initiative (perturbed? why should it be?), an unnamed spokesman said: "You can
be sure that we're not going to sign on to anything that looks like
negotiations."

He probably meant negotiations that would give Mr. Hussein a "reward" for his
aggression -- a reward President Bush has ruled out. This is not unlike the
"unconditional surrender" the World War II Allies insisted on, which actually
lengthened the war.

In effect Mr. Bush has given Iraq the same grim choice -- unconditional
withdrawal/surrender, or war. Yet, as President Mitterand has put it, if Kuwait
were evacuated and war avoided, "everything is possible." Mr. Hussein needs to
understand that, too -- as well as the inevitability of war if he doesn't.


LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
To Fight in the Gulf?

BYLINE: By Leslie H. Gelb

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 741 words


In April 1954, President Eisenhower told the French he would launch air strikes
against Vietnamese Communist troops surrounding French forces at Dien Bien Phu
only if two key conditions were met: that U.S. intervention had to be part of a
strong international coalition, and that Congress had to support the action.

Ike may have made the conditions tough in the correct expectation that they
would not be met. But he understood that a President does not jump into a black
hole without extensive international backing and a unified nation.


In other words, Ike was following an essential rule of politics and good sense
when a decision concerns lives and enormous costs -- and saying it depends.

It is not clear that President Bush understands this. He is content merely to
recite the reasons for using force against a tyrant like Saddam Hussein: his
record of brutal aggression, his use of chemical weapons and pursuit of nuclear
weapons and his fist thrust against the oil thorax of the world's economy. And
he is right on the fundamental issue: If war is not justifiable here, then
where?

But to grant that a war against Iraq would be just does not justify actually
going to war. Even just wars must be measured by their costs and consequences.
It depends.

In the first instance, it depends on the alternatives. The only realistic one is
economic sanctions. But its advocates cannot convincingly show that Iraq will
crack before the alliance crumbles; and its opponents cannot make the opposite
case persuasively. We're all guessing -- George Mitchell, George Bush, you, me.

To me, the argument unfortunately turns on one critical factor: the 1992
Presidential election. Sanctions advocates concede that the squeeze will take at
least one year to approach full effect.

But waiting one year really means delaying two years, since Saddam Hussein will
use the explosive mix of international crisis and Presidential politics to
handcuff George Bush militarily the way Hanoi stymied Lyndon Johnson in 1968 and
Ayatollah Khomeini neutered Jimmy Carter in 1980.

By 1992 Mr. Bush will no longer be able to credibly threaten employing force.
And with the threat to Saddam Hussein's regime removed, some of our allies will
have to snuggle up to their entrenched neighbor as before.

Yet even with these defects, sanctions cannot be dismissed without looking at
the costs and risks of war.

To begin with, as Ike knew in 1954, war should depend on a far larger commitment
by our allies of troops and money. The present distribution of risks and pain is
outrageously unfair.

Mr. Bush cannot allow the Saudis to make a windfall oil profit of about $4
billion monthly while we defend them, their unlikely denials of this
notwithstanding. Nor should we have forgiven the $7 billion Egyptian debt in
return for some 25,000 troops. Japan, Germany and France ought to be ashamed of
their efforts; and they are not ashamed.

What's more, the Saudis, French and Egyptians have to participate in all
military operations, including especially the bombing of Iraq. A reckoning will
come for scorching that country, and America and Britain cannot be left alone to
absorb the hatred.

Saying yes to war should also depend on Mr. Bush holding down casualties. The
Pentagon insists on massive land, sea and air attacks. But it is far from clear
why offensive action cannot be limited to air attacks, and ground action
restricted to defense. Given the open desert terrain, air power should be able
to sever resupply of Iraqi troops in Kuwait and starve them out. And to temper
Arab hostility after the bloodshed, Washington must not target Iraqi civilians.

In addition, Mr. Bush, like Ike, should seek the blessing of Congress. More than
one million armed personnel with the most modern weapons will be poised to do
battle. This is not a police action like Panama or Grenada; it could become a
mini-world war.

At worst, Congress would say not now, continue sanctions. This would be very
damaging, but not as bad as making war without Congress. My guess, however, is
that if Congress were reassured about costs and consequences, it would give Mr.
Bush as much authority to fight as the U.N. has.

He would thus gain what he and his aides fear he lacks most -- credibility with
Saddam Hussein. A declaration of war, or its equivalent, is the best way to
shock Iraq into submission without fighting, and if shock should fail, to fight.


LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
O.K., Flabby Press Corps, 32 Pushups for Uncle Sam

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 351 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Jan. 2


Worried that too many reporters are too far out of shape to cover a war,
Pentagon officials have imposed a physical fitness test on journalists who wish
to be sent out with American troops if there is battle with Iraq.

The test, which some journalists say has frightened them more than Saddam
Hussein ever did, requires the reporters to meet the standards the military sets
for its own men and women for sit-ups, pushups and a mile-and-a-half run.

"I was very apprehensive," said Edith M. Lederer of The Associated Press, a
London-based correspondent who covered the Vietnam war in 1972 and 1973, and who
began jogging two weeks ago in preparation for the running event. "I'm a
swimmer, not a runner, and I think I've found some muscles that I didn't even
know existed."

Ms. Lederer took the test this morning -- the January weather in the Saudi
desert was good for exercise, reasonably cool and dry -- and passed. "I was very
proud of myself," she said, noting that while she did finish last in the women's
run, "I ran it all the way and didn't have to walk, like some of the others."

Broken Down by Age

The passing standards are broken down between men and women, and by age.

A man in his late 30's would need to do 33 sit-ups in two minutes, 32 pushups in
two minutes and run a mile and a half in 15 minutes, 30 seconds. A woman in the
same age group would need to do 30 sit-ups, 13 pushups and complete the run in
17 minutes, 15 seconds.

The testing began several days ago at a luxury hotel in this eastern Saudi city,
where a road behind the swimming pool was used as a running track. Of the dozens
of journalists tested so far, only a handful have failed, all of them men.
Make-up tests are scheduled.

The Pentagon has imposed other requirements on journalists who wish to be part
of the so-called combat pool, a rotating group of journalists whose reports from
the front lines with American troops would be shared with their colleagues in
Saudi Arabia.

They must also attend a lecture on how to defend against chemical weapons and to
be outfitted for a gas mask.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: Exercise standards for reporters and military men and women
(Source: Defense Department)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Where Is Congress on the Gulf?

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 557 words


Will Congress debate and vote on President Bush's war policy in the Persian
Gulf? Will Mr. Bush ask it to? These questions belong at the top of the agenda
when Congressional leaders meet with the President today.

Until now, the Congress has shirked its constitutional duty to debate a
declaration of war. This week some members intend to introduce a resolution to
allow six months more for economic sanctions on Iraq and diplomacy to work. But
Congressional leaders want to dodge the issue by putting off a vote.

That's unconscionable. While hundreds of thousands of young Americans gird for
battle in the deserts of Arabia, their elected representatives can't summon up
the courage to confront their responsibilities at home.

The leaders' reason for their silence won't wash: that a debate could be
divisive, easing the pressure on Saddam Hussein. Debate is not divisive unless
the policy being debated is. Better to know that now, before Americans are
called upon to die for it. That Mr. Bush's brinkmanship is debatable is no
secret. Debate over the wisdom of war is raging everywhere in America except
where it's supposed to -- in Congress.

During Vietnam, when Presidents took it upon themselves to wage war, Congress
thought it necessary to enact the War Powers Act -- really a "War Responsibility
Act" -- forcing the President and Congress to face up to a war decision in full
public view. But Mr. Bush shied away from invoking the act, asserting that U.S.
troops are in no imminent danger of hostilities. Closing its eyes, Congress
accepted his claim, then left town just as he put aside Desert Shield and picked
up Desert Sword.

Now Congress is back, but its leaders still duck a debate. Take Lee Hamilton,
chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, for example. In one breath he
cogently argues against a war anytime soon: "So long as there is a reasonable
opportunity that the present strategy of the threat of the use of force, the
economic sanctions and the diplomatic activity will . . . get Saddam Hussein out
of Kuwait, then I think you ought to stick with it and not go to war."

In the next breath he opposes a vote now to stay Mr. Bush's hand: "I think the
name of the game at the moment is to ratchet up the pressure on Saddam Hussein
in every way that we can. You do not want to put a resolution or a declaration
on the floor of the House or the Senate . . . because that will send a signal of
divisiveness."

By this tortured logic, the need to maintain a credible threat of war would mean
that the time will never come for Congress to vote.

The leadership's position would be more understandable if there had been a
behind-the-scenes deal. The rumor around Washington was that in return for
unfettered authority to threaten war, Mr. Bush had pledged not to wage war
without Congressional approval. Last weekend the House Armed Services Committee
chairman, Les Aspin, scotched that talk: "The Administration has not in any
time, any forum, ever committed to that."

A deferred debate on a declaration of war invites divisiveness at the worst
possible time -- after Mr. Bush takes the country to war. Mr. Bush's
brinkmanship is running out of time to show results. If Congress prefers
sanctions and diplomacy to an early war, why not vote to give them a reasonable
chance to work?



LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: WASHINGTON AT WORK;
In Hot Spots Like Gulf, He's Baker's Cool Hand

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1739 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 2


"Perhaps you should leave through the back door," Robert M. Kimmitt suggested
after he scanned the note his secretary had slipped him. The State Department's
third-ranking official had inadvertently left a European ambassador waiting
outside his office for nearly half an hour and, a stickler for protocol, he did
not want to appear to be favoring a journalist over an ambassador.

Such long political antennae and stealth have been hallmarks of Mr. Kimmitt's
fast career climb, keeping him close to the center of the action, but far, his
critics say, from the fallout if things go wrong.

In the 14 years since his father, Stanley Kimmitt, then the Secretary of the
Senate, helped him get a summer job at the National Security Council, he has
managed to serve in the Ford, Carter and Reagan White Houses. In 1990 and the
Persian Gulf crisis, he came into his own.

Quietness Is Appreciated

Now Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, he is point man for
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d in the day-to-day handling of the gulf
crisis. He oversees diplomacy at the United Nations, gathers and filters
military, intelligence and political information from various advisers and
experts, and coordinates policy with the White House and the Defense Department.
In a capital where officials often equate power with the frequency their name
pops up in the press, he does his work quietly. That is a skill Mr. Baker
especially appreciates in his aides.

A West Point graduate, decorated Vietnam War veteran and seasoned player of the
bureaucracy, Mr. Kimmitt projects discipline, austerity and thoroughness, and
honors rank.

"I've always felt that the best way that one can serve in public service is to
maintain as low a profile as possible and keep your boss out front where the
proper focus belongs," he said. "I respect the senior-subordinate relationship,
just as Secretary Baker does in his relationship with President Bush."

Mr. Kimmitt's understanding of relationships works several ways. One of a
handful of aides in the tight circle of political professionals who came with
Mr. Baker from the Treasury Department and the White House, Mr. Kimmitt is more
popular than some of the others with the State Department's career officers,
many of whom have found their customary influence and access blocked. Filling
his personal staff with members of the Foreign Service, he has reached out
through the department for advice.

For Baker, a 'Capable Hand'

Mr. Kimmitt is "helping me tremendously" on the gulf crisis, Mr. Baker said. "He
has a military background and when you are dealing with military issues that
really helps. Bob is a guy who has a wealth of experience. He has served the
nation extraordinarily well. He is an extremely thoughtful and capable hand."

Margaret D. Tutwiler, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, who
watches over Mr. Baker's public relations, said: "Secretary Baker depends on
Bob. Bob is very valuable to him. He is someone you can rely on."

Before Iraq, Mr. Kimmitt was involved in a number of the Administration's more
difficult but not necessarily most flashy foreign policy problems, including how
to bring peaceful reform in South Africa and how to resolve the civil wars in
Afghanistan and Cambodia.

All his quiet deference notwithstanding, Mr. Kimmitt never lets you forget that
even before his role blossomed with the gulf crisis, it was he who was Jim
Baker's Baker.

"Management of a crisis is complex, it is tiring, but it is not necessarily the
most difficult task that I undertake," Mr. Kimmitt said. "Anytime I need to see
the Secretary or to give him recommendations, that is done and done instantly."

"The most difficult thing is policy formulation and implementation when you are
trying to keep many different policy balls in the air. How do we get a
cease-fire in Angola? How do we avoid tensions on the subcontinent? How do we
continue to advance the prospects of democracy in this hemisphere, particularly
in Panama and Nicaragua?"

Mr. Kimmitt's colleagues characterize him as a mainstream Republican, a
conservative not particularly driven by ideology whose advice on tactics and
Congress is his greatest contribution. His attitude toward disputes with Capitol
Hill reinforces that characterization. When Congress views a particular policy
in a different way, he said, the Administration must be ready to compromise
without retreating from principle. "My feeling is you take what you can get and
then march forward again," he said.

As for Congressional criticism that he and others in the State Department should
have foreseen the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and warned Iraq against it, he
strongly disagrees. In an argument that critics find disingenuous, he says that
Washington sent plenty of signals, but that the international response was weak.


The Unseen Hand

Last summer, Mr. Kimmitt sensed a Congressional rebellion brewing against the
Administration's diplomatic backing of a guerrilla coalition in Cambodia that
included the Khmer Rouge.

Persuading Mr. Baker not only to distance Washington from the Khmer Rouge but
also to open talks with Vietnam and Cambodia, he achieved the most far-reaching
change in United States Indochina policy in at least a decade without even
notifying Richard H. Solomon, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian
and Pacific Affairs and a proponent of the old policy. When the new policy began
to lead to breakthroughs in regional peace talks, Mr. Kimmitt let Mr. Solomon
take the credit.

Asked about his being shut out of the decision to change policy, Mr. Solomon
said: "I don't want to get into the game of who-whom. I happened to be in Paris
at the time."

"One of Mr. Kimmitt's alluring qualities is his discretion," said Richard Allen,
who as national security adviser in the early 1980's was Mr. Kimmitt's
supervisor. "People who are discreet and without their own agendas are hard to
find in Government. He was the kind of fellow in which you can confide."

But a reputation for discretion can have a downside. Mr. Kimmitt was one of only
two people from the Carter White House whom Mr. Allen kept on at the National
Security Council, a fact that has stimulated much speculation around Washington
that Mr. Kimmitt might have been the official who passed on a Carter strategy
book to the Reagan campaign in time for the televised debate between the two
candidates. Former Representative Donald Albosta, a Michigan Democrat who led a
House investigation into the matter, said he now wishes his aides had
interviewed Mr. Kimmitt.

"Why would Baker and everyone cuddle up to him after the campaign unless they
wanted to cover up perhaps?" Mr. Albosta asked.

The Iran-Contra Scandal

That speculation was fanned by allegations made privately by several former
Reagan White House officials that Mr. Kimmitt, who was executive secretary to
the National Security Council from 1983 to 1985, passed Mr. Baker, then White
House chief of staff, classified foreign policy papers when other senior Reagan
White House officials were trying to keep him out of policy discussions.

Mr. Kimmitt flatly denies passing White House documents to any unauthorized
people. He also says he had no involvement in the Iran-contra scandal. His
signature was found on one document made public during the trial of Oliver L.
North, indicating he had some knowledge of Reagan Administration attempts to
persuade Honduras to aid the contras when Congress had prohibited military
assistance.

Mr. Kimmitt "must have known a fair amount or he was incompetent," Michael A.
Ledeen, who was a consultant to the National Security Council in the Reagan
Administration, said of the affair. "His name never came up because he got out
in time."

Mr. Kimmitt said he had no particular recollection of the document he signed.
"Obviously if I had seen or heard something that I thought was out of bounds, I
would have raised that with McFarlane or Poindexter," he said.

Mr. Baker took Mr. Kimmitt with him to the Treasury Department in 1985 and then
on to the Bush campaign, where he was charged with screening vice presidential
candidates.

The Questioning of Quayle

Published accounts have said Mr. Kimmitt questioned Mr. Quayle about his
military record and asked if there was anything in his past that could be
embarrassing. Press reports that Mr. Quayle's father had helped him gain
entrance to the National Guard, a popular and legal way to avoid service in
Vietnam, later caused the campaign embarrassment. (The Vice President's office
has repeatedly said that there were a number of vacancies in the National Guard
unit in which Mr. Quayle served, and therefore he did not need his father's help
to gain entrance.)

Asked now if he questioned Mr. Quayle about his National Guard service, Mr.
Kimmitt replied: "This will sound evasive but it is not. I felt and still do
feel that I had a lawyer-client relationship with candidate Bush. As a result, I
have never disclosed either to whom I spoke or what I asked of those people."

In recent weeks, Mr. Kimmitt has battled with Central Intelligence Agency
officials who would like to unleash the guerrillas in Afghanistan in one last
effort to defeat the Soviet-backed Government of President Najibullah. Mr. Baker
wants to work closely with Moscow to coax the rebels and the Najibullah regime
into democratic elections.

"If they have a problem at the agency it is with me carrying out a policy that
has been set down by the Secretary and reaffirmed by the President during the
June summit," Mr. Kimmitt said. "So I have no hesitation in saying that their
problem is not with me but with the senior leadership of this department and
this Government. I think they are just bucking policy."

ROBERT MICHAEL KIMMITT

Born: Dec. 19, 1947

Hometown: Arlington, Va.

Education: B.S. in Engineering, United States Military Academy at West Point in
1969; J.D., Georgetown University Law Center in 1977.

Career Highlights: 1978 to 1983, member of the National Security Council staff;
1983 to 1985, executive secretary and general counsel for the National Security
Council; 1985 to 1987, general counsel for the Treasury Department; 1987 to
1989, partner, Washington law firm of Sidley & Austin.

Interests: Watching his five children play rugby, squash; going to the movies;
reading biographies and history.

NAME: Robert M. Kimmitt

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "The most difficult thing is policy formulation and
implementation when you are trying to keep many different policy balls in the
air," said Robert M. Kimmitt, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs.
(Michael Geissinger for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Entrepreneur Building Car Engine Franchises

SECTION: Section D; Page 3; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 430 words


With sales of new cars lagging, Joseph A. Robinson, a Philadelphia entrepreneur,
hopes that drivers will turn increasingly to repair shops to keep their existing
vehicles rolling.

So he is building a chain of franchise outlets that offer replacement engines
for cars.

"We're the Jiffy Lube of engines," Mr. Robinson said, referring to the quick
oil-change franchises.

Mr. Robinson opened Motorworks, the first engine-replacement franchise in the
United States, in Philadelphia three years ago. Today, situated near two
automotive giants, Aamco, the transmission concern, and Maaco, the body works
company. Mr. Robinson operates a $3 million remanufacturing plant in
Philadelphia that supplies engines to his 30 franchises. In 1990, revenues
totaled about $10 million, up 50 percent from 1989.

Mr. Robinson's engine remanufacturing company, Jarco, buys used engines from
automobile recyclers and rebuilds them with new and used parts. Jarco rebuilds
about 1,000 engines a month.

"Our typical customer is the everyday Joe who drives his car back and forth to
work," said Mr. Robinson, who is 42. His company has also replaced engines in
taxis and rental cars, and for the Navy and other Government operations.

Replacing an engine at a Motorworks franchise typically costs about $2,000, or
half the price charged at a dealership or automotive repair shop, said Mr.
Robinson, who started with a one-car garage in Philadelphia in 1969, after a
tour in the Navy rebuilding ship engines in Vietnam.

Mr. Robinson trains technicians, franchise owners and managers at his
Philadelphia plant. "Most franchise operators are businessmen, not mechanics,"
he said. "We teach them the business and they run it." A Motorworks franchise
costs about $50,000.

While there is little competition in the $2 billion motor rebuilding industry,
automotive franchises are difficult to establish because of stringent state
regulations. So far Mr. Robinson has about 30 franchises in eight states, mostly
on the East Coast. He plans to add several franchises in New York, California,
Nebraska and Illinois over the next year. About 7 percent of all motor vehicles
in operation need engine repairs or replacement.

California, a state with a staggering number of automobiles, recently registered
its first Motorworks franchise in Orange County. Mr. Robinson plans to sell
about 60 franchises in California in the coming year.

"The way they make engines today, we'll be in business forever," he said.

Mr. Robinson lives in Bucks County, Pa., with his wife, Nora, and their three
children.

NAME: Joseph A. Robinson

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 4, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Pentagon Seeks Tight Limits On Reporters in a Gulf War

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 823 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 3


The Pentagon has proposed rules for press coverage of a war in the Persian Gulf
that are far more restrictive than the guidelines used in Vietnam.

Under the Pentagon's plan, combat operations in the gulf would be covered by
specially designated "pools" of print and broadcast journalists subject to tight
restrictions. Pool members would have to remain with military escorts at all
times, and all interviews with servicemen and women would be on the record.

Some members of news organizations complained that this restriction would
constrain the troops from being candid. During the Vietnam war, journalists were
able to travel relatively freely to combat zones and were not routinely escorted
by military officials.

News reports produced by the pools of news organizations in the gulf would be
subject to a formal "security review" by public affairs officers in the field
before their release. There was no official censorship of news reports from the
field during the Vietnam war, although correspondents adhered to general
guidelines designed to protect the security of military operations.

Pentagon Cites Security

The Pentagon said the restrictions would be necessary to protect the security of
American military operations in the gulf and to guard the privacy of American
troops.

But some news executives and other critics said the rules were excessive. They
said the restrictions appeared to be aimed at preventing politically damaging
disclosures by soldiers and at shielding the American public from the
consequences of war.

"We are always willing to obey rules that protect lives and national security,"
said George Watson. the Washington bureau chief for ABC News. "These go too far
and we are concerned about it."

Max Frankel, executive editor of The New York Times, said: "We hope this isn't
the last word. The ground rules are unnecessarily restrictive and specific. We
look forward to further discussion about them with the Defense Department."

Revisions Possible

The proposed regulations were provided to news executives for comment in
December. An expanded version of the rules was distributed to correspondents in
Saudi Arabia today.

Pete Williams, the chief Pentagon spokesman, said in an interview today that the
proposed rules would be "subject to some further revisions" and that important
changes might still be made. Mr. Williams is scheduled to meet with news
executives on Friday to discuss the regulations.

In an apparent effort to prevent unauthorized comments by officers, the proposed
press restrictions would prohibit pool members from conducting impromptu
interviews of military officials entering and departing the Saudi Defense
Ministry and "other public places." Interviews with such officials could only be
conducted by pool members if coordinated in advance by military press officers,
Pentagon officials said.

In deference to Saudi sensitivities, the new regulations would also forbid
coverage of religious services in Saudi Arabia. The Pentagon has long been
concerned that news coverage of religious services involving American troops
might offend the Saudis.

The proposed rules would also ban television coverage of "personnel in agony or
severe shock" or "imagery of patients suffering from severe disfigurement."

Pentagon Cites Privacy

The military said its primary concern in setting the restrictions was to protect
the privacy of wounded troops and to insure that family members do not learn of
casualties through news reports before they have been officially notified by the
military.

Many journalists say they are sympathetic to this concern. But some questioned
whether the Government has the right to ban photographs of severely wounded
soldiers, especially if some way can be found to protect the identity of the
troops, like blacking out portions of the pictures.

Televised images of combat in Vietnam helped build opposition to the war in the
United States.

Mr. Williams said the basic ground rules set by the Pentagon would apply to all
accredited correspondents in Saudi Arabia, not just members of the news media
pools.

But he said that logistical considerations, the likely rapid pace of American
military operations in the gulf and concern over possible use of chemical and
biological weapons by the Iraqis had led the Pentagon to conclude that pools, or
specially designated groups of correspondents, were the best way to cover combat
operations.

"We are not sitting down here trying to limit the coverage because war is hell,"
Mr. Williams added, referring to the restrictions on televised images of wounded
soldiers. He said some of those rules might be modified.

"The starting point for these ground rules were the rules used in Vietnam," he
said. "As the proposed rules worked their way through the system; everybody
added something to it. We are now at the point where we have to simplify them
down again."

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Preparing for a Grim Job of War: Bringing Home the Fallen

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 784 words

DATELINE: NEW ORLEANS, Jan. 4


The military units trained to handle the bodies of soldiers killed in combat are
a low-key group of men and women. Identifying and handling dead soldiers is an
inevitability of war, they say. And though it is their job, they prefer not to
dwell on it.

But every war has people who handle bodies; their companies are called graves
registration units. And as the United States gears up for possible combat in the
Middle East, these units are being activated throughout the country for the
first time since the Vietnam War.

"It's a gruesome job, but somebody has to do it, just like somebody has to be
the garbage man," said Specialist 4 Schaylite Rudolph Sibley, 23 years old. A
pharmacy student in civilian life, he and the other 40 members of his Army
Reserve graves registration unit, the 630th Quartermaster Company, reported to a
reserves center in New Orleans on Thursday. All five such companies in the Army,
Army Reserve and National Guard are now on active duty.

"I try not to think about it," Specialist Sibley said. "My mother tells me to
keep faith in God, and that's exactly what I'm going to do. And where I leave
off, my sense of humor takes over."

'We've All Watched Autopsies'

Capt. Johnathan Riley, commander of the unit, said that it would move to Fort
Polk, La., on Sunday and that he expected it to be sent to the Middle East
eventually. He said the company could handle up to 70 bodies a day.

Overall, the mood of the 630th on Thursday morning seemed to be stoicism and
resignation. The members said they were neither enthusiastic about the prospect
of going to war nor particularly squeamish about their mission.

"None of us has ever handled actual bodies before," said Captain Riley, a
soft-spoken man who in civilian life is a merchandiser at a K Mart. "But we've
all been well trained. We've all watched autopsies. We've heard the extreme
stories about dealing with remains where rigor mortis has set in and you have to
remove the top layer of skin to get a good fingerprint."

Specialist 4 Danny Hutchinson, 27, is a carpenter and engineer. His assignment
is to secure the perimeters of the body-collecting sites with land mines and
razor wire and, if necessary, to plot out a temporary cemetery in the desert.

"This doesn't depress me," he said. "This is important work. Somebody's got to
bring the fellows back. I wouldn't want to be stranded dead on somebody else's
desert."

Of the four other graves registration companies to be activated, two are from
Aguavilla, P.R., one is from Oakland, Calif., and one is from Fort Lee, Va. The
Fort Lee company has already been sent to Saudi Arabia, according to Lieut. Col.
Stuart Wagner, a Defense Department spokesman. He would not say whether the
others were at mobilization sites like Fort Polk or in the Middle East.

In the Desert, Temporary Graves

The companies' mission is to operate body collection points, to help identify
the dead by means of clothing, dental work, fingerprints and so on, to store
bodies in refrigerated containers and to ship remains back to the United States.
The collection of bodies on the battlefield would be performed by the combat
units.

If bodies could not be shipped home, bodies would be buried three feet deep
instead of the usual six feet; after the war, they would be disinterred and sent
home, Captain Riley said.

Most members of the 630th are students who joined the Army Reserve to take
advantage of its tuition reimbursement program, they said. The rest hold an
assortment of civilian jobs, as chefs, truck drivers, stock clerks, store
managers and mail carriers. Their ages range from 18 to 46. All but one are
black, reflecting the typical racial makeup of Army Reserve units in New
Orleans.

"To be honest, I don't want to go," said Specialist 4 Bianca Johnson, 22, who
signed up to help pay her way through nursing school. "But I think I'm a damn
good soldier. What we have to do doesn't scare me, because I used to work in a
hospital. I can't say that I've seen bodies just totally deformed and blown
apart, but I have encountered death."

At a lunch break on Thursday, Specialist 4 Tommy Robinson, 29, sat down to a big
plate of Army-issue pork chops, red beans and rice. Like the others in his unit,
he sounded confident: whatever happens, he said, he knows he'll be fine.

"I have to be," he said. "That's the way it is."

Asked about the most difficult thing he could imagine having to do in a war, he
replied: "Probably to have to ID your own personnel. That would be kind of
rough."

Then he corrected himself.

"No, that would be the second worst. The worst thing," Mr. Robinson said,
laughing and eating, "would be to get ID'ed."

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The 630th Quartermaster Company is being activated to handle the
remains of any soldiers killed in a gulf war. Capt. Johnathan Riley, left, and
members filled out papers after reporting for duty in New Orleans. (Matt
Anderson for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
A Skeptic's Challenge To 'American Ideology'

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 842 words


Declarations of Independence
Cross-Examining American Ideology
By Howard Zinn
341 pages. HarperCollins . $25.

Howard Zinn's "Declarations of Independence" was written before Iraq's invasion
of Kuwait and President Bush's decision to send hundreds of thousands of
American troops to Saudi Arabia. Books are not newspapers; they cover not
yesterday's events, but what happened months or, more likely, years ago. In
light of the Persian Gulf crisis and the debate over who has the constitutional
responsibility to declare war, Professor Zinn's book has a certain remote and
theoretical air.

Yet the author's well-known ideas against the use of force to settle
international disputes -- he was one of the most visible opponents of the
Vietnam War while teaching political science at Boston University -- are not
without relevance today. He is aware that some of the views in his book, which
is subtitled "Cross-Examining American Ideology," may sound impractical, but he
seems more than willing to be accused of idealism. As he puts it:

"Those of us who call for the repudiation of massive violence to solve human
problems must sound utopian, romantic. So did those who demanded the end of
slavery. But utopian ideas do become realistic at certain points in history,
when the moral power of an idea mobilizes large numbers of people in its
support. This may then be joined to the realization, by at least some of those
in authority, that it would be realistic for them to change their policy, even
perhaps share power with those they have long controlled."

Professor Zinn believes that military victory may no longer be possible. He
notes that many of the wars since World War II have ended in stalemates: the
United States in Korea; Iran and Iraq, and the Soviet Union in Afghanistan. In
Vietnam,first the French, then the United States were forced to withdraw. Even
the victories, like the one Israel achieved in its 1967 war, have brought
neither peace nor security; stones have turned out to be dangerous weapons
against Uzis -- a story that goes back to David and Goliath. Civil wars become
endless, as in Central America, and after much bloodshed the participants turn
to negotiated settlements.


In his chapter on just and unjust wars, Professor Zinn gets personal. Although
he served as an Air Force bombardier during World War II, he raises questions
about what Studs Terkel, in his prize-winning oral history, called " 'The Good
War.' " (Mr. Terkel made sure to put quotation marks around his title, aware
that the word "good" was incongruous when mated to the word "war." )

"I flew the last bombing missions of the war, got my Air Medal and my battle
stars," he writes. "I was quietly proud of my participation in the great war to
defeat fascism. But when I packed up my things at the end of the war and put my
old navigation logs and snapshots and other mementos in a folder, I marked that
folder, almost without thinking, 'Never Again.' "

In a similar way, he quotes a passage from Mr. Terkel's interview with Adm. Gene
LaRocque, retired, now director of the Center for Defense Information in
Washington. "You could argue that World War II had to be fought," the admiral
said. "Hitler had to be stopped. Unfortunately, we translate it unchanged to the
situation today."

The chapter on just and unjust wars is disappointing. It lacks original
explanations or solutions. Professor Zinn is certainly not convincing when he
tries to find a certain similarity between the organized German concentration
camps for killing men, women and children and what the Allies did in response to
the London blitz and other Nazi atrocities with their saturation bombing of
German cities. The enormously difficult subject of just and unjust wars demands
legal and historical answers, if possible, not simply moral and personal
outrage.


In his most important book, "A People's History of the United States," Professor
Zinn offered a highly original view of the nation from the point of view of
blacks, Indians, other minorities, women and disadvantaged classes. Echoes of
his concern for these groups of Americans can be heard all through "Declarations
of Independence," and they are worth heeding.

Among the many citations Professor Zinn offers to support his views, none come
closer to his thoughts than remarks made by Leonard Bernstein to a graduation
class at Johns Hopkins University a few years ago. The composer said: "Only
think: if all our imaginative resources currently employed in inventing new
power games and bigger and better weaponry were re-oriented toward disarmament,
what miracles we could achieve, what new truths, what undiscovered realms of
beauty!"

Professor Zinn concludes that the "struggle for justice" should never be
abandoned, "whether by blacks in Alabama and South Africa; peasants in El
Salvador, Nicaragua, and Vietnam; or workers and intellectuals in Eastern Europe
and the Soviet Union." And he says that all of history's "excuses for war and
preparation of war" can no longer be accepted.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Howard Zinn (HarperCollins)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

EDITORIAL NOTEBOOK;
Ferment in the Think Tanks: Learning to Live With No Global Threat

BYLINE: By David C. Unger

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 666 words


I first noticed the change last spring. Foreign policy arguments abruptly
shifted ground. Familiar people took unfamiliar positions. Mellifluous talkers
fell silent. The issue of Communist power, the centerpiece of U.S. foreign
policy debate for 45 years, was no longer of immediate concern. A change so
momentous required more than a mere pause for breath.

The intellectual retooling was easiest to trace in the seminars where
journalists, government policy makers and academic specialists get together
month after month, year after year. Cold warriors now talk about withdrawing
American forces from Europe and counsel caution on Iraq. Arms controllers speak
of the folly of trying to prescribe detailed arrangements for regimes that are
still in flux. Human rights lawyers now worry not just about pursuing torturers,
but also about how new civilian governments can minimize conflicts with their
armed forces.

Before the upheavals of 1989-90, the people who sit around and talk about
foreign policy generally sorted themselves into three broad groups. The conflict
managers saw the Soviet Union as simply The Opponent, Brand X. For these social
scientists, turmoil anywhere in the world was a threat to be managed, either by
political and diplomatic action or, in extreme cases, by military force.

The ideological anti-Communists called themselves conservatives, but in the
Reagan era they became radical apostles of armed struggle in Afghanistan,
Nicaragua and Angola, and of strikes and sit-ins against the regimes of Eastern
Europe. They approached all international developments with one question: Do
they help the free world, or its Communist foes?

Finally, there were the human-rightists. They worried that the grievances of the
poor and oppressed would be ignored in the course of big power interventions.
They cast each crisis in local terms; their concerns reached into the planet's
remotest corners, from Brazilian Indian reservations to the border camps of
Cambodian refugees.

What united the three schools was the assumption that America was destined
forever to play the role of a global superpower: managing crises, or fighting
Communism or cozying up to human rights violators from Chile to Korea.

With the collapse of Communism, Americans are asking why their country must
expensively involve itself in what suddenly seem the minor political details of
apparently unthreatening societies like Chad or Panama or even Kuwait. Foreign
policy specialists thus have a common professional interest in saving their
specialty from the scrap heap.

A few still talk as if nothing had happened, playing their China cards even
after the card tables have been folded up and taken away, pretending that NATO
can soldier on as an anti-Soviet alliance and drawing facile analogies between
Saddam Hussein and Hitler. But many have begun to grope for new understandings
and prescriptions.

Finding them won't be easy. After Pearl Harbor, Americans switched from
isolationism to a World War globalism and then to a cold war globalism. Both
were premised on mortal threats -- first the Third Reich, then the Evil Empire.
We've had no real experience just living among nations. We all have to learn new
approaches to our relations with the outside world.

Ideally, these approaches will reflect America's values and democratic choices.
Grass-roots America has been disillusioned with the foreign policy establishment
ever since its supposedly best and brightest products engineered the debacle of
Vietnam. Now there's less need to defer to the expertise of national security
specialists. The events of the last two years have had a leveling effect. The
conversations of the experts are not all that different from the conversations
at dinner tables across America. They've become more humble, less apocalyptic
and more fruitful.

It's time for the public to catch on, relax and join in. It's a chance for
America's people to reclaim the country's policy from the mandarins.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 6, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 941 words


NIGHT STUDIO: A Memoir of Philip Guston, by Musa Mayer. (Penguin, $11.95.) The
daughter of the artist Philip Guston, a contemporary of Pollock, de Kooning and
Rothko, describes the difficulties of living with a famous and sometimes
neglectful man. "As much an autobiography as a memoir of her father, 'Night
Studio' is a rich study in father-daughter relations," Jill Johnston said here
in 1988.

AN INNOCENT MILLIONAIRE, by Stephen Vizinczey. (University of Chicago, $11.95.)
The son of an itinerant movie extra gets a job at a Bahamian resort, hoping to
fulfill his childhood dream of recovering sunken treasure. The novel is "a rare
accomplishment, a contemporary adventure told with style, wit and wisdom," Sam
Tanenhaus said here in 1985. "This is a delicious entertainment that towers
above most commercial fiction." The University of Chicago Press has also
published a new edition of Stephen Vizinczey's 1966 novel IN PRAISE OF OLDER
WOMEN ($9.95.) In the book, a 13-year-old boy in postwar Austria acts as a pimp
for Hungarian refugee women seeking clients among the soldiers of the occupying
American forces. "Here is a delightful, charming, richly ironic book, not really
erotic at all," a reviewer said in 1966. "Put a fresh breeze up there on your
fiction shelves among all the neurotica."

RED VICTORY: A History of the Russian Civil War, by W. Bruce Lincoln.
(Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $14.95.) Seventy years ago, Russia was torn apart
by factional violence that still simmers in the Soviet Union today. Last year
our reviewer, John A. C. Greppin, praised the author for his "abiding
descriptive powers; he presents a vast warring frontier filled with people who,
no matter how familiar their names and actions have become, often baffle us."

ORDINARY MONEY, by Louis B. Jones. (Penguin, $7.95.) Two California teen-agers,
the plain Kim Paschke and the voluptuous Cindy Potts, find a crate of $20 bills
that Cindy's father is hiding in the Paschkes' garage. " 'Ordinary Money' is an
uproariously satirical book, the product of an opulent imagination," Marianne
Gingher said here last year. "Although the author's lavish use of imagery
sometimes borders on the spendthrift, I say spend it."

HIGHER THAN HOPE: The Authorized Biography of Nelson Mandela, by Fatima Meer.
(Harper Perennial, $10.95.) Written by a friend of the Nelson Mandela family,
this biography of the antiapartheid leader "comes at the right moment to cast
new light on the man whose political will and skill are already dramatically
affecting the future of South Africa," Gail M. Gerhart said in The Book Review
last year.

A FARM UNDER A LAKE, by Martha Bergland. (Vintage Contemporaries, $9.95.) On a
trip to the Illinois farmland that she left 20 years ago, Janet Hawn meets an
old lover -- the brother of the man she is married to. "While Ms. Bergland
obviously knows her way around a farm -- the grease, the manure, the machinery
and the men -- her real expertise is in unraveling the psyches of the women who
make those farms run," Dan O'Brien said here in 1989.

BONNIE PRINCE CHARLIE: A Biography, by Carolly Erickson. (Quill/Morrow, $12.95.)
Once a hero throughout the Continent, Bonnie Prince Charlie, the young pretender
to the English throne, spent his last years drunk and brokenhearted over a reign
that never began. From these "crisply written pages there emerges a convincing
picture of Charles Stuart, stripped of the myths which over the years have
accumulated around him, yet never reduced to the obstinate, self-destructive
charlatan some other authors have portrayed," Christopher Hibbert said here in
1989.

DIRTY WORK, by Larry Brown. (Vintage Contemporaries, $9.95.) Lying side by side
in a V.A. hospital, a black man and a white man, both injured in Vietnam,
exchange stories about how their lives were changed by the war. "This is an
unforgettable, unshakable novel," Rick Bass said here in 1989. "In it, griefs
and joys are met not at a delicate, self-consciously artistic angle but head-on,
with a force that is both subtle and powerful -- and above all compassionate."

THE SINEWS OF POWER: War, Money and the English State, 1688-1783, by John
Brewer. (Harvard University, $11.95.) A historian tells how Britain built the
financial and government bureaucracy that allowed it to change from a backwater
into a world power. The book is "a complicated, technical history, but one
enlivened rather than burdened by its wealth of statistics and inventories, as
well as by the details of the working lives of the unsung clerks and copyists
who carried out the tasks of administration," David Simpson said here in 1989.

ANCESTORS, by Robyn Davidson. (Penguin, $8.95.) An orphan, sent to live with an
eccentric aunt in Australia, finds her way to Sydney, where she works in a
gambling den, consorts with leftist revolutionaries, begins a career as a
trapeze artist and goes on to become an American physicist's wife. "Charming,
funny, frequently affecting, briskly plotted and beautifully phrased,
'Ancestors' is like a weekend of conversation with a zestful and talented writer
-- a writer we can't wait to meet again," Ron Hansen said here in 1989.

LADY OF THE BEASTS: Ancient Images of the Goddess and Her Sacred Animals, by
Buffie Johnson. (Har perSanFrancisco, $24.95.) An artist shows how images of
goddesses and animals form a universal theme in ancient societies. In 1989 our
reviewer, Kathryn Allen Rabuzzi, praised the book for its "magnificent photos,
many in color, of stunning art works created by our paleolithic, neolithic and
Bronze Age ancestors: cave paintings, vessels, figurines and assorted objets
d'art."

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Stephen Vizinczey

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 6, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION;
The Couple Next Door? Just Folks Whose Phone Is Tapped

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1681 words

DATELINE: BURBANK, Calif.


A few minutes into the first episode of "Under Cover," ABC's new weekly series
on life as a spy in the post-cold war era, an American intelligence agent
operating under deepest cover from Iraqi-occupied Kuwait goes to a safe house
and calls her boss back in Washington. Over a top-secret line and with agency
brass hovering in the background, he informs her that her husband, also a
veteran operative, has just been sent from headquarters to Baghdad on the most
delicate of missions. "Who's with the kids?" she asks, worry furrowing her brow.
"Your mother," her superior replies.

It is hard to imagine such a moment taking place in "Mission Impossible," "The
Man From U.N.C.L.E.," "Secret Agent," "I Spy" or any of the various other
cloak-and-dagger series network television has periodically offered up over the
years. But "Under Cover," which will have a two-hour debut tomorrow night at 9
before moving to its regular slot on Saturday, also at 9, aims to show something
more of the world of espionage than the usual derring-do of a James Bond or a
Napoleon Solo. With Anthony John Denison in the role of National Intelligence
Agency operative Dylan Del'Amico and Linda Purl as Kate Del'Amico, his wife and
colleague, the series also sets out to explore another realm: that of the spy as
spouse, parent and neighbor.

"Part of the idea is to do for this whole arena what a serious show like 'Hill
Street Blues' or 'L.A. Law' does for cops and lawyers," said William Broyles
Jr., creator of the program and, with his partner John Sacret Young, its
executive producer. "We want to make it a show about real people who happen to
be spies, ordinary people who could live next door to us and are put in these
very difficult moral dilemmas. What happens when you're a spy and you go home
like everybody else to your kids and your house in the suburbs? It's an area
that hasn't been tackled before, so it's worth taking a chance."

At the same time, Mr. Broyles, a Vietnam veteran and former editor in chief of
Newsweek magazine, has also sought to keep the action quotient high and, as he
put it, "abreast of current events." Tomorrow's pilot, more timely at the moment
than when it was filmed a year ago, deals with a K.G.B. plot to bring down
Mikhail S. Gorbachev by fomenting domestic turmoil in the Soviet Union.

Later episodes find the Del'Amicos attempting to sabotage Iraq's biological
warfare program, negotiating with East European spies up for sale, uncovering
connections between the Irish Republican Army and South Africa, cooperating with
the K.G.B. against common enemies, and grappling with Congress and the
restrictions it has imposed on intelligence activities on American soil.

To ABC, the dual focus on the spy's life at work and life at home is essential
to the success it hopes the program will have. "The whole subject of spying is
something in which the country has shown interest, whether it's Tom Clancy
novels or James Bond movies," said Robert A. Iger, president of ABC
Entertainment. "It's something that has been dealt with countless times on
television with elements of comedy or fantasy. But this isn't a rock 'em, sock
'em action show, nor a domestic drama. It's a combination of both, and I can't
recall a show that has done that" in the spy realm.

In their search for authenticity, the makers of "Under Cover" have turned to
Frank Snepp as their story editor and technical consultant. Mr. Snepp, who was a
C.I.A. agent in Vietnam, was, as he put it, "one of the last Americans to be
hauled off the roof of the embassy in Saigon" in 1975. As technical consultant
to "Under Cover," he has provided details about the shape and color of C.I.A.
badges and the design of the agency's Langley, Va., headquarters as well as
information on cloak-and-dagger procedures.

Mr. Snepp also helped write two of the program's first dozen scripts, creating a
situation unique in the annals of network television: he must submit every word
he writes to the C.I.A.'s Publications Review Board before it can be made
public. As the author of "Decent Interval," the controversial 1977 best seller
critical of the agency, he became the subject of a 1980 Supreme Court ruling
that permanently limits the right of agents when it comes to writing about their
experiences as C.I.A. members.

"I have to clear all my scripts with the agency, and so far as I know, I'm the
only American screenwriter who currently has to do that," said the 47-year-old
Mr. Snepp, who this fall lost a court battle to ease the restrictions on his
activities. "I try to anticipate problems that might arise, and I clear even my
outlines and treatments with the Publications Review Board. If I make massive
changes in a script or they are dictated because of shooting or financial
concerns, and then I have to go back through the clearance process, we would
have to shut down, which would be devastating. So I am very careful about what I
write." According to the producers, the C.I.A. has thus far not demanded any
script changes.

Though Mr. Snepp said he had heard through the intelligence grapevine that
C.I.A. officials "were very concerned that I was involved, given my history with
the agency," he described himself as "not an agency basher, but a loyal critic"
determined not to give away secrets of the trade that could jeopardize his
former colleagues.

"We were spitballing one particular episode, and I couldn't tell anybody we were
getting into an area I knew to be highly classified," he said. "So I spoke to
Bill about it, and without telling him what it was all about, I said we would
have to pull back a bit." On all other counts, though, he said, "my job is to
get the actors looking at the world the way you do if you are an intelligence
agent."

The C.I.A., as is its custom, declined to comment on any aspect of "Under
Cover," other than to say that current officials had not seen any of the
completed episodes and were not involved in their making. But the Association of
Former Intelligence Officers, a Washington-based group that strives to project a
favorable image of the agency, was eager to make its view known to the makers of
the series.

In September, the group's executive director, David D. Whipple, a former C.I.A.
station chief in Cambodia and the Congo, accepted an invitation from the
producers to bring a group of former agents and their families to a Warner
Brothers soundstage here for a spirited exchange with Mr. Snepp and other former
agents-turned-critics. During this daylong session the group fielded questions
from the show's writers and actors about the reality of life under cover.

That meeting left a strong impression on the cast and, according to the two
stars of the series, helped them formulate their portrayals. "The mistakes of
the C.I.A. are spread throughout the press," Ms. Purl said. "But their successes
are for the most part unknown. I consider these people to be devotees of
freedom."

Mr. Denison, who said that "during my first few years in college, I initially
bought into the negative image of the C.I.A. that had been painted in movies and
the media," said he now believes that "national security is a necessary function
of government" and has come to appreciate "the guy out there in the field who
sometimes has to make Solomon-like decisions and struggles to maintain a sense
of morality." Like several others involved in the series, Mr. Denison also
mentioned the espionage novels of John le Carre as a bench mark.

Of Mr. Denison's character, Mr. Broyles said, "I was looking for a street kind
of guy, an urban ethnic hero, who had the basic neighborhood values." It is no
accident, he continued, that the name Del'Amico contains overtones of "loyalty
and patriotism, because this is a show so much about those subjects."

Nevertheless, the intelligence community remains unsure of what to expect from
the series. "I'm very nervous and worried about it," Mr. Whipple said. "I'm
hoping it will come out positive and not make a mockery of us.

"I have found that Hollywood is not big on accuracy," he went on, but he added
he was willing to cooperate with the producers because "a person like me is
loaded with self-confidence. I thought I could manipulate things so that they
would come out positive."

For his part, Mr. Broyles said that he was eager to present "an entertaining
show," especially since he and his associates "have had contact with the strong
loyalists and the critics both, because they all have good stories." But he
added, "This is not a documentary about the C.I.A., and we carry no brief for
them."

TOUGH TIME



During its initial run, at least, "Under Cover" will be broadcast Saturday
nights at 9, just ahead of "Twin Peaks" and in place of "China Beach." That
series, a Broyles-Young production set during the Vietnam War, has won critical
praise and four Emmy Awards during its two and a half years on the air. (One
Emmy was won by Dana Delaney, in photograph, for her portrayal of an Army
nurse.) But the show failed to dazzle in the ratings this fall when it was
shifted from Monday at 10 P.M.

"This is a tough time period on a tough night," Robert A. Iger, president of ABC
Entertainment, said of the network's scheduling of "Under Cover." "We're
prepared to be patient. We think 'Under Cover' offers good counterprogramming to
'Golden Girls' and 'Empty Nest,' " two NBC shows that have dominated their
Saturday slots in recent years.

Mr. Broyles, with the bittersweet experience of "China Beach" very much in mind,
said that he and Mr. Young consider "Under Cover" "a classic 10 o'clock
weeknight show."

"I don't think either of these shows is best suited for this time slot," Mr.
Broyles said. "But the network feels strongly there is an audience for a more
serious show at that time, and we're the ones who have been given the helmet,
the pack and the rifle and told to go do it."

Meanwhile, "China Beach" is technically on "hiatus," with seven new episodes
ordered but yet to run. The series is expected to return this spring, but its
future is hazy.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Anthony John Denison and Linda Purl play a husband-and-wife team
of intelligence agents in ABC's "Under Cover," making its debut tomorrow (Frank
Micelotta/ABC ) (pg. 34); William Broyles, the creator of ABC's "Under Cover"
(ABC); Frank Snepp, a former C.I.A. agent, is technical consultant (pg. 29);
Dana Delaney (ABC) (pg. 29)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 6, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Text of the Radio Address by the President

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 820 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 5


Following is the text of the radio address by President Bush today, as issued by
the White House:

As the new year begins, new challenges unfold -- challenges to America and the
future of our world. Simply put: 1990 saw Iraq invade and occupy Kuwait. 1991
will see Iraq withdraw, preferably by choice; by force, if need be. It is my
most sincere hope 1991 is a year of peace. I've seen the hideous face of war and
counted the costs of conflict in friends lost. I remember this all too well, and
have no greater concern than the well-being of our men and women stationed in
the Persian Gulf. True, their morale is sky-high. True, if they are called upon
to fight the aggressors, they will do their job courageously, professionally
and, in the end, decisively. There will be no more Vietnams.

But we should go the extra mile before asking our servicemen and women to stand
in harm's way. We should, and we have. The United Nations, with the full support
of the United States, has already tried to peacefully pressure Iraq out of
Kuwait, implementing economic sanctions, and securing the condemnation of the
world in the form of no less than 12 resolutions of the U.N. Security Council.

This week, we've taken one more step. I have offered to have Secretary of State
James Baker meet with Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz in Switzerland.
yesterday, we received word that Iraq has accepted our offer to meet in Geneva.

 Baker's Message

This will not be secret diplomacy at work. Secretary Baker will restate, in
person, a message for Saddam Hussein: Withdraw from Kuwait unconditionally and
immediately, or face the terrible consequences.

Eleven days from today, Saddam Hussein will either have met the United Nations
deadline for a full and unconditional withdrawal, or he will have once again
defied the civilized world. This is a deadline for Saddam Hussein to comply with
the United Nations resolution, not a deadline for our own Armed Forces. Still,
time is running out. It's running out because each day that passes brings real
costs.

Saddam already poses a strategic threat to the capital cities of Egypt, Saudi
Arabia, Turkey, Israel and Syria, as well as our own men and women in the gulf
region. In fact, Saddam has used chemical weapons of mass destruction against
innocent villagers, his own people. Each day that passes brings Saddam Hussein
further on the path to developing biological and nuclear weapons and the
missiles to deliver them. If Saddam corners the world energy market, he can then
finance further aggression, terror and blackmail. Each day that passes increases
Saddam's worldwide threat to democracy.

 Economic Effects

The struggling newborn democracies of Eastern Europe and Latin America already
face a staggering challenge in making the transition to a free market. But the
added weight of higher oil prices is a crushing burden they cannot afford. And
our own economy is suffering, suffering the effects of higher oil prices and
lower growth stemming from Saddam's aggression.

Each day that passes, Saddam's forces also fortify and dig in deeper into
Kuwait. We risk paying a higher price in the most precious currency of all --
human life -- if we give Saddam more time to prepare for war. And each day that
passes is another day of fear, suffering and terror for the people of Kuwait,
many who risked their lives to shelter and hide Americans from Iraqi soldiers.
As the Emir of Kuwait said to our Vice President just last week, those who
advocate waiting longer for sanctions to work do not have to live under such
brutal occupation.

As I have discussed with members of Congress, just two days ago and in our many
other consultations, economic sanctions are taking a toll, but they are still
not forcing Saddam out of Kuwait. Nor do we know when or even if they will be
successful. As a result, America and her partners in this unprecedented
coalition are sharing the burden of this important mission; and we are ready to
use force to defend a new order emerging among the nations of the world, a world
of sovereign nations living in peace.

 Forces at the Front

We have seen too often in this century how quickly any threat to one becomes a
threat to all. At this critical moment in history, at a time the cold war is
fading into the past, we cannot fail. At stake is not simply some distant
country called Kuwait. At stake is the kind of world we will inhabit.

Last Thanksgiving, I broke bread with some of our men and women on the front
lines. They understand why we are in Saudi Arabia, and what we may have to do. I
witnessed courage unfazed by the closeness of danger and determination
undiminished by the harsh desert sun. These men and women are America's finest.
We owe each of them our gratitude and full support. That is why we must all
stand together, not as Republicans or Democrats, conservatives or liberals, but
as Americans.


LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush speaking on the Persian Gulf crisis during
recording of his radio address Friday. (White House Photo via Agence
France-Presse)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 6, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Medical Teams in Gulf Disagree Over Readiness

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON with ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1769 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia


Senior medical officers in the Persian Gulf say they are prepared to treat heavy
casualties in case of combat, but many of the doctors and nurses who will handle
patients say they lack important medical supplies and modern equipment.

Casualty estimates, as well as numbers of hospital beds and medical personnel,
are among the Pentagon's most closely held secrets. Officials say the
information could tip off Iraq to the allied battle plan.

But military medical planners say they are relying on a range of equipment --
from scores of 50-bed mobile Air Force field hospitals to fully equipped
1,000-bed Navy hospital ships -- in preparation for the "worst case," an outcome
that some experts say could result in as many as 10,000 to 20,000 American
wounded and dead among the more than 430,000 troops expected to be deployed in
the region by the end of the month.

Assurances Are Undercut

"We've been ready to manage the patients from the beginning," Col. Robert P.
Belihar, the military's senior medical officer in the gulf, said in an
interview. "Each and every day of this operation, the medical community has
asked the question 'What if?' and then planned accordingly. We'll have thousands
and thousands of beds."

Some doctors and nurses here, as well as Congressional experts who have visited
American field hospitals, have voiced concern that official assurances are
undercut by a shortage of specialized surgeons and nurses as well as such basic
supplies as sutures and intravenous machines.

Although they say they are confident that they can provide basic medical care, a
number of doctors and nurses warn that they are still without essential
equipment, even though a war against Iraq may be only weeks, or even days, away.
And some say they are being cut out of essential planning for the treatment of
wounded soldiers.

"We'll end up practicing medicine as it was practiced in the 50's or 60's," said
a Navy surgeon, Lieut. Comdr. Bob Lynch of Cincinnati, who has been frustrated
by his inability to obtain advanced sutures for use in his mobile operating room
in the Saudi desert.

"I don't think anybody is going to die because I don't have the sutures, but I
could operate faster with them," he said. "We're a little frustrated that we
don't have state-of-the-art equipment."

Five months after the first deployment of American troops to the gulf, the Army
is just now replacing the last of its Vietnam War-era field hospitals with
larger, better equipped units.

The Navy has two 1,000-bed hospital ships off Bahrain. But at current staffing
levels, the ships have only three-quarters of their full complement of doctors
and nurses and, for now, each can handle about 500 patients at a time.

Navy officials say that ship staffing is planned with a built-in ability to
expand quickly if hostilities break out and casualties begin streaming in.

Other medical abilities are stretched to capacity. The military, which has
already stepped up blood drives at 84 installations around the country, has for
the first time tapped civilian blood banks in the United States for
contributions of 2,000 units a week. A unit is equal to about a pint. Military
planners say they will need an average of four units of blood per casualty.

Colonel Belihar and other senior military physicians here insist that medical
equipment has always been in place to deal with heavy casualities, and that
capacity grows daily as thousands of hospital beds, tons of medical supplies and
planeloads of doctors, nurses and technicians pour in from the United States and
Europe.

Torrent of Medical Personnel

"The flow of medical personnel and hospital units has become a torrent," the
Surgeon General of the Army, Lieut. Gen. Frank F. Ledford Jr., said in an
interview in Washington. "Between the three services, we'll have enough beds to
serve any reasonable contingency."

Colonel Belihar and others acknowledge that spot shortages of certain
specialists and equipment may exist, but that overall care is not jeopardized.

At lower ranks, however, doctors and other medical workers in Saudi Arabia warn
that even if there are enough hospital beds, some medical equipment is still in
short supply. Many say they are awaiting vital supplies that, in some cases,
were requested two or three months ago.

At Navy Fleet Hospital Five, the largest American combat field hospital in Saudi
Arabia, Comdr. Suzanne Morgan, a nurse who specializes in emergency care, put in
a request last fall for a suction machine used to clear a patient's respiratory
system. As of late December, it had still not arrived.

'Not a Frill'

"I consider that essential equipment," she said. "It is not a frill."

At the same time, Commander Morgan said her staff was able to manage without
other modern medical equipment that would be considered essential in a hospital
in the United States. Electronic monitors and pumps for intravenous drips are
one example, she said

"We're going back to the basics," she said. "What that means is that most of my
company have never actually had to eyeball an IV drip before and they will now.
We'll just have to eyeball our patients more."

Lieut. Comdr. Terry Aragoni, a 36-year-old surgeon from Syracuse, N.Y., who is
working at a Marine supply camp in the Saudi desert known as Northstar, said he
remained concerned about how wounded troops would be transported during a war.

Consultation Called Improved

Until recently, he said, doctors had largely been cut out of planning for
transportation of wounded soldiers from the front lines to hospitals.

"There is more consultation with us now than there had been," he said. "But this
is a big picture item that is still an area of real concern for us."

Since August and September, when American field hospitals were stretched
especially thin as commanders gave priority to fielding combat troops and
equipment, the military has filled out what had been a skeletal support system.
Each service is responsible for providing enough doctors, nurses and medical
services to care for its anticipated share of casualties in a war. But if
fighting began, the medical staffs and equipment would be pooled among all
branches of the military.

Through Several Echelons

The military plans to move casualties through several echelons of care in a war.

On the front lines, medics attached to fighting units would give wounded
soldiers first aid, carrying them on stretchers to the rear where they would be
evacuated in ambulances to battalion aid stations, 10 to 15 miles behind the
lines.

At the clearing stations, a doctor and corpsmen would evaluate the injured and
provide emergency care until they could be transported by helicopter or
ambulance to one of several medicial facilities: a 60-bed hospital near the
front lines, a larger fleet hospital, one of the Navy's two hospital ships or,
for the most seriously injured, military hospitals in Europe or the United
States.

Colonel Belihar said that the Defense Department's rule of thumb was to transfer
a wounded soldier out of the battle area if he could not return to combat within
seven days. "The concept is to keep the patient moving," he said.

Air Force and Navy Hospitals

The Air Force will rely on dozens of mobile field hospitals, which can each
accommodate 50 casualities. The Air Force will have the ability to evacuate
1,800 patients a day to hospitals in Europe. In addition to its hospital ships,
the Navy has operated the 500-bed fleet hospital since last summer and is
planning to open two more shortly.

Troop-carrying ships and the six aircraft carriers the Navy plans to have in the
region have medical care and would make available 2,000 more hospital beds.

The Army, which has the largest number of troops in the gulf and is therefore
responsible for the largest number of medical units, is expected to have 10,000
to 12,000 hospital beds in the region once the buildup is completed, although
only about half of those are now in place, medical officials said.

Military medical officials say the Navy and the Air Force have adequate
facilities to deal with their possible casualties, but the Army for several
reasons is lagging behind and would rely on hospitals run by other military
branches or on Saudi and Bahrain hospitals.

"The Navy isn't nervous about taking care of Navy and Marine medical
requirements," said a senior Navy official. "The big question is what kind of
additional load would we have to handle from the Army."

The medical needs of the first 250,000 American troops deployed to the Persian
Gulf were met primarily by active-duty physicians, nurses and technicians. But
as the United States force increases, medical personnel in the reserves are
expected to take on a large share of the medical responsibilities.

Reserves account for about three quarters of the Army's total medical personnel,
and the two new Navy fleet hospitals are expected to be operated by reservists.

Under the Pentagon's current authority, however, doctors and nurses called up
from the reserves and National Guard can stay on active duty only for six
months. The first wave of medical reservists will have to be sent home beginning
in February unless Congress approves a Defense Department request to extend the
callup and stave off serious shortages.

Exhausting the Supply

"The Army can get the number of doctors and nurses it needs over there, but once
they are there, that's all you've got -- you've exhausted your supply," said a
Senate aide who is following the medical readiness in the gulf. "When the Army's
call-up authority expires, you're going to be in a world of hurt."

Moreover, military manpower experts, such as Sen. John Glenn, Democrat of Ohio,
chairman of the Senate Armed Service's subcommittee on military personnel, have
warned that there are dangerously low levels of key specialists in the reserves,
including anesthesiologists, orthopedic surgeons and operating-room nurses.

"We're already having to strip some people out of stateside hospitals and
medical facilities to go over to the gulf, and it's not going to leave that many
for rotation if we're there for the long haul," Senator Glenn said.

The Navy said recently that it was requiring all active-duty medical personnel
to stay in uniform indefinitely to stem any possible shortages in the gulf or in
the United States.

The Army, which already has a freeze on its medical personnel, summoned 15
physician assistants from retirement last month. It was the first such callback
of retired medical personnel since the Berlin crisis in 1961.


LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "We'll end up practicing medicine as it was practiced in the
50's or 60's," said Lieut. Comdr. Bob Lynch, a Navy surgeon from Cincinnati. He
has been frustrated by his inability to obtain advanced sutures for use in his
mobile operating room in Saudi Arabia; Lieut. Comdr. Terry Aragoni, a surgeon
from Syracuse who is working at a Marine camp in the Saudi desert, is concerned
about how wounded troops would be transported during a war. (Photographs by
Philip Shenon/The New York Times) (pg. 6)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 6, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Defeating Iraq Would Create Worse Problems

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 379 words


To the Editor:

Your welcome reinforcement of the demand for Iraq's complete withdrawal from
Kuwait in "No Booty for Iraq. None." (editorial, Dec. 24) commendably suggests
that nonaction beyond diplomacy and the embargo remains a politically viable
policy.

It might be further argued that if war should come, the danger to the long-run
interests of the United States would not arise from an ambiguous conclusion to
the hostilities, but from quite the reverse.

Every nation wishes it could fight the next war to revise the mistakes of the
last one. But in our intense desire to avoid another debacle like Vietnam, we
run the real risk of so devastating Iraq that the ensuing power vacuum would
invite at least equally perilous consequences.

In the wake of Saddam Hussein's defeat, unless the United States were willing to
occupy Iraq, the Islamic fundamentalist prime movers in Iran would not be able
to resist the temptation to march on Baghdad. Similarly, Hafez al-Assad, the
Syrian leader, seeks a regional hegemony that would vindicate the expansionist
Assyrian Empire of ancient days.

There is, however, a calculable resolution. If the United States does not wish
to safeguard the front lines of Iraq against Syria, Iran and possibly the Soviet
Union, as well, and if we are reluctant to entrust such a task to protean and
usually inadequate United Nations forces, then Saddam Hussein himself,
effectively restrained, could remain as perfect a foil for us as he was during
his war with Iran.

Restoration of the balance of power in the Persian Gulf region need not depend
on eliminating Saddam Hussein, but on channeling his latent threat toward
Syria's Hafez al-Assad and the Islamic fundamentalists.

As for Kuwait, aside from reinstating its independence, there are not enough
crocodiles in all the Nile Valley to shed the metaphorical tears necessary to
lift the Emir back onto his autocratic throne. On the other hand, the allies
could probably enable Saddam Hussein to recompense the Kuwaiti people for their
suffering.

By this path, we could satisfy the United Nations and ourselves without actually
harming the people of Iraq, with whom we may have more in common than anyone has
yet dared to suggest.

HARVARD HOLLENBERG
New York, Dec. 25, 1990

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 6, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Defeating Iraq Would Create Worse Problems;
Winners and Losers

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 372 words


To the Editor:

Roger Fisher, professor of law at Harvard University and director of the Harvard
Negotiation Project, has said that unless we answer two questions about Iraq's
presence in Kuwait, we will be unable to resolve the conflict. The first is
"What happens to Iraq if it remains in Kuwait?" The second is "What happens to
Iraq if it withdraws?"

We are certainly addressing the first question. Economic sanctions have taken a
tremendous toll on Iraq and its people, and President Bush's tough rhetoric and
military presence are definite responses to the first question.

However, as Professor Fisher also points out, until we begin to address the
second question, Saddam Hussein has no incentive to leave Kuwait, no matter how
intolerable we make the circumstances. And until he sees that the fire won't be
hotter than the frying pan, he will not leave.

The sanctions have not extricated President Hussein from Kuwait and restored the
Kuwaiti Government because of our failure to address the second question. One
problem with asking it is our very normal reaction against allowing Saddam
Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait without being punished, even if all of our
demands are met.

This view, however, assumes that there can be a winner and a loser (we win, they
lose), which is clearly the option we would prefer. Yet, of the three scenarios,
win-lose, win-win or lose-lose, the win-lose scenario is not practical or
possible.

Resorting to military force, even assuming victory, would result in the loss of
thousands of lives, create a schism in this country deeper than Vietnam, deepen
an economic recession and perhaps lead to a depression, result in the loss of
the oil fields we are there to protect, unite the Arab nations of the world
against the United States, lead to terrorism within our borders, promote an
attack on Israel and perhaps initiate the use of nuclear weapons. Thus, even in
winning, we would lose.

When left with the remaining options, win-win or lose-lose, win-win becomes our
best course. It is now time for us to discover creatively the win-win scenario.

With the President's deadline of Jan. 15, we had better get on with it quickly.

JAMES F. CARSON JR.
Macon, Ga., Dec. 26, 1990

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 6, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Asian Gangs in New York -- A Special Report;
Immigrant Waves From Asia Bring an Underworld Ashore

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2573 words


As waves of Chinese and Southeast Asian immigrants flood New York City in search
of better lives, their expanding neighborhoods are being plagued by increasingly
violent street gangs and new criminal enterprises that law-enforcement officials
say may come to rival the Mafia in its heyday.

The crimes, concentrated almost entirely in the hard-working Chinese community
itself, are likely to mount even more as three forces separately challenge the
traditional order of the tongs, the fraternal societies that have ruled
Chinatown for generations.

One is the growth of street gangs fighting for control of burgeoning Asian
communities in Queens and Brooklyn. Another is an effort by the criminal Triad
societies in Hong Kong to establish a foothold in New York in anticipation of
the 1997 takeover of the British colony by China. The third is the emergence of
ruthlessly violent gangs of young Vietnamese.

'No Rules, No Values'

The criminal activity is expanding from the longstanding enterprises of
protection rackets, gambling and prostitution into extortion, armed robbery,
large-scale heroin importing and the smuggling of illegal aliens, who are often
held as virtual slaves to pay for their passage.

"There are no norms anymore, no rules, no values; the code has broken down,"
said Dr. Ko Lin Chin, a sociologist studying Chinatown's criminal subculture.
"That is why it is so violent."

Chinatown has burst its traditional boundaries. The new Asian community is
expanding north and east -- along East Broadway, glistening with new banks and
office towers shielding Hong Kong investments, to Division Street, where
immigrants from Fujian province in southeast China are clustered, to Centre
Street, where the Taiwanese are, to Henry Street, where the Burmese can be
found, and along Canal, where the Vietnamese gangs dominate.

But like other immigrant groups in the city, the Chinese have moved out along
the subway lines, particularly the No. 7 to Queens -- the train they call the
Orient Express -- through Jackson Heights, Elmhurst and Flushing. Where the
subway ends, in the shadow of Shea Stadium, new high-rises and signs in Chinese
mark a rapidly growing community. None of the established Chinese tongs operate
there, and that has left a power vacuum for the youth gangs to try to fill.

"Queens is the future, it's open for picking, it's virgin territory," said Lloyd
Hutchinson, a Shanghai-born police detective who went undercover in Chinatown
gambling dens a dozen years ago and is now on the Queens District Attorney's
investigative squad. "It's not sanctioned territory like Chinatown. The question
is who's going to be the first one to take over."

Law-enforcement officials, struggling to penetrate a traditionally closed
society that rarely cooperates with the police or prosecutors or talks to
outsiders, concede that they can see only the tip of the iceberg. The outside
world becomes aware of the level of crime there only when a startling shooting
occurs -- for example, the slaying of a leader of the Vietnamese gang Born to
Kill on Canal Street last July. At his funeral in New Jersey, attackers, who are
still unknown to the police, pulled weapons from behind their funeral wreaths
and sprayed the mourners with gunfire, wounding a dozen.

But a recent series of arrests and indictments gives an idea of the scope of the
crime and violence. One was a raid by Federal Drug Enforcement Administration
agents on a heroin ring in Brooklyn that seized $8.6 million in cash, the
largest such haul in the United States. In Chicago, 29 people, including several
New York Chinatown civic leaders, were indicted on Federal charges of operating
a nationwide gambling ring. Last week in the Bronx, the police raided a crowded
apartment to rescue an illegal immigrant who had been kidnapped and beaten with
a hammer because he had not paid $30,000 to a ring that that had smuggled him
into New York. Thirteen of his captors, themselves all illegal immigrants from
Fujian province, were arrested.

Last month, a joint police and Federal Bureau of Investigation task force
interrupted an investigation of youth gangs extorting Asian merchants in Queens
to arrest seven leaders of the Green Dragons gang. The authorities said the
arrests broke up a plan by the Green Dragons for a shootout with a rival gang,
the White Tigers, who were shaking down the Elmhurst and Flushing areas. Among
the 29 guns seized were two Uzi submachine guns and a Mac-10 machine pistol.
Investigators believe the rivalry has already led to a half-dozen killings.

"Every single business in Chinatown and Chinese areas of Queens is being
extorted, and sometimes not just by one gang," said Catherine E. Palmer, an
assistant United States attorney who specializes in organized crime in the Asian
communities. "Gangs are a day-to-day reality, a real problem. Look at all the
shootings that happen in Chinatown."

The Lords of Chinatown: A Union of Generations

In 1980, there were some 120,000 people from China in New York City; today,
Frank Vardi, a demographer with the city Planning Commission, estimates there
are 300,000 who are here legally and an unknown number who are not. The city's
Chinese population continues to grow by about 11,000 a year.

But the growth and expansion of the Chinese community, fostered by improving
United States relations with China and the 1965 Federal immigration act, which
removed longstanding racial restrictions on immigration, involve more than
numbers.

Under the restrictive policies, Chinatown's residents had been almost
exclusively Cantonese, descendants of poor farmers imported in the mid-19th
century to work in mines and on railroads.

In America they formed an institution known as the tong, which means "meeting
hall," drawing on their tradition of secret societies like the original Triads,
formed in the late 17th century to challenge invading Manchu rulers. The tongs
functioned in part like the self-help organizations of other immigrant groups,
providing protections against the larger society and such services as credit
unions. But they also formed enterprises like high-stakes basement gambling dens
and houses of prostitution that were part of the Chinese culture.

"The tongs, international in scope and enormously powerful, were in part
legitimate merchants' associations," prosecutors said in a brief filed in
Federal court in New York. "However, they and some of the individuals who led
them also sanctioned, participated in and profited from illegal activities."

Inside the traditional boundaries of Chinatown, a tong named On Leong dominates
Mott Street while the Hip Sing controls Pell Street and its environs. The 1970's
saw the emergence of criminal street gangs, largely composed of alienated youths
born in Hong Kong. They were eventually absorbed by the tongs, but not without a
number of gun battles, with the Ghost Shadows allied with the On Leong and the
Flying Dragons with the Hip Sing. Two lesser gangs, the Tong On and the Fuk
Ching, are each also affiliated with an adult association and claim turf on the
fringes of Chinatown.

"It's a symbiotic relationship," said Nancy Ryan, now the chief prosecutor in
the office of the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morganthau, who formed
what is called the "Jade Squad," concentrating on Asian-rooted crime.

From a tong "the gang gets protection, such as lawyers, under certain
circumstances and vastly increased power in the community," Ms. Ryan said. "The
tongs also get power, in the form of visible muscle. Most of the people in the
tongs could be perfectly respectable. They join to enhance their prestige. But
they are perpetuating gangs by giving them respectability."

Detective Hutchinson, who had a Chinese mother and a British father, said the
tongs' decision to join with the gangs was a mistake. "The tongs don't want this
level of violence, all this heat," he said. "But for them to get rid of these
kids now, they'd literally have to kill them."

The Enforcers: Young, Strong and Ruthless

Typically gangs are headed by a Dai Lo (elder brother), usually in his 20's.
They are paid to guard the tong-controlled gambling dens. They eat free in
neighborhood restaurants, scrawling the gang's name across the check. They
extort money from businesses, particularly restaurants, in return for
protection. They force businesses to buy ceremonial items like firecrackers,
cakes or orange plants for the moon festival or the Chinese new year. And at
gunpoint they rob people unlikely to complain, like winning high-stakes gamblers
and patrons of massage parlors where Korean prostitutes work.

The language used in extorting merchants, the police say, is often diffidently
polite -- although the implied threat is clear -- making prosecution difficult.

The gang members are recruited as young as 14 from high schools and junior high
schools. They are mainly foreign-born, have had trouble speaking English and are
failing in school. They see the easy money and exciting life of the gangs as a
sharp, pleasant contrast to that of their parents, both frequently working two
or three low-paying jobs in restaurants, laundries or garment sweatshops and
often crowded into cramped quarters with other relatives. There are flashy cars,
available women and guns stashed in communal gang apartments.

The gangsters' appeal extends to popular Chinese movies and videotapes, where
they are luridly portrayed. When the shooting at the New Jersey funeral took
place last July, there was a nearly identical scene in a film playing at the Sun
Sing movie theater on East Broadway.

Some progress has been made in weakening the On Leong and its youth gang, the
Ghost Shadows, through Federal indictments. The Chicago charges, for example,
named On Leong's president, along with two past presidents of the Chinatown
Merchant's Association, as leaders of a gambling ring. The On Leong leader,
Eddie T. C. Chan, had already fled the country two years ago ahead of the
mounting charges. Mr. Chan was one of five Hong Kong police sergeants who
abruptly departed in the midst of a corruption inquiry there; investigators in
New York say he is reputed to have arrived in Chinatown with about $19 million.
In New York he grew prominent in local politics.

The Hip Sing, with its and the affiliated Green Dragons, remains a powerful
force, although somewhat more restrained than On Leong. It is directed by the
aging Benny Eng, the reputed "Chinese Godfather."The former Green Dragon leader,
Johnny (Onionhead) Eng -- whose predecessor died of 14 bullet wounds in front of
the Hip Sing office building and Buddhist temple on Pell Street -- is awaiting
extradition from Hong Kong on Federal narcotics charges.

Five years ago, Ms. Ryan, on loan from the Manhattan District Attorney's office
to the Federal attorney's office, successfully prosecuted 21 Ghost Shadows,
using the more flexible Federal racketeering conspiracy laws to get around the
near impossiblity of persuading Chinese witnesses to testify in court.

"We had succeeded in constructing a nice, neat little model," Ms. Ryan recalled.
"Then two things happened -- the expansion to Queens and the advent of
narcotics. That changed everything."

The Wild Frontiers: Enter the Vietnamese

The growth of new Chinese communities in Queens meant that those areas were
outside the control of the Chinatown tongs. In effect this created a vacuum in
which the youth gangs operated unrestrained by adult organizations and without
clearly defined turf.

"Queens is like the Wild West; it's the frontier," said Dr. Chin, author of the
recently published "Chinese Subculture and Criminality" and a researcher with
the city's Criminal Justice office. "

The area is being contested by the White Tigers, a group that split off from the
Chinatown Ghost Shadows, and the Green Dragons, who are composed of Fujianese,
Vietnamese and others who have a reputation for being particularly violent. In
Chinatown, merchants can often negotiate demands down, but in Queens they just
pay up.

"The fight was over extortion money and territory," said Lieut. John O'Brien, a
police member of the joint task force with the F.B.I. that arrested the Green
Dragon leadership. "The White Tigers were actually making collections. They
showed no respect for the Green Dragons."

Teen-age Vietnamese refugees began appearing in the gangs about two and a half
years ago. The Chinese at first enlisted them as enforcers but later shunned
many of them, saying they were too violent even by the Chinese standards. The
Vietnamese then formed their own groups. One, the Gum Sing, operates along
Eighth Avenue in Brooklyn.

"The Vietnamese are willing to do pretty much anything to get a toehold," said
Ms. Palmer, who is a prosecutor in the office of the United States Attorney in
Brooklyn, Andrew J. Maloney. "The use of guns and other kinds of violence is
nothing to them."

Another Vietnamese gang is Born to Kill, a name derived from the phrase many
American soldiers wrote on their helmets in Vietnam. "When the B.T.K. popped up
on Canal Street, they were the craziest group that anybody had ever seen," Ms.
Ryan said.

Luke H. Rettler, the head of the Jade Squad in the Manhattan District Attorney's
office, estimates that about two-thirds of the roughly 40 indictments his group
has brought in the last two years involve Vietnamese gangs."They are a kind of
chaotic group," Mr. Rettler said. "They seem to do things -- like deciding on a
massage parlor to take off -- on the spur of the moment."

Since the shootings last summer and fall, however, the Vietnamese have been
absent from their usual haunts at Maria's coffee shop on Lafayette Street and
the Tung Nam Har mall on Canal. "Right now you couldn't find a B.T.K. if you
went through Chinatown with a fine-tooth comb," Mr. Rettler said.

Chinese smugglers now dominate the city's heroin market, bringing in "China
White" from the seat of the heroin trade, the Golden Triangle of Myanmar,
formerly Burma, and selling it in bulk to drug dealers, Federal drug officials
say. The drug comes in by plane, cargo ships, diplomatic pouches and even in
furniture.

Over the last two years, agents of the Drug Enforcement Agency in New York have
made 130 arrests, confiscated 200 pounds of heroin and seized $25 million in
drug-related assets, including $15 million in cash, houses in Florida, apartment
buildings, boats, jewelry stores and one of the biggest restaurants in
Chinatown, the Golden Palace, which was being used to launder money, the agency
said.

A second new criminal pursuit is the smuggling of illegal aliens, who promise to
pay about $30,000 to be taken to the United States, usually through South
America or Canada. Frequently the immigrants are held in a kind of bondage,
often forced to turn over their wages until they pay off the debt. Some are used
as drug couriers.

For the police and prosecutors, the major problem in dealing with Chinese crime
is the near-impossibility of getting witnesses to testify. Many fear reprisals;
others fear the authorities will deport them.

"This has always been a very insular community, and there is a natural cultural
problem, an inherent distrust from bad experiences in China or Hong Kong," Ms.
Palmer said. "That's why the Green Dragon case is very important. We're trying
to tell the community: 'We're here. We took them off the street.' "


LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 13, 1991, Sunday

CORRECTION:

An article last Sunday described the increasing power of Chinese and Southeast
Asian gangs in New York City. It reported that they were growing in number and
expanding into new types of crime.

An adjoining picture caption said that prostitution and gambling, "while held
illegal by the larger society, have traditionally been accepted in Chinatown."
Since prostitution and gambling also flourish outside Chinatown, the suggestion
that Chinese- Americans are more tolerant of these crimes than other Americans
was unwarranted.

The article referred to basement gambling dens and houses of prostitution as
"part of the Chinese culture." The implication that gambling and prostitution
are uniquely or especially Chinese problems was also unwarranted.

GRAPHIC: Photos: In Chinatown, rival Asian gangs control territories. On Pell
Street, which the police say is controlled by the Hip Sing tong, a reputed
gambling den operates from a basement, whose entrance is at left. Houses of
gambling and prostitution, while held illegal by the larger society, have
traditionally been accepted in Chinatown; The On Leong tong dominates Mott
Street in Chinatown, where alienated Asian-born youths first formed street gangs
in the 1970's to gain power in the community. (Angel Franco/The New York Times)
(pg. 20)
 Map: Chinatown, indicating territories of different gangs. (pg. 20)

TYPE: A Special Report

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 6, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

An Author I'd Walk the Plank For

BYLINE: By Richard Snow; Richard Snow is the editor of American Heritage
magazine.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2520 words


During the late 1960's and early 70's I spent much of my time reading about
wars, and the rest trying to keep out of one. I was in college then, and the war
I wanted to avoid was, of course, Vietnam; I liked reading about any conflict
remote enough to be harmless. I found particularly absorbing novels about the
British Navy during the Napoleonic Wars when -- much as during the early days of
World War II -- all Europe had fallen to a seemingly invincible conqueror
against whom England fought on alone. In 1940 the Royal Air Force stood in the
breach; in 1800, it was the "wooden walls," the fleet of Lord Nelson.

Those were big times, and they have produced a steady stream of literature that
began to be published not so very long after the wars ended. By the 1830's Capt.
Frederick Marryat was writing about frigate actions and cutting-out expeditions
in "Peter Simple" and other brisk, lively novels that remain readable to this
day. Marryat knew what he was talking about (he had joined the navy as a
14-year-old midshipman in 1806), and his works were drawn upon in this century
by the best-known of all naval novelists, C. S. Forester, whose shy,
self-doubting, indomitable Capt. Horatio Hornblower will last as long as the
genre endures.

A good many other writers have followed in Forester's wake. There is Alexander
Kent, with his robust hero, Captain Bolitho, and Dudley Pope with Captain
Ramage, and a dozen others -- all of them producing burly, straightforward
action stories, full of deadly peril, high courage and warmhearted Cockney
understatement. And then there's Patrick O'Brian.

I first came across Mr. O'Brian 20 years ago in my local library. The book was
called "Master and Commander," and its cover bore the reassuring image of a
blue-coated officer standing beside a cannon, shouting defiance and waving a
sword. But from the first page, I felt something was wrong. The people spoke
oddly. There was a strange, allusive, parenthetical quality to the writing. One
of the officers in the book composed poetry. There were some good battles, to be
sure, but the whole thing made me uncomfortable. I returned to the bracing
predictabilities of Alexander Kent.

And yet, something about the book stayed with me, because when I found a copy at
a street fair a few years later, I bought it at once. By then I was working for
a magazine of history, and perhaps my sensibilities had been somewhat sharpened
by that; or perhaps it was simply that I was older; but in any event, this time
I understood what I was reading. For one thing -- and I had managed to miss this
completely on my first go-around -- it was funny; every page shone with humor,
sometimes mordant, sometimes wise, and always growing naturally out of the
situations it illuminated.

But behind the humor, behind the storms and the broadside duels that I had
understood on my first encounter, loomed something larger: the shape and texture
of a whole era. Without ever seeming antiquarian or pedantic or showy, Mr.
O'Brian summoned up with casual omniscience the workaday magic of a vanished
time. The furniture of life was all unobtrusively here: clothes, curtains, the
sauce on the fish, the absent-minded politeness of daily intercourse with
grocers and friends, everything whose inconsequence insures its almost immediate
oblivion, and which is so hard to retrieve without an ostentatious show of
"research." In fact, the story was told with such scrupulous respect for every
nuance of the world in which it unfolded that I might have been reading the
prose of Jane Austen's seafaring brothers (two served in the Royal Navy), had
they shared her gifts. Before I finished the book, I was convinced it was the
best historical novel I'd ever read.

"Master and Commander" ended happily; was there a sequel? Yes. I was delighted
to find the story picked up in "Post Captain," and continued splendidly in
"H.M.S. Surprise." Shortly after I finished this last, a complex and fascinating
successor appeared -- "The Mauritius Command" -- and after that, "Desolation
Island." Each seemed richer, funnier and more humane than its predecessor. And
then they stopped publishing them in the United States!

Mr. O'Brian, who lives in France, has written contemporary novels, published
several volumes of short stories and has translated many modern French writers
into English. Through the past 20 years ("Master and Commander" was published in
1970), along with all of his other work, he has kept turning out sequels in his
saga and successfully publishing them in England -- but he couldn't find anybody
to issue them here. It puzzled and frustrated me, the more so when an American
editor friend of mine explained why he had turned down the American rights to
"Desolation Island." Here was a wholly gripping, beautifully written book that
offered treachery, sexual tension, shipwreck at the very bottom of the world, an
exploration of natural science that was at once historically illuminating and
highly interesting, and a murderous pursuit in a gale that made the hair stand
up on the back of your hands. Or so I thought. My friend described it this way:
"Oh, they sail all over, and there's a sort of a fight in a storm, and then they
hit an iceberg or something -- it was all kind of boring."

I was somewhat comforted later to find that even in his homeland Mr. O'Brian is
occasionally met by this curious opacity. The British critic Peter Wishart has
written, "The relative neglect of Patrick O'Brian by both critics and the
book-buying public is one of the literary wonders of the age. It is as baffling
as the Inca inability to invent the wheel; or conversely, it is as baffling as
the Inca ability to possess an ordered, sophisticated society without the
wheel."

But this vexing situation may be coming to an end over here. After more than a
decade, Mr. O'Brian's novels will once again be available in America. This fall
W.W. Norton brought out in hard cover a recent addition to the series, "The
Letter of Marque," and at the same time began issuing its predecessors in
handsome paperback editions. Sooner or later they are bound to find the audience
they deserve.

"Master and Commander," the first installment in Mr. O'Brian's epic, opens
during a musicale at the Governor's House in Port Mahon, Minorca, off the
Spanish coast, with a beefy lieutenant listening so raptly to "the triumphant
first movement of Locatelli's C major quartet" that he is unaware of his actions
until the weedy little man next to him whispers, "If you really must beat the
measure, sir, let me entreat you to do so in time, and not half a beat ahead."

Annoyed and rather hurt, the officer sinks back into the music until, beating
time again, he feels an elbow jab into his ribs. "A nudge, a thrust of that
kind, so vicious and deliberate, was very like a blow. Neither his personal
temper nor his professional code could patiently suffer an affront: and what
affront was graver than a blow?" So it is to be a duel. As the concert ends, the
two men grimly introduce themselves: the lieutenant is Jack Aubrey; the little
man in the rusty coat is Stephen Maturin.

Jack Aubrey goes off into the night brooding not only about the encounter, but
about all the frustrations of being an officer without a command, on half pay
and deep in debt in a foreign port. Then, back at his lodging, the world
changes, for he receives word that he has been given command of His Majesty's
sloop Sophie. In the ecstatic hurry of errands the next morning (the first being
to "pledge his now elastic credit to the extent of a noble, heavy, massive
epaulette, the mark of his present rank") he runs into his newfound enemy. "
'Mr. -- Mr. Maturin. Why, there you are, sir. I owe you a thousand apologies, I
am afraid. I must have been a sad bore to you last night, and I hope you will
forgive me. We sailors hear so little music -- are so little used to genteel
company -- that we grow carried away. I beg your pardon.'

" 'My dear sir,' cried the man in the black coat, with an odd flush rising in
his dead-white face, 'you had every reason to be carried away. I have never
heard a better quartetto in my life -- such unity, such fire. May I propose a
cup of chocolate, or coffee? It would give me great pleasure.' "

Jack, discovering that Maturin is a physician, quickly recruits him to serve as
his ship's surgeon. Thus begins a friendship and -- in effect -- a partnership
that endures and deepens through a hundred triumphs and calamities across every
ocean, in the fever-ridden jungles of the tropics, in the streets of Boston and
the dungeons of Napoleon's Paris. The two men could not be more different. Jack
is sanguine, open-hearted, merry, a perfect fool ashore and a superb and
dauntless commander afloat. Stephen Maturin, half-Irish, half-Catalan, is
brooding, sardonic, subtle and brilliant. A "scientific philosopher," he is an
ardent naturalist who collects specimens of the local fauna wherever he goes (to
his disgust, his three-toed sloth becomes addicted to Jack's navy grog), a
gifted physician -- and a highly effective spy dedicated to the overthrow of
Napoleon. It is in this last capacity that he serves with Jack, although
everyone else aboard knows only that they are fortunate enough to be sailing
with the finest ship's surgeon in the Royal Navy.

Maturin is given to bouts of despair, but through the worst of his woes keeps
intact a sharp, deadpan wit. When a windy colleague remarks, "You might say that
Duns Scotus stands in much the same relationship to Aquinas as Kant to
Leibnitz," Maturin replies, "Sure, I have often heard the remark in Ballinasloe"
-- a market town in County Galway known for its cattle fair -- then goes on to
declare, "But I have no patience with Emmanuel Kant. Ever since I found him take
notice of that thief Rousseau, I have had no patience with him at all. . . .
Gushing, carefully-calculated tears -- false confidences, untrue confessions --
enthusiasm -- romantic vistas. How I hate enthusiasm and romantic vistas."

There is not a chance in the world that Jack Aubrey would ever have heard of
Emmanuel Kant. The only intellectual common ground the friendship enjoys is the
mutual love of music that almost proved fatal at the outset. Yet the two men's
understanding of each other is warm and instinctual.

A scene from "The Letter of Marque" (which was reviewed here by Newgate
Callendar in October) suggests the subtlety and depth with which Mr. O'Brian
renders their relationship. Aubrey and Maturin, both amateur musicians as well
as men of action, indulge their love of music in occasional duets of cello and
violin. One night as they sit talking, an astonished Aubrey asks Maturin if he
is picking out the tune of the "Marseillaise." "Stephen had his 'cello between
his knees and for some time now he had been very quietly stroking two or three
phrases with variations upon them -- a half-conscious playing that interrupted
neither his talk nor his listening. 'It is not,' he said. 'It is, or rather it
is meant to be, the Mozart piece that was no doubt lurking somewhere in the
Frenchman's mind when he wrote it. Yet something eludes me. . . . '

" 'Stephen,' cried Jack. 'Not another note, I beg. I have it exactly, if only it
don't fly away.' He whipped the cloth off his violin-case, turned roughly, and
swept straight into the true line. After a while Stephen joined him, and when
they were thoroughly satisfied they stopped, tuned very exactly, passed the
rosin to and fro and so returned to the direct statement, to variations upon it,
inversions, embroideries, first one setting out in a flight of improvisation
while the other filled in and then the other doing the same, playing on and on."

On the foundations of this friendship, Mr. O'Brian reconstructs a civilization.
The Royal Navy at the beginning of the 19th century was a world of extraordinary
breadth and complexity. Its hundreds of ships, the larger of them regular
floating cities with close-packed populations of 1,200 souls, allowed Britain
first to survive and then to prevail in a struggle whose cost and size would
have been unimaginable only a generation earlier. These sailing ships -- today
reduced to quaint and soothing images on wall calendars -- were in their time
the most complicated machines on earth, and the deadliest.

Patrick O'Brian presents the lost arcana of that hard-pressed, cruel, courageous
world with an immediacy that makes its workings both comprehensible and
fascinating. All the marine hardware is in place and functioning; the battles
are stirring without being romanticized (this author never romanticizes); the
portrayal of life aboard a sailing ship is vivid and authoritative.

But in the end it is the serious exploration of human character that gives the
books their greatest power: the fretful play of mood that can irrationally
darken the edges of the brightest triumph, and that can feed a trickle of
merriment into the midst of terror and tragedy. Mr. O'Brian manages to express,
with the grace and economy of poetry, familiar things that somehow never get
written down, as when he carefully details the rueful steps by which Stephen
Maturin falls out of love.

These are peculiar precincts for an adventure novelist to visit, but Mr. O'Brian
comes to the job with unusual credentials. He is, for instance, the translator
of both novels and memoirs by Simone de Beauvoir, and perhaps something of her
clear-eyed account of the years with Nelson Algren has seeped into Maturin's
disentanglement from the brave and reckless Diana Villiers. Mr. O'Brian's
interest in Catalonia is reflected in his going ashore for long enough to write
"Picasso," a book considered by no less an authority than Lord Kenneth Clark to
be the finest biography of that artist. And his understanding of the temper of
Jack and Stephen's Gallic foes is suggested by the fact that he translated Jean
Lacouture's recent, highly acclaimed biography of Charles de Gaulle.

There are 14 Jack Aubrey novels in print in England, and the latest to be
released over here, "The Letter of Marque," is a self-contained and satisfying
story. But begin with the first of them, "Master and Commander," and there's a
good chance you'll find yourself at the final installment all too soon. You will
have read what I continue to believe are the best historical novels ever
written. Along the way you'll not only have witnessed the unfolding of a
tremendous story, but the very beginnings of the world we inhabit. In one of the
books Maturin nearly propounds a theory of Freudian psychology; in another he
falls just shy of the immense implications of evolution. His is the kind of
questing mind that made the late 18th century such an age of revelation; his
counterpart Jack Aubrey personifies the raw energy that fueled the epoch. On
every page Mr. O'Brian reminds us with subtle artistry of the most important of
all historical lessons: that times change but people don't, that the griefs and
follies and victories of the men and women who were here before us are in fact
the maps of our own lives.


NAME: Frederick Marryat

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustration: Engraving of the British fleet, under the command of Lord
Nelson, at the Battle of the Nile, Aug. 1, 1798. (The Bettmann Archive) (pg. 38)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 6, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CHILD OF THE MOVIES

BYLINE: By Jonathan Van Meter; Jonathan Van Meter is a contributing editor at
Vogue.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4864 words


JODIE FOSTER HAS ONLY ONE REGRET. IT CAME up one brutally hot day in August as
she slouched in a chair in a warehouse in Cincinnati wearing a pair of blue gym
shorts and a tank top. "The only thing I've ever regretted in my whole life,"
she said, stamping out a cigarette on the cement floor, "is that I started
smoking." Seems remarkable. But there it is. She said it without a trace of
exaggeration.

Foster was on the set of "Little Man Tate," her directorial debut in which she
plays Dede Tate, a rough-around-the-edges woman who, like many of Jodie Foster's
characters, talks tough, lives hard and smokes.

Listen to Jodie Foster, the good girl with a Yale degree in literature, talk
about cigarettes: "I quit for many years, and then I started directing this
movie. I get nervous. And I'm stupid, and I'll never do that again. I was such a
fervent nonsmoker for so long. The next time you see me I won't be smoking."

She is true to her word. The next time I see Foster, two weeks after she has
finished shooting her movie in Ohio, it is an early October morning in
Manhattan, and it feels, still, like August. The kicked habit is the first thing
she mentions as she jumps into a Lincoln Town Car that waits to take her to a
helicopter headed for Atlantic City. "Guess what?" she says with the exuberance
of the kid who once did Crest commercials. "I quit smoking!"

Today, Foster is on her way to Trump's Taj Mahal, where ShowEast (the Eastern
half of the National Association of Theatre Owners) is holding its annual
convention. She looks not like the Jodie Foster we know. Passed on the street,
she would go unnoticed. Her hair, cut in a short bob and dyed chestnut, is still
wet from the shower. A touch of freshly applied makeup is evident, and she wears
uncharacteristic big dark sunglasses that hide the giveaway blue eyes. Her
clothing, too, is a switch -- a steel-blue, washed-silk suit, black pumps and
gold Chanel-like jewelry. I search for a purse, only, happily, to discover a
sign of the decidedly utilitarian Foster I had met in August: she is wearing one
of those marsupial pouch belts instead.

At this year's exhibitor's convention in Atlantic City, ShowEast and Orion
Pictures have staged a retrospective of Jonathan Demme films, the finale being a
screening of his latest, "The Silence of the Lambs"; it will open in February
and stars Foster (her first movie since her Oscar-winning performance in "The
Accused" more than two years ago) and Anthony Hopkins. Based on a novel by
Thomas Harris, "The Silence of the Lambs" is, like the book, an astute,
well-researched psycho-thriller that will scare the bejesus out of audiences.
Foster plays Clarice Starling, a young F.B.I. agent-in-training who is assigned
to interview Dr. Hannibal Lecter (Hopkins), the worst serial killer ever known
and a brilliant psychiatrist with a taste for human flesh, who has been in jail
for 15 years. The F.B.I., with Starling as its pawn, is trying to manipulate
Lecter into helping them catch Buffalo Bill -- another serial killer on the
loose who skins his victims. At the center of the movie are the interviews
between Starling and Lecter -- the meeting of two complex and powerful minds.

Foster is traveling to Atlantic City to help honor Demme, and to see the
finished version of "The Silence of The Lambs" for the first time. Watching
their movie in a darkened casino showroom, Foster and Demme seem delighted with
each other and their work, exchanging giggles and jokey asides. Foster even
jumps in her seat during the scary parts.

"I'm flabbergasted!" she says, shaking her head in disbelief when the movie is
over. "It's strange for me to see myself this way. You do a movie and then you
forget about it. And then you come back to it and you're like . . .who's that
funky bitch?" She cracks herself up, forcing out that staccato nasal laugh.

JODIE FOSTER OCCUPIES one of the more unusual places in popular culture. At 28,
she has performed in about 30 films, more than many actors will ever make, five
of which were done while she was turning in term papers two weeks early and
earning A's at Yale. She is the only movie star ever to have had a crazed fan
(John Hinckley) try to impress her by gunning down the President of the United
States. She is, arguably, the only child actress to segue from kid to teen to
woman in films with little to no difficulty and utter respectability intact.

Jodie Foster's career is marked by provocative choices in parts, many made with
the help of her mother-manager, Brandy. After several wide-eyed roles in mostly
juvenile films in the early 1970's, Foster played the first of her more complex,
tough-girl roles as the Ripple-drinking street kid in "Alice Doesn't Live Here
Anymore" (1975) with Ellen Burstyn. Many people thought she was a boy.
Nevertheless, her performance so impressed the film's director, Martin Scorsese,
that he cast her as Iris, a self-possessed 12-year-old hooker in "Taxi Driver,"
a role that gained her an Oscar nomination.

"That film completely changed my life," says Foster, in her throaty alto. "It
was the first time anyone asked me to create a character that wasn't myself. It
was the first time I realized that acting wasn't this hobby you just sort of did
, but that there was actually some craft."

In 1976, at 13, Foster had three films screened at the Cannes International Film
Festival --"Taxi Driver," "Bugsy Malone" and "The Little Girl Who Lives Down the
Lane" -- and had become, as The Washington Post wrote, "a prodigious movie
talent in the making." By 1980, after a few Disney films ("Freaky Friday,"
"Candleshoe"), Foster was onto her young adult roles, in films like "Foxes,"
directed by Adrian Lyne, and Robert Kaylor's "Carny." Both movies opened to
mixed reviews, but Foster was duly praised. According to People magazine, she
was "arguably the best young actress in Hollywood." Everyone seemed to agree.
But the roles she chose through her late teens and early 20's, up to "The
Accused," didn't meet her or her admirers' expectations.

Foster admits to being very picky. "Whatever I'm doing next has to be something
that's going to move me somewhere else," she says. "Otherwise, I'll get bored
and I'll be bad." Her explanation for having been in some flawed movies is
long-winded, defensive and confusing, but finally ends with: "There're all sorts
of people convincing you that this is right and that's wrong. Eventually you
just have to say, 'No. This is what I want and I don't have to explain why.'
Hopefully, it's the right move. And if it isn't, it's my mistake. At least I'm
not making someone else's mistakes."

"The Silence of the Lambs" was no mistake. It is the perfect follow-up to "The
Accused." Not only is "Silence" smart and commercial, like "The Accused," but
Foster's performance is powerful. The Starling character is tough, beautiful,
ambitious and independent, yet brims with barely masked fear and insecurity. I
suggest to Foster that it is a role many actresses would kill for. She says:
"Yeah, but at the same time it's a very quiet role. It's not like. . ." she
lurches forward. . ."ahhhhh! those juicy Oscar parts everybody loves."

The stories of Foster's work on the rape scene in "The Accused" were much talked
about in Hollywood before the film's release. It took five days to film,
technicians lost weight and sleep, Foster cried so much she broke blood vessels
over her eyes. But if it was difficult work, Foster, as usual, took it in
stride. "At night," she once told a writer from Vanity Fair, "I'd watch the
dailies of the rape scene and make jokes." Talk to anyone who has worked with
Foster on a movie, and they will eventually say this: She is very professional.
"She never has to pace around and get into character," says a technician from
"The Silence of the Lambs." Demme adds: "I wish you could have seen how
effortlessly she would suddenly be Clarice Starling."

Foster has never taken an acting class because, as Jonathan Kaplan, who directed
Foster in "The Accused," says, "She's been in class forever." And if Foster is,
as one person put it, "totally comfortable on the set," it is perhaps because
she has reduced the craft of acting to one simple thing: pretending. While
directing Adam Hann-Byrd, the 7-year-old who plays her son in "Little Man Tate,"
Foster says she gave him this advice: " 'Just pretend really well, and then
think about what that pretending looks like.' It's a horrible way to teach
somebody to act, but in a weird way, I think that's basically what it boils down
to."

But even as she tries to demystify the process of acting, she knows there is
more. "One of the reasons why actors continue to work even though it's painful,"
she says, "is that it's this intoxicating experience. When people say, 'I have
to act! I'll do anything to act!' -- I never understood that until I finally did
something that was so provocative that I realized it's this big emotional high."

Consequently, she can't work a lot. She says: "I have to replenish myself. It's
not that I go to the guru and chant. It's this muscling up. Physically and
mentally."

Perhaps part of the reason Foster tries to make only one movie a year is that
she's only interested in "heavy dramas." " I love life-threatening situation
movies," she says. "They're not about, 'Will I lose my virginity?' And in terms
of women in history, 95 percent of women's experiences are about being a victim.
Or about being an underdog, or having to survive. So, if I played Wonder Woman
all the time I would be betraying where I come from. Women didn't go to Vietnam
and blow things up. They're not Rambo. That's why 'Silence' is such a big
departure, because it stands for all the same things, but you have a real female
heroine. It's not about steroids and brawn, it's about using your mind and using
your insufficiencies to combat the villain."

If Foster is in combat with a villain in real life, it is her own fame. Winning
an Oscar has given her power as well as a certain freedom in Hollywood. But it
has also brought her things she finds less palatable: intensified public
scrutiny. When I refer to her as a "big star," she laughs and says flatly, "I'm
not a big star." When pressed, she adds: "It's funny to be someone everyone has
an opinion about. I think that's why I'm much too gentle with my judgments of
things and people. Everyone's always going to have 30,000 opinions on who you
are.

"You have three options when you win an Oscar. You either go for a juicy
performance piece and another nomination; you use it to make a big movie that
makes millions of dollars and you get paid a lot of money, or you use it to get
you into something that normally you wouldn't have access to. So. . .I guess
that's what I did." So Foster decided to become a director.

IT IS ANOTHER SWELTERING DAY BACK IN August, and Foster, on the set of "Little
Man Tate," is smoking like a fiend. She is tense this morning because the day
before, Diane Wiest (who plays a child psychologist) sprained her ankle, having
tripped over an electrical cable, and would be out for at least two weeks. Adam
Hann-Byrd, who has never even been in so much as a commercial and is in nearly
every scene, can only work eight hours a day (as dictated by the Screen Actors
Guild). So Foster has gone into overdrive, moving up scenes with Hann-Byrd to
keep things on schedule.

After lunch, Foster, dressed as her character, Dede Tate -- tight black
leggings, a loose, see-through, macrame shirt and black clogs -- comes into the
production room in the warehouse in Cincinnati where Peter Silbermann, the set
publicity coordinator, works the phone, organizing Foster's life (Foster doesn't
have a public-relations person). In her hand is a pink "While You Were Out"
memo. "I need to make a call," she says to Silbermann.

"Oh, do you need privacy?" he asks.

"No; I don't even know who this is."

Jodie Foster -- director, star -- returns the phone calls of complete strangers.

She lights up a cigarette, dials the number, gets right through. Soon into the
10-minute conversation, it becomes clear that she is, seemingly cheerfully,
giving advice on matriculation at Yale (from which she graduated in 1985).
Finally, she says: "It tells you all this in the blue book; didn't you get a
copy of that? . . . Well, I'm glad you found me in the middle of nowhere to ask
me this incredibly important question." She laughs. . . . "That's O.K." She
laughs again. . . . "You're welcome. . . . O.K., yeah, terrific. . . . Bye." She
hangs up.

"Who was that?" she squeals in disbelief. "I don't even know this person!
Somebody at William Morris wanted to know, if you take a spring semester off can
you also take the next semester off. It was an agent who obviously will go back
and say," -- she imitates agent schmooze -- " 'Yeah, well I talked to Jodie and
she seemed to think that. . . .' Aaaah! Is that nerve, man? To call me on a
movie set. " She crumples up the note and tosses it on the floor.

Before I arrived on the set of "Little Man Tate," I was told by a publicity
agent that I would only be able to observe Foster on location ( with her acting
and directing, Foster would be much too busy) and that the interview would come
after she completed filming. Within 10 minutes of my arrival, however, Foster
appeared in front of me, offered a firm handshake, knew my name without an
introduction, and asked me to join her for lunch. Over the next three days we
would have lunch together every afternoon. During the shooting, whenever there
was a lull, she would saunter over, plop down in a chair or on the ground next
to me, light up a cigarette, and continue the interview. This, I would discover
later, is all part of what she calls "the martyr thing" -- her overwhelming need
to be liked.

One day, however, she contradicted herself. "I stopped worrying about what other
people think of me," she says. "When I was young I wanted everybody to like me.
My professional behavior on the set was, 'Yes sir. No sir.' God Forbid anybody
should think I was a brat."

Foster, who will talk a blue streak about anything -- even, she admits, things
she knows nothing about -- often contradicts herself in her loquacity.  One
minute she's expounding on women's issues, sounding thoroughly feminist, the
next she's saying things that would make Betty Friedan's teeth rattle. For
example, when I asked her about how, several years ago, it was said that she
would have to "hang in until she was 35, when the great parts for women begin
again," she said, "My mom always says that. I don't think that's true anymore."
Then she came out with this: "The truth is that women aren't interesting before
30. Men are kind of born people."

Foster has a reputation among her friends of being an unqualified authority on
everything. That trait carries through to her professional life. During "The
Accused," Jonathan Kaplan, the director, called her "B.L.T." -- Bossy Little
Thing. "Yeah, I'm pretty bossy," she says. "And as a director, it's not any
different than what I do as an actress, except that I'm allowed to."

Even with all the nerves and cigarettes, directing, being the boss, seems to be
a comfortable place for Foster. "I've never been this sane on a movie set," she
says. "It's partly because of my personality. You have to be a huge egomaniac to
be a director. This is a requisite. You have to, above all, really enjoy stress.
And you have to enjoy responsibility.

"I've been ready to direct for a long time," she says. "I have a lot of
experience on totally different-sized movies. And a lot of experience, also,
watching movies fail, watching first-time directors fail. Emotionally, however,
I don't think I was ready until after 'The Accused.' There're only so many times
you can make movies that nobody likes. At some point, you've got to get some
applause."

Later I ask Jon Hutman, a former college roommate of Foster's and the production
designer on "Little Man Tate," about Foster, the director. "Jodie knows so much
about film," Hutman says. "Not only the day to day how movies are made, but also
what she knows from having been taken by her mother since before she could speak
to see all manner of films. Brandy's idea of a good time is going to three
French movies back to back. And that was a large part of what Jodie's childhood
was like."

When I ask Foster about her influences, she rattles on jovially about how she
loved Kevin Costner's "Dances With Wolves" against all her better instincts,
and, having just rented "Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles," complains that there
are no female heroines for children. Finally, we get to her influences.

"I love all those French movies from the 50's, 60's and 70's," she says. "
'Murmur of the Heart,' 'Breathless,' 'The 400 Blows.' " Foster cites their "lack
of prudishness" mixed with "a real intelligence" as the qualities that thrill
her. "They're not restrained the way American movies were at the time," she
says. "I was watching 'Goodfellas,' and I really see that same sensibility in
Scorsese's work.  Characters aren't made to do things that are only wholesome
and wonderful."

Foster also speaks highly of directors who "are trying to break genres": John
Sayles, Nicolas Roeg, Alan Rudolph, Stephen Frears, among others. "Even if I
don't end up thinking it's the best movie in the world," she says, "I'll still
see every movie they make until there's that single one that says everything
I've always wanted a movie to say."

She cites Woody Allen's "Crimes and Misdemeanors" as a film that may have been
just that. "It was an absolutely perfect screenplay," she says. "You could
relate to every single character, even the ugliest parts of them. You had to
look and say, 'I could be that way.' "

Foster had been looking for something to direct for a long time. "Even before I
read 'Little Man Tate,' " she says, "I was trying to figure out how to do a
movie about a whiz kid, because of the J. D. Salinger short story 'Franny and
Zooey,' which is my complete preoccupation.

"For my first movie, I wanted a piece that was not autobiographical, but that
had to do with the 10 philosophies I've accumulated in the past 25 years. Every
single one of them, if they weren't in the script from the beginning, they're
there now."

"Little Man Tate" is the story of Fred Tate, an extraordinarily gifted
7-year-old boy; his mother, Dede Tate, who's a bartender who sees her son as her
best friend, and Dr. Jane Grierson, a neurotic upper-class psychologist who
wants to take Fred off to college and away from his mother to intellectually
stimulate him in ways his mother hasn't been able to.

I ask Foster if she could list her "10 philosophies," and she balks. Instead, I
get a 20-minute monologue about the "themes" in the movie -- a lecture that
reveals more about how the film's director sees herself than it does about the
film.

"There's the single-parent theme for one," she says. "And there's the theme
that's run through all of my work; I really only realized it a couple of films
ago. That is that I tend to deal with mundane heroes. Not people who build
bridges, but people who are moral survivors in a world that's really. . .uhhh. .
.cruel."

She flexes her arms, glancing down occasionally to admire her muscles. "Also,"
she continues, "it's the portrait of an artist. Any artist. It's the portrait of
somebody who's constantly dealing with conflicts. His head and heart are
somewhat opposites, if not totally apart. And how do we put them together? How
is it tolerable? How is it tolerable to have a heart this big and head this
smart? Not only am I romantic, but I'm also cynical. And that's a conflict. I
see these things I love, but I know I'll never have them. How do you deal with
that? Knowing things, and also feeling things at the same time. . . . He's so
knowledgeable and wise that he recognizes the pain in things."

Does she relate to this character, this boy genius? "Not necessarily as a
prodigy, but as somebody who has been singled out for being different," Foster
says. "And also, for being sensitive. Which is what an actor is." She pauses,
carefully fixes her bright blue eyes on me to punctuate every sentence. "When I
was a kid, while other kids were sitting around worrying about zits, I was
making movies about real subjects. And I came from a very sensitive house. And.
. .I came from tragedies. Not just Malibu and the beach. That's what an artist
is. That's what a wise person is. It's not about winning Oscars, and making tons
of money. It's about how many disappointments you've gone through. That's what I
think I relate to: that he's informed by this tragedy that surrounds him."

WHEN JODIE FOSTER SPEAKS OF coming from "tragedies," one isn't exactly sure what
she means. Growing up without a father? Financially supporting her family as a
child? The Hinckley nightmare?

Born in Los Angeles in 1962, Foster is the youngest of four; she has two
sisters, Lucinda and Constance, and a brother, Buddy. Her parents divorced when
she was a few months old and she has seen her father only four times in her
life. Her mother, Brandy, worked for a time doing public relations for the film
producer Arthur Jacobs, until Buddy at age 9 began doing television commercials.
Brandy became a stage mom, toting little Jodie around on Buddy's auditions. When
Jodie was 3, her brother auditioned for a Coppertone commercial. Jodie was
noticed and cast as the little girl who gets her pants pulled down.

A gifted child who could read at the age of 3, and within two years understand
scripts on her own, Foster made commercials exclusively until she was 5. For the
next four years, she appeared in about 50 episodes of various prime-time
television series. At 8, she was featured in her first film, "Napoleon and
Samantha," and by 10 her movie career was in full swing. All the while, Foster
attended the Lycee Francais in Los Angeles, delivering the valedictorian address
in French for the French division when she graduated in 1980.

When Foster went to Yale in the fall of 1980, it was probably her first real
attempt at seizing some kind of normalcy. But of course, that was shattered by
John W. Hinckley Jr., who tried to kill President Reagan on March 30, 1981,
attributing his "historical deed" to a desire to impress Jodie Foster.

The only instruction one receives before interviewing Foster is "don't ask her
about John Hinckley." It is no surprise that Foster doesn't want to talk about
it today, mostly, because it is old news. Besides, Foster had her final say on
the fiasco in a first-person account titled "Why Me?" published in Esquire in
1982. It is filled with personal details of the time surrounding the event --
including press conferences, death threats and shameless news media invasions.
One of the more bizarre passages describes her reaction to hearing of the
assassination attempt: "I started to cry a bit, then my tears turned to
laughter. I couldn't stop laughing. It was simply too funny, too incredibly
bizarre, too painful. My laughter was strange and hollow, and I couldn't control
it. My body jerked in painful convulsions. I hurt."

"You know," says Foster of the article, "when I think back on it, I feel like a
real idiot. It's so emotional. But I was 18. You know what it says without me
even knowing? It makes a comment on a paranoid thing of me always thinking I'm
responsible."

Foster had written for Esquire before, a piece about going to college, and in
the summer after the Hinckley affair, had worked as an intern at the magazine.
Her association with Esquire was, it seems, a byproduct of a friendship she had
with Lee Eisenberg, who was then the magazine's editorial adviser. They had met
when a publicity agent took Foster, at the time 17, out for pizza with Eisenberg
and an Esquire editor in the hope of commissioning a story on the young actress.
The story never happened, but the two began to write to each other. "He is the
only person I had ever written letters to," says Foster. "I was living in
California thinking there would never be anybody in my life that would have a
vocabulary."

They remained pen pals through her freshman year in college. "Then the Hinckley
thing happened and I was at this horrible manic-depressive time," she recalls.
"He took me to his country house to go fishing, and he would talk to me and I
would talk to him, you know, 'I'm depressed, and I'm 19, and the world's gonna
fall apart.' And then he said, 'Let me get you an internship at Esquire,' And we
were together for two months every day. After the internship, we stayed less and
less in touch and now haven't seen each other for a year."

"It's a very difficult relationship to characterize," says Eisenberg, who is 44
years old, married and lives in London. "I don't think she was looking for a
father or an older brother, but we did develop this long-distance relationship.
I don't know what you would call it. We just enjoyed one another's company."

WHEN FOSTER ACCEPTED HER OSCAR FOR her performance in "The Accused," she gave a
speech that has become near legend in Hollywood. "This is such a big deal," she
started, "and my life is so simple. There are very few things -- there is love,
and work, and family. . . ."

That Foster thinks her life so simple -- or wishes it to be -- is perhaps both
her most charming and annoying quality. Nobody's life is simple, particularly
that of a movie star who has played a hooker at the age of 12. But the constant
effort toward "normalness" -- her conversation is loaded with references to the
mundane -- is part of the self-denying martyr program she has put herself on.

When in New York, she sleeps over at friends' apartments and rides the subways
("I hate being in cabs"). When she finally bought a house a year ago in Los
Angeles, she chose "the deep dark Valley" over, say, Malibu.

"When you are a star and recognized when you are a kid," says an old friend of
Foster's, "I think you begin to look for ways of being normal. Perhaps you have
to go out of your way to be just folk."

Though Foster toys with the idea of moving to New York, she says Los Angeles is
the perfect place for her suburban life style. "I wear the same jogging pants
four days in a row," she says. "I see my nephews. I pick them up from school. I
go to the mall. And the people that I know there are film technicians and people
I knew from college. I don't feel like a celebrity. If somebody starts making me
feel like a celebrity, I can't be around them."

She pauses, still defending Los Angeles as only a native can: "O.K., it's ugly.
O.K., the people are stupid, but they're really harmless. I don't want to be
surrounded by a bunch of cynical, mean people. There's something great about how
you just get this feeling nobody's going to hurt you in L.A. Where in New York
everyone is so beautiful, and they know so much, and they've been in every
museum, and they dress great, and I just always feel like I can't compete, and
that as soon as I turn my back, they're saying mean things about me."

What's her routine like in Los Angeles? "I get up early and talk on the phone to
New York if I have to. Drink coffee, read the paper and wait till traffic dies
down. Then I go to the gym. Then, usually, if I'm in one of those ritualized
moments, I eat lunch at the same place everyday by myself or in my car. Then I
read whatever it is that I have to read. Come back, make all my phone calls. If
I have to shop for food I do that. I come home, rent a movie and cook. That's
it. I don't like seeing people during the day. It's an infringement if I have to
have lunch with someone. If I want to see a movie, I usually go alone."

Is there a significant romance?

"No. But I wouldn't talk about it if there was."

Dating?

"I don't think about it. I certainly don't talk about it because then it's like.
. .talk about trivializing your life!"

IN ATLANTIC CITY AT the Jonathan Demme luncheon, after everyone has got up and
told his favorite Demme story, Demme gets up to give his speech. At the end he
thanks everyone, and then adds, "The last thing I have to say is that with
Jodie, true, she's made her official directorial debut with 'Little Man Tate,'
which she has just finished shooting, but she was certainly practicing a lot
with 'The Silence of the Lambs.' " Everyone cracks up, Foster the loudest. "But
really, I'm so happy because they were good touches," he concludes.

It should be enough of an accomplishment that Jodie Foster, at 28, could get
away with butting in on the direction of Jonathan Demme's movie -- and that he
would appreciate it -- but not for Jodie Foster. Now she's the director. The
Boss. None of this comes as a surprise to anyone, least of all herself. What is
surprising, however, is that, even though she had to "grow up" at the age of 12,
run her career, support her family, and then deal with a national security
crisis at 18 -- "acting and politics all mixed up together," as she wrote in
Esquire -- in a lot of ways, she is still a child. She is the good girl who
knows that smoking cigarettes is bad.

NAME: Jodi Foster

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cover photo: Jodi Foster. (Michael O'Neill for The New York Times);
Photos: Foster directs Adam Hann-Byrd on the set of "Little Man Tate"; she also
plays the 7-year-old's mother in the film. "I tend to deal with mundane heroes,"
Foster says. "Not people who build bridges, but people who are moral survivors
in a world that's really cruel." (Suzanne Hanover)(pg. 18); Jodie Foster won an
Oscar in 1989 for her performance in "The Accused." (Thierry Campion/Frank
Trapper/Sygma)(pg. 50); In "The Silence of the Lambs," to be released next
month, Foster is an F.B.I. agent- in-training. She is shown questioning a
cannibalistic killer played by Anthony Hopkins. (Ken Reagan/Camera 5); When she
was 12, she was cast as a 12-year- old prostitute in "Taxi Driver." "That film
completely changed my life," she says. (Steve Shapiro/Gamma-Liaison)(pg. 51)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 6, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Classroom Innovations Encourage Students and Teachers to Excel

BYLINE: By ROBERT A. HAMILTON

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 1; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1284 words


IN some schools, a visiting parent usually means that a student is in trouble.
But J. Brian Lally, a teacher at the Tashua School in Trumbull, has parents in
the classroom so often that the pupils take their presence for granted. Parents
help Mr. Lally teach everything from computers to cooking.

"You can tap a wealth of experience when you get parents involved," said Mr.
Lally, whose innovations in the classroom recently won him national recognition
in a contest conducted by two professional publications, American School Board
Journal and Executive Educator.

Another winner from Connecticut, Mary A. VanDerMeid, developed a curriculum to
teach students at Andover Elementary School about heroes. The program
incorporated history, sociology, science and other subjects to teach students
about figures like the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and about the kind of
heroes who emerge from emergencies like earthquakes, fires or floods.

Beyond Ninja Turtles

"It was something to present a set of values to kids," Ms. VanDerMeid said. "Our
goal was to broaden their outlook, so they didn't just think of Mutant Ninja
Turtles when they were asked to name a hero."

Four Connecticut programs were among the 88 recognized by the contest. The other
two were an oral-history project developed by John Vincenzo, a teacher in
Newington, and a program to intoduce New Haven's high school students to
colleges, begun by the district's supervisor of guidance and counseling, Cynthia
Beaver.

"There's a great deal of creativity going on in our public schools, but it's not
well communicated to the public," said the executive director of the Connecticut
Association of Boards of Education, Terry P. Cassidy.

George A. Coleman, chief of curriculum and instruction bureau at the State
Department of Education, said schools are finding new ways to capture children's
interests. For instance, he said, he went to one school in Hartford recently
that handed out calculators to kindergartners, so they could do more advanced,
real-life problems, like as figuring how much change they would get back after
making a purchase.

"The feeling is, once the students see an application for a concept, they get a
lot more excited," Mr. Coleman said. "And once they understand the concept, they
can use their time a lot more purposefully."

Trumbull's Superintendent of Schools, Dr. Edwin T. Merritt, said: "A combination
of the recession we're in, which means there are fewer resources available to
educators, and the situation in the world, where our kids are not performing as
well as their counterparts in other countries, has scared parents and teachers
into trying different ways of getting kids focused. Americans are creative, and
when we're in a crisis we tend to do better. Clearly, we're in a crisis now."

In order for innovation to work, Dr. Merritt said, teachers have to know they
have a relatively high degree of freedom in curriculum design. "When a system is
tightly controlled from the top down, these things don't happen," he said.

Appreciation of Risks

Mr. Coleman said the state has supported innovation as well, with its Teacher of
the Year program, Celebration of Excellence awards, and awards of up to $25,000
from the Milken Foundation.

"As a department, we have looked for ways to appreciate those individual
teachers and programs that are innovative and help students achieve," Mr.
Coleman said. "It's given teachers more of an appreciation for taking a risk."

In addition to the support of administrators, the programs have been
enthusiastically endorsed by parents, he said.

"There are parents who are concerned, they don't want us to give up on reading
and writing," Mr. Coleman said. "But these programs are designed to enhance
those skills, and once parents understand that, they become very supportive.
"The kids come home from school excited, want to talk about it, and the parents
are impressed."

Some of the innovations are originating outside the schools. The Windham Textile
and History Museum, for instance, is testing a curriculum it developed that
encourages students to research local history or family trees. The history
lessons are more meaningful, because the children are learning about things in
their own neighborhoods, said a spokeswoman for the museum, Linda Riquier.

"I wish I was a kid again, some of this stuff is so much fun," said Ms. Riquier.
"The teachers who are using it are finding the kids are responding beautifully."

But most of the new ideas come from teachers. Mr. Vincenzo, a history teacher at
Martin Kellogg Middle School in Newington, developed a program in which his
students compile oral histories, which are published in a school magazine. Last
year, the students learned about the Depression by interviewing people at a
local nursing home. This year, the youngsters interviewed Vietnam War veterans
at a local veterans hospital.

"Some of these veterans were on the verge of tears, even today, recalling what
they went through," Mr. Vincenzo said. The interviews were much more emotionally
charged, and more interesting, than reading a dry account of the war in a
textbook, he said.

"A lot of the kids were quite apprehensive about going to the hospital, probably
just because of the reputation of veterans' hospitals," Mr. Vincenzo said. "But
the kids enjoyed it so much that the one student who was absent the day we went
to the hospital found his own veteran to interview."

Mr. Lally said his award-winning program, Parents Getting Involved, was
developed when he was teaching third grade. He had students and their parents
write stories separately, then bring them to school to read aloud and critique.

It worked out so well, he said, that even when he switched to a kindergarten
class this year, he continued to use the concept. Because the students are too
young to write their own stories, though, he has parents keep a "Teddy Bear
Journal," reading stories to their children and transcribing the children's
reaction.

The more parents got involved with their children's schoolwork, the more they
volunteered for other duties, Mr. Lally said. He now has parents coming in two
or three days a week. Of 37 children in the two sections he teaches, parents of
21 come in regularly.

"It gives the parent a more realistic view of their own child's strengths or
weaknesses," Mr. Lally said. "If the child is having a great deal of difficulty
writing, the parent is going to be much more sensitive to the child's needs if
they see that in the classroom.

"And another advantage is, in kindergarten, you need 13 arms and legs and about
a thousand eyes. Just having another adult there can be a great help."

Finding Definitions

Educators said that thematic teaching, as in Ms. VanDerMeid's program on heroes,
is growing in popularity.

"When we surveyed kids in the beginning, the heroes were often rock stars and
athletes," Ms. VanDerMeid said. But when those figures are caught using drugs or
steroids, "kids get really disillusioned," she said.

"Our goal was not to give them one definition of hero," Ms. VanDerMeid said.
"It's kind of like talking about love -- everyone has their own definition."

The program looked at heroes in history, at heroes in different countries and at
how the definition of hero has changed.

"When you plan an all-school program, you have to have something that can cross
all ages, all cultures," Ms. VanDerMeid said. "Schools get a lot of criticism
nowadays that we're not doing enough. Whatever we do in education, we have to
validate. But our kids are writing, are doing history, are doing oral
presentations -- I don't think anyone can object to that kind of program."

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 6, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Seattle, Too Much of a Good Thing?

BYLINE: By JON BOWERMASTER; Jon Bowermaster is co-author, with Will Steger, of
"Crossing Antarctica," to be published by Alfred A. Knopf.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 24; Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4030 words


A FERRYBOAT WHISTLE SINGS OFF NEARBY ELLIOTT Bay and a warm rain dances off the
awning that covers the sidewalk espresso stand -- one of a multitude that line
the wide, spotless avenues of downtown Seattle. The streets are packed with
people on the way to work in the gleaming skyscrapers that tower above Puget
Sound or shop in the fashionable indoor malls that are the heart of the new
downtown. The affluent crowd shuffling past is young, sharply dressed, upwardly
mobile: for every briefcase, there's a backpack; for every pin stripe, a pair of
blue jeans. Everyone looks fit and prosperous. The whole scene is an
advertisement for the good life. I feel like I've stumbled onto the set of a
credit-card commercial.

Over the last decade Seattle has gained a reputation as the adopted home of
America's hip and young, but it was popular even before that; in the last 20
years there have been roughly three waves of immigration. The first began at the
height of the 60's and featured Birkenstock-wearing, guru-following,
back-to-earth peaceniks lured by the town's frontier charm and boundless natural
beauty. Many came without jobs, opting for "quality of life" over career track.
But as word of Seattle's laid-back pace and affordability got out (and as
magazines insisted on labeling it the nation's "most livable city"), the
migration swelled. During the late 1980's a quarter of a million people moved to
this corner of the Northwest.

The second wave of newcomers was richer and better-educated than the first and
represented more the Saab-driving, home-buying, conspicuous-consumption class.
They came from the East Coast, the upper Midwest and California, burned out on
big cities, attracted by Seattle's proximity to the great outdoors, its "big
city" art and culture scene and flourishing computer software and import-export
industries.

But the good word could hardly be confined to the yuppie pipeline. As the
newcomers sprawled beyond the city's limits, their developments of town houses
and split-levels swallowing farmlands and threatening to climb the nearby
Cascade Mountains, they were joined by a third wave of paradise seekers. These
were as likely to be of Hispanic or Asian origin as white, from Saigon as from
Boston. Refugees from Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand; laid-off factory
workers from the Rust Belt; disillusioned Sun Belters; the underemployed and
unemployed from around the nation -- like their predecessors, they came to
Seattle because they'd heard it was a "better place."

In numbers, this last wave may have been less dramatic than the others, but
there are plenty of representatives around. At an outdoor cafe, a black man in
his early 30's -- neatly dressed in a white shirt, blue slacks and bow tie --
sits down and asks to borrow the sports pages. After a perfunctory swapping of
scores, he introduces himself as Derrick Thomas and explains that he's lived in
Seattle for just a month. A 13-year veteran of Chrysler in Detroit, he had just
joined his wife and three sons, who preceded him two months earlier.

While it was lack of work that encouraged Thomas to search out a new home (he
was laid off last January from his $15.65-an-hour assembly-line job), it was a
quest for more basic security that finally lured him to Seattle. In recent
years, he tells me, he had taken to wearing a bulletproof vest in his car when
he drove to work through some of Detroit's worst neighborhoods; his eldest son,
now 13, had been taunted at school by classmates waving wads of money they'd
made selling crack; a friend's 15-year-old daughter was shot and killed while
she sat on a neighbor's stoop.

In Seattle things improved immediately. Thomas's kids are doing better in
school, his wife is working part-time, he's got an application in with Boeing,
the area's biggest employer. There have been sacrifices, though. The best job he
could find is busing tables in a cafeteria for just over minimum wage. Until
recently, it was costing him more to live here, too. Thomas paid $350 a month
for a four-bedroom house in Detroit; here he paid $550 for a two-bedroom
apartment on Martin Luther King Jr. Way, a street in a rundown neighborhood,
until he found an apartment in a low-income housing project. Unlike earlier
newcomers to Seattle, Thomas did not come for the natural beauty that abounds
but because the city has a reputation as a safe place -- and because it has
jobs. "It's peaceful here, everybody seems to be nice," says Thomas, drawing a
last puff on a cigarette. "I think we made the right move."


THE UNITED STATES WAS FOUNDED ON THE NOTION that there must be a "better place"
over the horizon. In the 1990's, we're still on the lookout for an American
mecca. In the 60's, San Francisco (the Paris of the West) was reputed to be
America's hottest city; in the 70's it was Denver. Eventually both were sullied
-- the former by a skyrocketing cost of living, the latter by an economy tied to
the vagaries of the oil industry. The hip moved on. In the 80's, Seattle became
the place to be.

It's not hard to see why. From the bow of one of the city-financed ferries that
deliver commuters across Elliott Bay, the skyline of Seattle shimmers and
sparkles in the first light of day. Twenty-strong, the new buildings jut into
the sky, their mirrored facades reflecting the snowcapped peak of Mount Rainier
and the Puget Sound. Anchored to the north by the Space Needle, to the south by
a crane-littered port where ships load and unload containers filled with
everything from doorknobs to prefab buildings, the city sits poised on a thin
isthmus between the bay and Lake Washington. Its waterfront is rimmed with a
string of picturesque clam and oyster saloons; above them whirs a six-lane
highway, bringing scores of commuters into downtown. Within easy reach are
old-growth forests, glaciers, wild ocean beaches, national parks and Canada.
Theaters, galleries, symphony, opera and ballet are first-rate and well
attended; the downtown streets are lined with public art, from poetry carved in
the sidewalks and engravings on manhole covers to sculptures by Henry Moore and
Alexander Calder. Seattle spends more on arts per capita than nearly any other
city in the nation.

Seattlites have always been proud of their image as a kind of last frontier. In
the 80's, a strong economy nourished that pride. Boeing, the region's largest
employer, with 104,000 workers and an annual payroll of $4 billion, was
flourishing; the Seattle-Tacoma port had emerged as a center for Pacific Rim
trade; the high-tech industry, dominated by the giant Microsoft and with 350
other software companies, was in a boom phase. While other downtowns withered,
Seattle's prospered.

All this good word swelled the region's statistics. The population grew by 18
percent in the last decade (the national figure was only 9); unemployment is now
at a 22-year low (3.4 percent). Demand drove the housing market wild: last year
the average selling price of a house in Seattle was 40 percent higher than the
year before, and it was not unusual for anxious buyers to line up three and four
deep and make offers on the stoop.

People liked Seattle for its small-town, big-city mix and lack of pretension.
Many came to start families. In a recent poll the most common reply to the
question "What Is Your Favorite Place to Unwind After Work?" (asked by the
Seattle Weekly) was "Home." Migration to Seattle was so intense in the last few
years that it became virtually impossible to rent a U-Haul to the area; trucks
and vans were getting stuck here. No one was leaving.

That nothing lasts is nowhere more conspicuous than in the United States. As the
90's dawned, Seattle -- and its booming suburbs and exurbs -- was beginning to
pay the price for its good press. That price is easily measured: the rising cost
of living is making it harder for the middle class to live within the city
limits, and there is an emerging clash between rich and poor. Tolerance,
moderation, the small-town virtues that attracted people, are in shorter supply.
Seattle is no longer a quaint frontier town but a booming metropolis teetering
precariously on the brink of becoming something it did not particularly seek to
become: a big urban city, with all the advantages and headaches that accompany
that designation.

Must the growth of a city inevitably lead to decay? That seems to be the pattern
in this country, in "livable city" after "livable city." We populate our urban
areas to the point of degradation, then abandon them. Our cities, like so many
other products of contemporary life, are disposable. The advance of technology,
the change from a manufacturing to a service and information-based economy and
the accumulation of private wealth have made it possible for people and commerce
to settle pretty much where they please. And settle we do -- over and over and
over. The average American moves 11 times in a lifetime; nearly one-fifth of the
population relocates each year. How long can this search for a "better place"
continue before we have trashed them all?


TAKE A STROLL THROUGH OCCIDENTAL PARK, a brick-and-tree-lined commons just off
First Avenue downtown. Homeless men loiter there; many curl up at night in the
doorways of the hip coffee shops along First Avenue. Panhandlers energetically
hustle the tourists, and crack dealers have made the corners around the
well-known Pike Place Market their domain. Recent acts of gay-bashing have
shaken the sanctity of downtown neighborhoods; racial attacks have unnerved city
high schools. The school system is faced with large classes and an ineffective
bureaucracy. Courts are overcrowded; plans for a new county jail are in the
offing. Local businesses -- among them Weyerhauser, Boeing, major banks and
airlines -- have recently announced layoffs. "It's a healthy economy, but it has
plateaued," says Jim Hubert, editor of the Seattle-Everett Real Estate Research
Report.

Seattle, more than most cities, is wary of outsiders. The relatively low housing
prices of the mid-1980's attracted many equity-rich Californians, who sold their
$750,000 homes in places like Orange County and bought similar houses here for a
third of the price. Others bought inexpensive houses with good views and then
tore them down and built neo-mansions in their place, raising tax assessments
throughout the neighborhood. (Though the real-estate and home-construction boom
abruptly ended in the past six months, the price of a home in neighborhoods like
Queen Anne and Capitol Hill runs as high as half a million dollars.) Aggravating
anti-outsider sentiment was the disclosure a few months ago that the Pike Place
Market is actually owned by a Manhattan-based property management firm. Nor does
it sit well that the city's professional baseball team, the Mariners, is owned
by a businessman from Indianapolis, its football team by a California developer.

These days it is popular for Seattlites -- both old and new -- to blame their
problems on this influx of newcomers. The biggest gripes are traffic congestion,
air pollution, crime and the high cost of living. Voters proved they were
against the "Manhattanization" of Seattle's skyline when in 1989 they forcefully
ratified a cap on the height and size of downtown buildings. A growing faction
has adopted the hostile rallying cry: "Have a Nice Day -- Somewhere Else."

Perhaps the worst result of Seattle's uncontrolled growth in the last few years
is the effect it's having on the pristine environment that drew so many people
to the Northwest in the first place. In the past the city was a leader in urban
environmental policies: Seattle has one of the highest garbage collection rates
in the nation in order to afford the best recycling program; 82 percent of the
city's residents participate in curbside recycling. In November 1989, 70 percent
of King County voters agreed to tax themselves a total of $117 million so that
the county could buy 3,000 acres of open space and 70 miles of trails.

Now that "forever wild" posture appears to be wilting. A statewide initiative on
the ballot last November would have provided $160 million to help communities
enact and enforce growth controls and zoning laws. The complex proposal was
defeated 3 to 1, losing in every one of the state's 39 counties. The opposition
was well financed; it spent $1.5 million raised from developers, real-estate
agencies, Boeing, Weyerhauser and others. But the defeat is seen as a signal
that even pro-environmentalists are beginning to check their pocketbooks before
voting.

Yet now more than ever the Seattle area needs environmental consciousness: its
landfills will soon be full. (As a temporary solution, the city has hired Waste
Management Inc. to haul its 400,000 tons of annual garbage to a cash-poor county
in Oregon, beginning next April.) According to the state departments of Ecology
and Health, 40 percent of Washington's recreational beaches are "seriously
threatened by pollution." Traffic congestion around Seattle is so bad that on
many summer days a haze clouds Mount Rainier from view. Every day the city is
becoming more and more like the Southern California megalopolis it so detests.

Seattle's growth is limited by its physical boundaries, but the region continues
to expand. The population of the surrounding three-county area grew by 21
percent in the 1980's, to an estimated 2.5 million, with another 200,000 people
expected by 1995. Dairylands and truck farms are being replaced by strip malls
and warehouses, surrounded by tract homes on cul-de-sacs. Laurie McCutcheon, a
local demographer who has spent the last few years studying population shifts
for some of Seattle's biggest firms, isn't convinced that government leaders are
prepared to deal with this growth. "In the early part of the decade, Seattle
dominated the county," she says, "but today the growth in the suburban cities is
dwarfing it, and the whole balance of power is shifting. We are fighting tooth
and nail over governance issues, like 'Should the county take over all
government -- city, suburban, transportation, sewer and water?' "

David Bricklin, an environmental lawyer who headed the Initiative 547 drive, is
even more skeptical. "When I moved here there were four tall buildings
downtown," says Bricklin, a native of Philadelphia. "There was not a rush-hour
traffic jam; now there are traffic jams any time of day or night, weekday or
weekend. It took me an hour and a half to get from downtown to the airport the
other day, in the middle of the afternoon. It is typically a 20-minute drive."

The problem is lack of foresight, he says. "We have virtually no mass transit --
no rail, no segregated bus ways. We are just now trying to develop a plan for
mass transit from Seattle out into the suburbs, but that's a decade away at
best."

Bricklin maintains that things are not as bleak as the 3-to-1 defeat of 547
indicates, but he still despairs: "Am I optimistic about Seattle's future? No, I
don't think so."


FROM HIS OFFICE 12 stories above Fourth Avenue, first-term Mayor Norm Rice looks
out on the skyscrapers that block the once clear view of the Puget Sound.
Building more of them, he says, is not on his agenda. Mayor Rice understands
that if he wants to govern a truly "great" city, expanding Seattle's diversity
-- of economy, ethnicity and race -- is essential. It won't be easy, but Rice
insists he is optimistic about Seattle's future. At the recent "urban summit" in
New York, presided over by Mayor David N. Dinkins and attended by 35 big-city
mayors, he appeared downright smug. A lot of mayors are struggling to save their
cities; Rice is worrying about how to preserve his.

"Every major urban city is a magnet," he says, tugging at the knot of his tie
and propping his feet on a glass-topped table. "Some people come in hope, some
to hide. Some succeed, others fail. But as the number of people coming to
Seattle who are unable to climb the ladder of success grows, they and their
problems begin to consume your whole sense of what you want to do as a city."

The explosive growth of the last three years has been "great," Rice admits, "but
I think it is possible for us to oversell ourselves." He also admits that he
welcomes a slowdown in the economy and rising housing prices: both will slow the
numbers moving to Seattle and give the city time to figure out how to
accommodate the population that is already taxing existing facilities and
services.

One of Mayor Rice's biggest challenges will be convincing Seattlites to stay and
fight rather than head for the next mecca -- or the suburbs. "It used to be that
when things like schools got bad the middle class would flee -- to a place like
Seattle," he says. "But now all cities face the same problems. There is no
'better place' to escape to. People have to stick around and get involved if
they want to save their schools and their neighborhoods."

Preparing the city for an increase in Asian, black and Hispanic minorities is
also near the top of the Mayor's list. Seventy-five percent of Seattle's
population of 512,000 is white. Rice, who is black, knows that Seattle must be
successfully integrated if it is to make the transition from a "livable" city to
an "international" city (as neighboring Vancouver has done so successfully).
"Our biggest balancing act now is that we don't want a city that's all white
Anglo-Saxon Protestant. Seattle deserves a multi-cultural, multi-ethnic
population."


AT A SMALL TABLE IN the Phnom Penh Noodle House, across the street from a
sprawling Asian restaurant-grocery store-pharmacy-gift shop called Uwajimaya, I
share a bowl of noodles with Lin Nouen, an 18-year-old Cambodian who has lived
in Seattle just one month. Smiling broadly, he repeats how glad he is to be
here. When he first moved to the States -- thanks to a sponsor in Austin, Minn.
-- he'd been disillusioned. It was too cold, and there were too few Asians. He
kept hearing that Seattle was the place to be, and he arranged a "transfer."
Today, dressed in the uniform of a typical high-school junior -- stone-washed
jeans and high-top sneakers -- he says it is better here than he ever expected.
"In one month I make more friends than I made in eight in Minnesota."

Outside the window, Asians of all ages, armed with shopping bags and bus
schedules, pop in and out of markets that line the streets, their shelves laden
with seaweed, noodles, exotic fruits and sake. This neighborhood is called the
International District: there are Filipino clothiers, Laotian-run bars, Chinese,
Japanese and Vietnamese newspapers, Asian welfare agencies, Korean movies and a
Cambodian hair salon. Asians are Seattle's most visible import -- their
population increased 16 percent between 1985 and 1988.

Lin says he is already investigating the job market. He hears there are
$7-an-hour jobs at a clothes manufacturing shop and is considering quitting
school to take one. "Already I like Seattle, very much," he says. "I think I may
stay here, maybe all my life." He has sent word to family members -- scattered
through Cambodia, Thailand and Laos -- that this is a good place.

Less than a mile from the International District, another kind of trade
featuring another kind of immigrant flourishes as dusk settles over the port
city. From near-downtown apartments and dilapidated wood-frame houses in the
Rainier Valley neighborhood come street hustlers, crack dealers, whores and gang
boys, eager to begin their day while the commuters are heading home. Up and down
Pine and Pike streets, from Capitol Hill to the Alaskan Way viaduct, clusters of
young toughs -- of a variety of ethnic groups -- gather on street corners. They
hassle passers-by and peddle their illicit wares to drivers who cruise slowly
by.

Police have been battling this "invasion" for several years, ever since Seattle
became a favorite stopping-off point for gang members -- Crips and Bloods --
from Southern California. They came for the wide-open drug market, traveling
straight up the Interstate 5 corridor that stretches from Los Angeles to
Vancouver. Teen-age prostitution was already a problem downtown, and soon crack
houses proliferated.

Then last summer a new explosion of cocaine dealers surfaced on the corners near
the Pike Place Market. Patrols were beefed up; more of Seattle's
first-in-the-nation mountain-bike cops were deployed. Mayor Rice and the City
Council armed the police with a controversial new drug-trafficking and loitering
ordinance that enabled them to arrest anyone observed selling drugs on the basis
of "conspicuous actions," even when no contraband is found. "I worry when I see
gangs hurting people on our streets, when I see gangs fighting in our parks,"
says the Mayor, "but the biggest issue facing us right now is the fine line
between being 'tough on crime' and harassment. We have yet to come to grips with
it."

The apartment of the novelist Tom Robbins looks out over this troubled
neighborhood (known as "the Blade" because it is "on the edge"). From his window
he can see signs of all the changes that the recent boom years have wrought on
his adopted home (he moved here from Richmond, Va., in 1962): traffic jams,
smog, street punks, skyscrapers. "In many ways this place was wilder 20 years
ago," Robbins says. "The difference is, while it has always been easy to get
beat up on these streets, 20 years ago you didn't worry about getting killed."

Now 54, the cult storyteller divides his time between Seattle and a house near
the sound, an hour outside town. "The changes are all a matter of perspective,"
he says. "People who come here now rave about the place -- but I know that 15,
20 years ago Seattle really was paradise. For those of us who were here then, we
do see the place today in much darker hues." He pauses and looks out on the
neon-lit street below. "But I could live anywhere in the world, and I choose to
live in Seattle."


UNLIKE MOST AMERICAN cities, Seattle enjoys a strong economy despite
recessionary rumblings. Boeing appears to be on an unstoppable roll: profits for
the year will exceed $1 billion and the company has a backlog of orders for
nearly 2,000 jets, worth over $90 billion, enough to keep it busy through 1995.

"The only wild card in our future is what goes on in the Middle East," says
Craig Martin, a spokesman for Boeing. "We can't predict exactly what the results
would be if there is some kind of economic upheaval as a result. Barring a major
shooting war, our outlook is pretty positive." Just before Christmas the
company's Seattle office handed out holiday bonuses equal to 5 percent of each
employee's salary -- a total of $253 million.

But Seattle's strongest economic card in coming years may be its proximity to
the Pacific Rim. Closer by ship and air to Asian markets than any California
city, the Port of Seattle is thriving: international air freight was up 8
percent last year; more than a million containers of cargo passed through the
docks. It is also home to the $3 billion-a-year North Pacific fishing fleet. At
a time when many big cities are cinching their belts, Seattle is expanding.

Shortly after this new decade began, David Brewster, publisher of the Seattle
Weekly, gave warning about the obstacles that faced his adopted hometown (he
came here from New Jersey in 1965): "The highest drama is to fashion a lasting
marriage . . . to have vitality along with grace, hustle along with humaneness.
Few American cities have managed to combine these qualities without toppling
into giantism or heartlessness." That is still Seattle's challenge, but it won't
be easy to achieve, especially given Americans' penchant for moving on instead
of digging in.

Some of the more restless already have their bags packed. I met a fellow one
afternoon outside the Osho Suravi Meditation Center (he'd moved here from
Milwaukee five years earlier), and he explained why he would soon be heading
for, in his words, "greener pastures." Greener? Really? "Seattle, for all its
beauty, is just too big, too dirty, too congested. Don't tell anyone, but I know
where the next mecca is," he whispered conspiratorially. "Burlington, Vermont."

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Mountain bike" police in Seattle arrest a drug suspect.
Cocaine dealers have also discovered the city. (pg. 24); Mount Rainier and the
Puget Sound form the backdrop for Seattle's skyline. The size and height of
downtown buildings have been limited by voters. (pg. 25); The thriving Port of
Seattle benefits from its proximity to the countries of the Pacific Rim. Diners
at Il Bistro, an upscale restaurant in the Pike Place Market -- a typical
byproduct of Seattle's booming economy. (pg. 26); Mayor Norm Rice would like
Seattlites to dig in and face their problems rather than move on. Seattle's
evening rush hour. The city is trying to develop a plan for mass transit to the
suburbs. (pg. 41); Airplanes ready for delivery at a Boeing plant north of
Seattle. The largest employer in the region, Boeing has a backlog of orders for
almost 2,000 jets, worth more than $90 billion. (pg. 57)(Photographs by Robert
Lyons for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Rules for Journalists: Necessity or Prior Restraint?

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1189 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 6


The Pentagon is establishing a system for covering a war in the Persian Gulf
that would impose much stricter restrictions on journalists than they were
subjected to during the Vietnam War.

Under the system, print and television combat coverage would be carried out
exclusively through groups of reporters called pools that are assembled and
escorted by the military. The reports would then be subject to a "security
review" by the military before being disseminated in Riyadh, Dhahran and
Washington, where they would become the basis for newspaper, news agency,
magazine and television reports.

During the Vietnam War, reporters could travel relatively freely and combat
coverage was not done by pools of reporters with military escort. In Vietnam,
there were ground rules for press coverage designed to protect the security of
military operations, and correspondents who violated those rules could have
their press credentials lifted. But there was no formal security review or
censorship, which was sometimes applied during the Korean War and which was also
used during World War II.

Pentagon officials acknowledge that only a handful of security breaches occurred
during the Vietnam conflict. Why, then, is it now necessary to impose more
restrictive procedures, which some news executives fear might be used to limit
coverage of mistakes or setbacks?

No Persuasive Public Case

Fred S. Hoffman, the second-ranking Pentagon spokesman during the Reagan
Administration and the early part of the Bush Administration and a former
Pentagon reporter for The Associated Press, said that the Defense Department had
not yet made a persuasive public case for its "security review" system.

"In my view, the Pentagon intends to impose de facto field censorship without
calling it that," said Mr. Hoffman, who added that the ground-rule approach used
in Vietnam would be adequate to defend the security of operations and the safety
of the troops.

"A security review is prior restaint," Mr. Hoffman said. "It is censorship by
the Government and could be abused to protect the military from criticism or
embarrassment."

Pressed to defend its regulations, Pentagon officials said that the system used
in Vietnam would not be well suited to a war in the Persian Gulf.

Access and Pools

They said that the logistical difficulties in providing access to rapid American
military operations in the gulf have dictated the decision to rely on specially
designated pools of reporters. And Pentagon officials argued that security
reviews would be needed because instant communications would increase the
chances that tactical information useful to the enemy could be disseminated so
quickly that it might endanger American operations.

The Pentagon spokesman, Pete Williams, said that an appeals process would be
established in case corresponents disagreed with the rulings by military
officials that some press reports, or portions of them, could not be released.
In the final analysis, Mr. Williams said, the Defense Department would rely on
the willingness of the media to accede to the military's judgment about what
information would not be fit for publication.

In an effort to address some concerns of news organizations, the Pentagon has
also dropped some proposed press restrictions. It no longer plans, for example,
to ban impromptu interviews with senior American miltiary officials entering and
leaving installations or to prohibit coverage of religious services in Saudi
Arabia.

The Pentagon also plans to drop the requirement that all interviews with
servicemen and women be on the record, a stipulation that some journalists
complained would inhibit troops from being candid. Nor does the Pentagon plan to
ban television pictures of severely wounded soldiers, as the miltiary initially
proposed.

Protecting Families Cited

The Pentagon had contended that those particular restrictions would have been
necessary to prevent security breaches and to protect families from learning
prematurely through news reports of killed or wounded soldiers before they could
be notified by the military authorities.

But some news executives and other critics fear that the remaining restrictions
might be used to limit coverage of mistakes. They are concerned that the
Pentagon system is driven not only by security considerations but also by
lingering suspicion toward news organizations dating from the Vietnam War.

"The Pentagon should scrap the entire system of prior restraint and security
review," said Andrew J. Glass, Washington Bureau chief of the Cox newspaper
chain.

Mr. Glass argued that the security review system would set a bad precedent for
prior restraint of news reporting and that it could lead to abuses by military
officials concerned with surpressing embarrassing information.

Drawing Distinctions

The dispute over news coverage, however, is not black and white.

Fred Francis, the Pentagon correspondent for NBC News, said, for example, that
he agreed with the essence of the Defense Department position that some form of
review is needed.

"This would not be a low-level guerrila war or a war of attrition in which the
disclosure of the location and size of a battalion would not be critical," said
Mr. Francis, drawing a distinction between the ground rules approach used in
Vietnam and the Pentagon's insistence on a using a security review for a war in
the gulf. "The inadvertent disclosure of such information in a set-piece gulf
war could cost a lot of lives because of missile warfare and the high-tech
weapons involved."

Mr. Francis also said, however, that some of the press restrictions initially
proposed by the Pentagon "went too far."

While there is a chance that the security review systems might be scrapped, this
appears to be unlikely.

Rules in Other Conflicts Varied i

Rules for news coverage of conflicts have varied widely. Journalists were
accorded relatively unimpeded access to major military operations during the
Second World War, were allowed to wear uniforms and accepted censorship as
necessary to protect the nation's security.

The Korean conflict began with a system of voluntary censorhip in which the
military relied on the news organizations to withhold the reporting of
information that could compromise military operations. Some journalists later
asked military officials to impose a censorship policy so that there would be
uniform standards about what information could be disclosed, according to a
history of relations between the military and news organizations written for the
Twentieth Century Fund by Peter Braestrup, a former Vietnam correspondent.
Formal censorship was later imposed after Chinese forces entered Korea and drove
allied forces south.

There was no censorship in Vietnam and few violations of the ground rules there.
Barry Zorthian, the former United States Mission spokesman in Saigon, has said
that there were only four or five breaches of security by the approximately
2,000 correspondents accredited to cover the Vietnam War between 1964 and 1968.
Some of the violations were unintentional errors.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1214 words



INTERNATIONAL A2-11

Saddam Hussein said Iraq will fight to keep Kuwait part of his nation. In a
speech three days before his Foreign Minister is to meet with Secretary of State
Baker, he told soldiers they were prepared to go to war. A1

King Fahd of Saudi Arabia said he shared President Bush's impression that Saddam
Hussein would withdraw his forces from Kuwait in compliance with the United
Nations deadline of Jan. 15. A10

Baker rejects French plan A11

Europeans press Baghdad on talks A11

Congressional votes on use of force against Iraq would probably support, though
narrowly, a decision by Presdient Bush to attack, the leaders of the Senate and
House said. A11

News analysis: Rules for reporters covering a war in the gulf are being
established by the Pentagon. The system would impose much stricter regulations
on journalists than were carried out in the Vietnam War. A11

The U.S.-Soviet summit meeting scheduled for Moscow in February may be postponed
because of differences over arms control and uncertainty in the Persian Gulf,
Administration officials said. A1 A revival for Soviet hard-liners is being
welcomed with glee by the editor of a once-obscure magazine that now features
exerpts from Mein Kampf and K.G.B. records aimed at besmirching Andrei Sakharov.
A3

Soviets raise hopes on answers to Korean crash A3

A dispute in Latvia has intensified the conflict between the central authorities
in Moscow and Baltic independence movements. The dispute is over control of
Latvia's main newspaper printing plant. A8

Haiti's provisional leader resigned after an apparent military coup by Dr. Roger
Lafontant, a supporter of the ousted Duvalier dictatorship. The new
President-elect, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, was reported safe. A1

Rebels in El Salvador made an offer to cooperate with "any type of
investigation" into the killings of two U.S. soldiers whose helicopter was shot
down in a guerrilla stronghold in the eastern part of the country. A2

Czechs will no longer represent Cuba in U.S.  A9

Rome Journal: Making a big issue of small change A4

NATIONAL A12-15, B7-9

Bank of New England was seized by the Federal Government, which said it would
protect the company's depositors until the bank could be sold. The rescue is
likely to cost taxpayers at least $2.3 billion. A1

A "super regulator" of all banks, savings associations and other financial
services will be recommended by the Bush Administration as part of a sweeping
overhaul of the complex regulatory system. D1

Changes in the student loan program are being considered by the Bush
Administration. The changes would increase direct lending by the Federal
Government and sharply curtail the role of commercial banks. A1

An advanced type of nuclear reactor built by the Soviets to generate power in
space will be bought by the U.S. in the first major sale between the former
antagonists of a space technology with miltary potential. B8

U.S. economic relations with Japan have become more truculent, reflecting
frustration over Tokyo's trading policies and unease over Japanese investment in
the U.S. D1

Hundreds of illegal immigrants die or are injured in Southern California as they
try to run across highways in an attempt to avoid capture by immigration agents.
Since 1987, at least 227 people have been struck. A1

Groups for breast cancer victims are taking a lesson from the success of AIDS
advocacy organizations and are using political action to urge the Federal and
state governments to pay more attention to the disease. A12

Lyndon Journal: Search for past offers lesson for future A12

Episcopalians retain convention in Arizona A12

U.S. has the highest rate of imprisonment in the world A14

Man's obsession with son's killing ends in arrests A14

O'Hare Airport should be expanded to ease problems there that are felt at
airports around the country, a report by the Secretary of Transportation said.
But neighbors of the Chicago airport vow a fight. B7

Yellowstone's rising tourism sets off debate B7

Drives to raise money for education will be renewed when Texas and Mississippi
lawmakers reconvene. Coming in states with weak economies and reluctance to
raise taxes, the efforts are attracting attention. B9

REGIONAL B1-6

A hybrid form of state government is shaping up in Connecticut, charged with
addressing a severe budget crisis. The new Governor, Lowell P. Weicker Jr., has
kept a monk-like silence about his plans. A1

New York City's growing fiscal crisis is straining the once-warm relationship
between the administrations of Governor Cuomo and Mayor Dinkins. The rift seems
to go beyond the usual political jockeying. B1

Higher property taxes are likely for residents of Morris County, N.J., where the
taxable worth of real estate is dropping after a 10-year boom in construction
and in property values. B1

The motorman in the subway train where two riders died on Dec. 28 said it was a
routine morning. A mild warning of trouble ahead did not seem too alarming. Then
came the flames and the smoke. B1 Outdated systems contributed to confusion in
subway fire B4

Penn Station fire prompts review of safety procedures B4

The largest union at The Daily News filed charges of illegal strikebreaking
against 98 of its own members -- said to have crossed the picket lines -- as the
strike entered its 11th week. B3

Grossinger's Home Bakery will close after 55 years. Customers at the landmark
bakery on the Upper West Side sighed in disbelief, as if they were losing a
member of the family. B1

A pack of fire-belching drag racers and other high-powered vehicles tore through
Madison Square Garden, and the muddy spectacle fulfilled every commuter's
fantasy of crushing a path through traffic. B2

Neediest Cases B2

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

SportsMonday

Basketball: Knicks defeat Clippers C6

Villanova ends Syracuse streak C6

Koncak earns his keep C6

N.C.A.A. upholds Upsala penalties C6

College player scores a record 72 points C7

Boats: Dealers fight slump C5

Column: Anderson on the Bears C2

Berkow on Oilers' Carlson C3

Features: Question Box C6

On Your Own C9

Football: Bears beat Saints C1

Bengals rout Oilers C1

Penalty costly for New Orleans C2

Giants' Walls may lose job C2

Turnaround for Dolphins C3

Golf: Kite outlasts Wadkins C4

Hockey: Remarkable goalie rotation for Rangers C1

Mid-season look at N.H.L.  C4

Outdoors: Sea duck shooting C9

Obituaries D9

Bernard Hellring, lawyer who led legal reform efforts Arts/Entertainment

Czechoslovak literature looks to the future C11

Stage actors who look to the screen C11

Challenges of filming in New York C11

Dance: "Five Again" at St. Mark's Church C13

Music: 2 pop bands, 2 approaches C18

Word and Image: "After the Crash" C16

"Under Cover" C16

Le Carre's "Secret Pilgrim" C18

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A16

America's duty to New York

Vietnam's brave voices

Topics: Calhoun strategy

Letters A16

William Safire: The letter A17

Anthony Lewis: The nuclear priority A17

Randy Shilts: Claim you're gay, avoid the draft A17

Lewis Shiner: Confessions of an ex-cyberpunk A17

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam's Brave Voices

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 498 words


Bui Tin was at Dien Bien Phu in 1954, when Ho Chi Minh's Viet Minh Army defeated
French colonial forces to secure an independent Communist North Vietnam. Bui Tin
was in Saigon, in April 1975 accepting the surrender of the South Vietnamese
Government that paved the way for reunification under Communist rule. Now, Bui
Tin is in Paris, calling for an end to Marxist-Leninist economic planning and
political repression in statements broadcast back to his homeland over the BBC.

Bui Tin's long journey reflects a growing disillusionment among important
Vietnamese Communists with Hanoi's failure to deliver on its revolutionary
promises. His words deserve serious consideration by his political superiors,
rather than the abuse and punishment that is the dissenter's usual lot in
Communist Vietnam.

Mr. Tin was a close associate of Ho Chi Minh. So was Vo Nguyen Giap, the
military architect of Dien Bien Phu and of Hanoi's victorious war in the South.
Mr. Giap is similarly impatient with the timidity of Hanoi's reforms. So are
numerous former Viet Cong leaders and other Communists with historic ties to the
old South.

These people have been loyal and convinced Communists for most of their lives.
But unlike some of the career Communists now climbing the ranks of power in
Hanoi, these old revolutionaries embraced Communism because they saw it as an
ideal means to achieve independence, reunification and economic development.

Today Vietnam is an impoverished bystander amid Southeast Asia's economic boom.
And the political divisions between North and South, Communist and non-Communist
remain acute. It should not be all that surprising to see people like Bui Tin
breaking ranks.

Mr. Tin faces almost certain persecution when he returns. He reports that his
family has already been interrogated. Impeccable revolutionary credentials
failed to save other Communist critics of the regime from arrest during last
spring's sweeping purge. Many longtime Communists find it easier to suppress any
misgivings and enjoy the rewards available to members of the nomenklatura.

Yet those who are honest with themselves cannot believe that present-day
Vietnamese Communism has much of a future. Ideology and a heavy-handed
bureaucracy stunt economic reform. Democracy remains illusory. The real issue is
power, not economic or political theory. Those calling the shots in Hanoi insist
on centralized control.

Bui Tin now challenges their power head on. He calls for a "real democratization
and opening," in contrast to the window-dressing undertaken so far. He even
speaks of a government of national reconciliation, including anti-Communists who
have fled Vietnam since the Communist takeover.

Anti-Communists may find it difficult to work with even the most reform-minded
Communists. Yet Mr. Tin gives voice to the deepest hopes of millions of
Vietnamese. Given recent events in the Communist world, his more orthodox
comrades would be foolhardy to ignore his bold advice.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 8, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Pentagon Issues Press Rules Authorizing Military Censors

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 448 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 7


The Defense Department issued rules today for journalists who would cover a
Persian Gulf war, including a requirement that military censors review all
reports before they are disseminated.

Pete Williams, the assistant secretary of defense who issued the rules,
discarded some earlier proposals that news executives had said would impose
unnecessary hardships on reporting.

But even with those changes, the rules appeared to subject reporters to
restrictions greater than they were obliged to operate under during the Vietnam
war. Under the Pentagon's rules, print and broadcast coverage of hostilities
would be allowed only by officially designated "pools" of reporters operating
under a military escort.

In addition, all reports would be subject to censorship -- what the Defense
Department called a "security review" -- before they could be disseminated.

No Similar System in Vietnam

There was no similar system of advance review in Vietnam, where reporters were
free to try to make their way around the country without a formal escort.

The rules issued today said that the security review would be conducted by the
public affairs officer at the scene to determine whether reports "contain
information that would jeopardize an operation or the security of U.S. or
coalition forces."

If there were a dispute, the issue would be taken up by senior officers at a
central base in Saudi Arabia. If the dispute persisted, it would be be forwarded
to the Pentagon for resolution.

The rules include the statement that "material will not be withheld just because
it is embarrassing or contains criticism."

'Prior Restraint' Cited

Andrew J. Glass, Washington bureau chief of the Cox newspaper group, criticized
the system of security review as an unnecessary system of censorship. "I'm not
against stringent rules," he said. "Experience shows that if people are given a
clear set of rules, what may and may not be reported, they will follow them. But
what will happen here is a system of prior restraint imposed by bureaucrats in
the field."

An earlier draft proposal contained numerous restrictions that Mr. Williams
eliminated in response to complaints from news executives, including a
prohibition on impromptu interviews with military personnel and a requirement
that all interviews be on the record.

The Pentagon also dropped a prohibition on taking pictures of severely wounded
soldiers. New guidelines stress that news organizations should be cautious about
broadcasting such pictures, and should be particularly careful to determine that
the next of kin of casualties have been notified before pictures of the
casualties are broadcast or published.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 8, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

PENTAGON SCRAPS $57 BILLION ORDER FOR ATTACK PLANE

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1349 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 7


Defense Secretary Dick Cheney today canceled plans to build a new Navy attack
plane, the largest weapons program ever terminated by the Pentagon.

The decision, which surprised military analysts, was announced in a Pentagon
statement that said the builders of the $57 billion A-12 warplane program had
defaulted on the program by failing to "design, develop, fabricate, assemble and
test the A-12 aircraft within the contract schedule."

The contractors are the McDonnell Douglas Corporation and the General Dynamics
Corporation, both based in St. Louis. Both denied that they defaulted on the
contract and said they would challenge the ruling. Moments after the
announcement, General Dynamics said it would begin laying off 4,000 workers in
Fort Worth and Tulsa, Okla. McDonnell Douglas said as many as 5,000 workers
could lose their jobs in the next few days. [Page A18.]

Signal to the Military

Mr. Cheney's decision to cancel the radar-evading stealth warplane, the Navy's
top-priority aircraft, sent a strong signal to both the military industry and to
the armed services that he would tolerate neither delays and cost overruns nor
attempts to conceal such problems. [Page A18.]

"This program cannot be sustained unless I ask Congress for more money and bail
the contractors out," Mr. Cheney said in a statement. "But I have made the
decision that I will not do that. No one can tell me exactly how much more it
will cost to keep this program going.

"I do not believe a bailout is in the national interest. If we cannot spend the
taxpayers' money wisely, we will not spend it."

No Planes Have Been Built

The A-12, or Avenger, is 18 months behind schedule and more than $2.7 billion
over cost, by Pentagon projections. The contractors have made designs and built
some parts, but have produced no actual aircraft.

Pete Williams, the Pentagon spokesman, told reporters at a briefing today that
under the contract, McDonnell Douglas and General Dynamics had agreed to develop
eight prototype planes at a maximum cost of $4.8 billion, but added that the
Pentagon now estimated that that cost would rise to more than $7.5 billion if
the project proceeded. Mr. Williams said the Pentagon had paid about $1.2
billion to the contractors. Contractors had incurred costs beyond the $4.8
billion contract before even building the plane and were seeking to have the
Defense Department reimburse them.

After developing the prototypes, the companies were to build six planes at a
total cost of no more than $1.2 billion, along with parts for eight others at a
total of $200 million.

On Dec. 14, Mr. Cheney had ordered the Navy to prove why the Pentagon should not
terminate the A-12 program. In a three-hour meeting on Saturday, the Navy urged
him to proceed with the program by buying fewer planes over a longer period and
absorbing some of the contractors' costs.

Military analysts had said it was highly unlikely that Mr. Cheney would go so
far as to cancel a program the Navy said was so vital to its aviation programs
into the 21st century. But the Secretary was clearly not persuaded by the Navy's
arguments.

Today he said the stealth technology would still be needed "if attack aircraft
are to elude advanced fighters and surface-to-air missiles in the future."

"My decision against a bailout is solely in response to the problems with the
current program," his statement said. "We will still need to develop a
next-generation strike airplane for our aircraft carrier force to replace the
aging A-6 aircraft."

Now, to Consider Alternatives

The A-6, the Intruder, first flew in Vietnam and was used in the United States'
attack on Libya in April 1986. The A-12, a faster, radar-evading version, would
also have been based on carriers and would have been used to attack targets on
the ground with rockets and bombs.

Mr. Williams said the Defense Department would "be considering alternatives to
the A-12 program to meet future needs for carrier aircraft" but added that no
decisions had been made. He said any replacement would have the same
all-weather, night-fighting and radar-evading abilities as the A-12.

The Navy had originally planned to buy 620 A-12's to replace the A-6. The first
A-12's were to have been delivered to the Navy in February 1992, and the plane
would have completely replaced the A-6 by the late 1990's.

Three years ago, the Pentagon decided against buying a modernized version of the
A-6. The Grumman Corporation, which builds the plane, said it would take at
least three years to gear up its production line and network of suppliers.

Contract Is Termed Flawed

In a statement today, General Dynamics called Mr. Cheney's ruling "extremely
disappointing, especially in light of the substantial progress that had been
made on this highly advanced carrier-based aircraft."

The contractors said the development contract, signed in January 1988, was
flawed, and they blamed the Pentagon for the problems. On Dec. 31 they filed a
claim against the Pentagon for $1.4 billion.

A spokesman for General Dynamics, Alvin Spivak, said the A-12's development
problems had "been the direct result of Government insistence on a
fixed-price-type contract for a program that is on the cutting edge of
technology."

In St. Louis, McDonnell Douglas said the company would "vigorously pursue all
claims against the Government" and added, "Therefore, the Government's decision
is not expected to have a material adverse affect on McDonnell Douglas's
financial position."

But Mr. Williams, the Pentagon spokesman, said the contractors were to blame.
"The Secretary believes that the contractor and the Defense Department entered
into the contract to build the A-12 as a good-faith matter, both parties with
their eyes wide open," he said. "The contractors knew precisely what the terms
of the contract were for. We believe the contractor has defaulted."

Other Programs Canceled

The Pentagon's announcement came after the stock market closed. General Dynamics
stock closed at $25, down 32.5 cents. McDonnell Douglas stock closed at $38.75,
down $1.

Mr. Cheney's ruling seemed to reflect an effort to curb a longstanding Pentagon
practice of bailing out troubled programs that the military service say they
urgently need.

Last summer, the Navy canceled a $5 billion contract with the Lockheed
Corporation to build a submarine-hunting airplane, the P-7A, because development
costs had jumped sharply. In December, the Army terminated the FOG-M missile
when development costs tripled.

Budget analysts said cancellation of the A-12 program would ease the Pentagon's
long-term budget constraints. Gordon Adams, director of the Defense Budget
Project, a nonpartisan research organization here, said the savings would rise
from $2 billion a year in the early 1990's to more than $8 billion a year by the
end of the decade.

The problems plaguing the A-12 program, one of the Pentagon's most highly
classified projects, led to the early retirement and transfer of two admirals
last month and of another officer responsible for managing the plane's
development. An internal Navy inquiry found that the officers had failed to
inform top Defense Department officials of extensive delays and cost overruns in
the development of the attack plane.

Eight days later, the Pentagon's procurement chief, John A. Betti, abruptly
resigned. The Defense Department Inspector General, Susan J. Crawford, had said
Mr. Betti put too much credence in contractors' assurances that the A-12 program
was on schedule, while ignoring an aide's warnings that the project was running
into trouble.

Mr. Cheney was deeply embarrassed last April, five weeks after he told Congress
that development of the plane was on schedule, when the contractors told the
Navy about the delays and cost overruns.

The Securities and Exchange Commission and the United States Attorney for the
Eastern district of Missouri are investigating accounting procedures and
payments made for incomplete work the companies performed on the A-12 program.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney (The New York Times) (pg. A1);
Artist's rendering of the Navy's A-12 attack plane which was canceled by Defense
Secretary Dick Cheney. (General Dynamics) (pg. A18)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 8, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Filipino Actress Allowed in 'Saigon'

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 380 words


A union-management arbitrator ruled yesterday that the Filipino actress Lea
Salonga can come to Broadway to re-create her leading role as a Vietnamese bar
girl in the hit London musical "Miss Saigon." The decision resolves a dispute
over the casting of the $10 million show, which has a record advance ticket sale
of $34 million.

Alan Eisenberg, the executive secretary of Actors' Equity, said the arbitrator
approved Miss Salonga "under the unique services paragraph of the rule book on
the ground that no Asian-American actor had both the physical capacity to play
the role and any significant theatrical experience."

Of International Stature

The show's producer, Cameron Mackintosh, had asked the actors union in December
to approve Miss Salonga, saying that he had seen 1,200 Asian actresses but that
none had her unique ability or professional potential.

Mr. Mackintosh later asked that the union permit her to appear on Broadway by
declaring her a star of international stature. He cited the acclaim and
recognition the 19-year-old actress had received for her London performance as
Kim, who falls in love with an American marine at the time of the fall of Saigon
in 1975.

Taking the Matter Further

A few days later, Equity's alien committee rejected Miss Salonga on the grounds
of both star status and unique ability, and after the union's council upheld the
rejection Mr. Mackintosh took the matter to arbitration.

The arbitrator, Daniel Collins, a professor of law at New York University, ruled
in favor of Miss Salonga solely on the question of unique talent and did not
address the issue of whether she was an international star.

The union was "disappointed with the decision," Mr. Eisenberg said.

"We certainly believe that there is sufficient and wonderful talent within the
Asian-American acting community in this country to do this role in extraordinary
fashion," he said.

Professor Collins announced his decision in telephone calls from the Caribbean,
where he is on vacation, to lawyers for Equity and Mr. Mackintosh. A written
ruling is to follow in several weeks, Mr. Eisenberg said. Professor Collins
could not be reached for comment.

Alan Wasser, Mr. Mackintosh's general manager, said he was gratified by the
ruling.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 8, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
Making History Repeat, Even Against Its Will

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1142 words


Perhaps if the world were not actually on the brink of war, "A Bright Room
Called Day," a fatuous new drama about a world on the brink of war, would not be
an early front-runner for the most infuriating play of 1991. But then again, is
the time ever right for a political work in which the National Socialism of the
Third Reich is trivialized by being equated with the "national senility" of the
Reagan era? Or in which George Bush's ultimatum to Iraq, the Iran-contra scandal
and Mr. Reagan's AIDS policy are all frivolously lumped together as historical
progeny of the Reichstag fire and Dachau? "History repeats itself, first as
tragedy, then as farce," goes one of the evening's many aphorisms. "A Bright
Room Called Day" would be a sitcom if only it were any fun.

Written by Tony Kushner, the play is of note because it marks the return of the
gifted young director Michael Greif to the Public Theater after his success with
"Machinal." What's more, the production boasts a stellar cast that includes
Frances Conroy, Joan MacIntosh, Marian Seldes and the performance artist Reno.
The actors are unfailingly professional in trying circumstances -- poor Ms.
Seldes must don rags to play a cronish symbolic ghost known as Die Alte, if you
please. Yet no one can escape a script that starts off with a Berliner's
leadenly ironic declaration that Berlin is a "relatively safe" place to be in
1932 and gets less subtle from there.

Mr. Kushner is playwright in residence at the Juilliard School of Drama, and "A
Bright Room Called Day" is nothing if not a product of a reading list. Its
principal characters, a handful of middle-class German artists and film-industry
workers caught in the collapse of the Weimar Republic, often seem like studied
stand-ins for Sally Bowles and the rest of the indolent, omnisexual drifters in
Christopher Isherwood's "Berlin Stories." When Mr. Kushner is not paraphrasing
Isherwood ("I am not a camera," says Reno), he rehashes Marx and Freud, and at
the end of Act I, the company re-enacts "Faust" by way of "Mephisto." (Frank
Raiter plays the modern-dress devil in a devil-may-care manner appropriate to a
less pretentious adaptation of Goethe, "Damn Yankees.") For the audience's
further edification, the speechifying is accompanied by slide projections
relaying the red-letter events of the period and the author's analysis of those
events in textbook ese.

The most forceful interruptions to Mr. Kushner's nominal narrative, however, are
those periodic monologues gamely delivered by Reno, who plays Zillah Katz, a
contemporary Jew from Great Neck, L.I., who has for some metaphysical reason
visited Berlin in 1990. Through some clumsily executed theatrical crosscutting,
the playwright can draw his false analogies between 1932 and the present, as
well as make wisecracks about Patrick Buchanan, Leonard Bernstein, Jesse Helms
and No Doz. (No Doz is definitely the most germane of these references.)


Amid these ramblings, one intriguing question is raised: If Hitler is this
century's standard for "absolute evil," is it an "unusable standard" that
prevents anything else from being called evil? But the argument is immediately
vitiated by Mr. Kushner's insistence on indiscriminately dumping all present-day
ills into Zillah's diatribes until all moral distinctions are blurred and
history is rendered meaningless. One hardly has to be a Reagan or Bush partisan
to be offended by the author's juvenile line of attack; if anything, the play
inflicts a greater slander on the antiwar movement of this fateful moment by
making its spokeswoman as mindless as Zillah.

It says everything about the interchangeability of Mr. Kushner's political
equations -- and his opportunism -- that when this play was produced in London
two years ago, Zillah's monologues likened Thatcherite England to the Third
Reich. The same lack of specificity can be found in the playwright's
indistinguishable characterizations: Aside from a mascara-fixated homosexual
(Henry Stram), everyone on stage has the same windy diction, from a hot-headed
Hungarian refugee (Olek Krupa) to an opium-addicted starlet (Ellen McLaughlin)
to Zillah and Die Alte.  While Mr. Kushner's political position is clear -- he
is angry at selfish liberal dilettantes, then and now, who equivocate rather
than act -- he is unable to animate the people who reveal it. Even as Ms. Conroy
cries her way through the second act, her character's internal conflict, that of
a well-meaning movie actress who cannot bring herself to join either the
underground or her friends in exile, remains externalized and remote.


For Mr. Greif, "A Bright Room Called Day" is an odd choice with which to follow
up his revival of "Machinal," and not just because of its quality. Mr. Kushner's
play is set in virtually the same period as that 1928 Sophie Treadwell drama of
pre-Depression New York and, more crucially, is written in the same
mock-Expressionist style. Inevitably Mr. Greif must repeat himself here, and
just as inevitably, the repetitions (the nightmarish noise effects, the
Brechtian blackouts) will seem stale to those who saw the earlier show. As in
"Machinal," Mr. Greif again seems at his weakest in directing actors, but, as
was not the case last time, he also loses command of the production's look.
Frances Aronson's lighting must overcompensate for the menace missing from John
Arnone's uncharacteristically flavorless parlor set, which lies in an awkward
gully dividing the audience.

Curiously enough, "Machinal" tapped into more of the anxiety associated with a
prewar civilization than this effort does; at its best, in fact, Mr. Greif's
treatment of "Machinal" was reminiscent of Harold Prince's landmark staging of
the Isherwood-inspired "Cabaret," which bridged the ominous moods of Weimar
Germany and the Vietnam-War-divided America of its time. "A Bright Room Called
Day," by contrast, seems to take place in the same distant, ethereal nowhere
land as its artsy, unilluminating title. Mr. Greif, talented as he may be, must
return to earth if he is serious about enlisting in the theater's efforts to
bring the new war home.

A Bright Room Called Day
By Tony Kushner; directed by Michael Greif; set design by John Arnone; costumes,
Walker Hicklin; lighting, Frances Aronson; sound score by John Gromada;
projections by Jan Hartley; associate producer, Jason Steven Cohen. Presented by
Joseph Papp. At the Public Theater/LuEsther Hall, 425 Lafayette Street.

Zillah Katz . . . Reno
Agnes Eggling . . . Frances Conroy
Annabella Gotchling . . . Joan MacIntosh
Paulinka Erdnuss . . . Ellen McLaughlin
Vealtninc Husz . . . Olek Krupa
Gregor Bazwald . . . Henry Stram
Die Alte . . . Marian Seldes
Roland and Emil Traum . . . Kenneth L. Marks
Rosa Malek . . . Angie Phillips
Gottfried Swetts . . . Frank Raiter

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Frances Conroy, left, and Reno in "A Bright Room Called Day."
(Martha Swope/New York Shakespeare Festival)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
U.S. Logistical Effort Nears Peak in the Gulf

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 754 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Jan. 6


Every few minutes during long stretches of the day, another American cargo plane
laden with weapons or equipment rumbles to a halt on the runway of a giant
military base here in the Saudi desert.

Commercial jets, each filled with hundreds of American soldiers fresh from
Europe or the United States, pull up alongside the cargo planes already parked
on the sun-warmed tarmac.

At Saudi ports along the Persian Gulf, as many as a dozen jumbo American cargo
ships dock every day, each one jammed with tons of supplies for the 325,000
American troops already deployed here, and for nearly 100,000 other soldiers,
sailors and airmen who are due to arrive by the end of next month.

The buildup here is the largest deployment of American troops and supplies since
the Vietnam War. But in terms of the number of soldiers and the mass of weapons
and equipment moved in such a short time, the operation here may have no equal
in all of military history.

'Ready to Hit Our Peak'

The man in charge of this logistical colossus, Maj. Gen. William G. "Gus"
Pagonis of the Army, says it is all going according to plan. "The deployment is
moving very well and very efficiently," he said confidently. "We are now ready
to hit our peak."

The peak comes this month as a result of President Bush's order last November to
increase the number of troops deployed by nearly 150,000, bringing the total to
430,000 by late February.

Air Force combat planes are being brought into the Persian Gulf at a rate of
more than five a day, including new F-117A "stealth" fighter-bombers, and should
soon number more than 900.

The Army is increasing its tank forces here from 1,000 to more than 1,300. The
Navy is adding the aircraft carriers America, Theodore Roosevelt and Ranger and
the battleship U.S.S. Missouri to its already vast fleet in the region.

U.N. Deadline Near

The United Nations has imposed a Jan. 15 deadline for Iraq to withdraw from
Kuwait or face the use of force.

While many American military officials concede privately that they will not be
ready for a strike against Iraq by the deadline, they say they are still
scrambling to have as many troops as possible in place by the 15th -- in large
part because they fear a pre-emptive attack by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.

General Pagonis and his 16,000-member staff -- he had a staff of five when the
operation began last August -- are responsible for providing each of those
soldiers, within a few days of their arrival in Saudi Arabia, with the weapons,
uniforms and other equipment they will need for a war with Iraq.

It is requiring a round-the-clock, nearly superhuman effort to move people and
equipment here, General Pagonis says.

5 Days to Get Ready

On an average day, nearly 2,000 soldiers and sailors arrive in the Persian Gulf,
and each is expected to be "married" to his weapons and equipment and moved out
to his unit within five days.

That demands careful timing, since the military planner's nightmare is a soldier
who arrives in Saudi Arabia only to discover that his tank or other vital weapon
is sitting on a ship that is still weeks from port. While they wait for their
equipment, soldiers must be housed and fed near the port.

"On any given day there are hundreds of ships at sea" bringing cargo to Saudi
Arabia for the buildup, General Pagonis says. "And I can tell you where each of
this ships is right now."

310 Tons of Mail

There are more than 1,000 trucks on the roads and highways of Saudi Arabia
delivering supplies and food to military units already deployed in the desert.
The trucks are also used to distribute an estimated 310 tons of mail that arrive
here each day for American troops.

Despite what he says are the Pentagon's best efforts, General Pagonis
acknowledges that there have been some delays in delivery of vital equipment.

Desert-colored uniforms and desert boots are still in short supply for American
soldiers here. But General Pagonis says there are enough of the uniforms for
front-line troops and, because of rush orders to the manufacturers, 30,000 to
40,000 of the uniforms are now arriving in Saudi Arabia each week.

When the system works, it can be an impressive sight, as it was last week at a
Saudi port as soldiers from the Army's VII Corps, based in Ansbach, Germany,
watched their top-of-the-line tanks being unloaded from the belly of the U.S.S.
Bellatrix.

Under military reporting rules, the exact location of the port in eastern Saudi
Arabia cannot be identified.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "The deployment is moving very well and very efficiently," said
Maj. Gen. William G. Pagonis of the Army, referring to the military buildup in
Saudi Arabia. (Pool photo via Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Aspin Sees Air Strikes Leading to a Quick Victory

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1233 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 8


The chairman of the House Armed Services Committee said today that if war breaks
out in the gulf, the United States and its allies will attack in phases,
beginning with an air campaign against Iraq and Iraqi troops in Kuwait.

The chairman, Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin, said a sustained
ground attack would be used as a last resort and would come in the final phase
of the fighting, after it was determined that Iraqi forces had been weakened.

Mr. Aspin said the United States has a good chance of scoring a rapid victory
over Iraqi forces with relatively light American casualties. Mr. Aspin defined a
rapid victory as one that could be achieved in less a month and said that
casualties could be in the range of 3,000 to 5,000, including 500 to 1,000 dead.


Argument for Force

His assessment, presented in a detailed report that Mr. Aspin discussed at a
news conference, is likely to be cited by lawmakers who favor giving President
Bush strong Congressional endorsement to use force against Iraq.

In an assessment that appeared similar in some respects to Mr. Aspin's, King
Fahd of Saudi Arabia has evidently concluded that the international coalition
against Iraq must be prepared to strike at military targets deep inside Iraq
without destroying the country itself. [Page A9.]

Mr. Aspin said in an interview that his assessment about the prospects for a
quick victory and his conclusions about how the war would be fought were "based
on numerous conversations with officials in Government and on the outside."
Pentagon officials have refused to discuss their casualty estimates or military
plans.

"We do not discuss future military plans," said the Pentagon spokesman, Pete
Williams, when asked about Mr. Aspin's report.

The Wisconsin Democrat has generally been supportive of the Bush
Administration's policy on the Kuwait crisis and said that he was issuing his
report to influence Congressional debate about whether to endorse the use of
force. The document might also strengthen the Bush Administration in its efforts
to persuade the Iraqis to withdraw from Kuwait.

War 'a Reasonable Option'

'If all else fails, war is a reasonable option here," Mr. Aspin said.

"Advocates of air power will likely get a full opportunity to see if air power
can win it by itself," Mr. Aspin said, discussing his assessment of how the
military plans to fight a war with Iraq.

"But the U.S. military has made sure that sufficient ground force capability is
available to do the job, if air power does not force Iraq's withdrawal from
Kuwait," Mr. Aspin wrote in his report on the American military's plans for
fighting a war against Iraq.

Mr. Aspin, whose committtee held a series of hearings on the Persian Gulf
crisis, said his conversations with current and former military officials had
led him to several conclusions about the likely course of war.

U.S. Objectives Limited

First, Mr. Aspin said, any war against Iraq would have the "limited" objective
to evict Iraqi forces from Kuwait.

"It is not a war to defeat and occupy the country of Iraq. It is not a war to go
on to Baghdad," Mr. Aspin told reporters today.

Second, Mr. Aspin said, the United States military plans to conduct a phased
campaign against Iraq, beginning with air strikes.

Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has sharply
criticized air power advocates, who say the United States can rely entirely on
air strikes to defeat Iraq, instead stressing the importance of a combination of
air, sea and ground operations.

But Mr. Aspin noted that General Powell also suggested in a December appearance
before the House Armed Services Committee that air and ground forces would not
necessarily be committed to combat simultaneously but could be used in sequence.

"I am convinced that if we must go to war," Mr. Aspin said, "we will fight a
phased campaign, one that begins with an air campaign against strategic and
military targets in Iraq, then proceeds to a sustained air campaign against
military forces in or near Kuwait and ends with the commitment of ground
troops."

Mr. Aspin said the initial targets in an air campaign would be Iraqi aircraft,
airfields, surface-to-air missiles, command and control complexes, and Iraq's
chemical, nuclear and biological installations. The United States and its allies
would then strike Iraqi forces in and around Kuwait, including supply depots,
field headquarters, highways and communiciations north of Basra and troop
concentrations.

By saying that he thought ground action would be deferred until the third phase,
Mr. Aspin said that he was referring to a major commitment of land forces to
seize territory and not the small-scale use of special forces or other units to
seize particularly important points, which might happen earlier. Mr. Aspin said
that he though some form of ground attack would be needed after air assaults had
weakned the Iraqi forces.

The emphasis on using air power in the early stages of a conflict, as well as
its likely prospects for success, would enable the United States to deliver
punishing strikes against Iraqi targets with relatively few casualties, Mr.
Aspin said.

'Bloody Campaign' Unlikely

"I judge the risk of a bloody campaign, with casualties in the 10,000 to 20,000
range, including several thousand fatalities, to be small," Mr. Aspin noted in
his report.

Instead, Mr. Aspin said that the United States had a good chance to achieve a
rapid victory with perhaps 3,000 to 5,000 casualities, including 500 to 1,000
dead.

Echoing many of the assumptions by airpower advocates, Mr. Aspin said that air
attacks were likely to lead to rapid victory because there is little concealment
in the desert for Iraqi forces and no friendly countries furnishing substantial
supplies to Iraq, making Iraqi troops especially vulnerable to attacks that
would interdict their supply lines. This is in contrast to the Vietnam War, in
which Hanoi obtained supplies from the Soviet Union and China and moved them to
the combat zones across mountainous or heavily forested terrain.

No Shadowy Enemy

"We would not be fighting a guerrilla force supported by a sympathetic
population, but a uniformed military that has occupied and largely depopulated
Kuwait," Mr. Aspin said, drawing another distinction with Vietnam.

Mr. Aspin also said that while some ground forces may not reach their peak
readiness until early February, Air Force and Navy planes will be fully ready by
mid-January, within a few days of the Jan. 15 deadline.

The lawmaker said that he believed that Arab forces allied with the United
States are willing to engage Iraqi forces in Kuwait, though he added they may be
reluctant to attack forces in Iraqi territory.

Attention was first drawn to the possibility of relying on air attacks to defeat
Iraq by Gen. Michael J. Dugan, the former Air Force Chief of Staff, who was
removed from his post by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney for talking openly about
Israeli military advice and possible plans to attack President Saddam Hussein
personally.

Since then, a number of experts, have stressed the use of airpower to defeat
Iraq, including former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger; Paul H. Nitze, the
former State Department and Pentagon official and Adm. William J. Crowe, the
former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Representative Les Aspin telling of military plan against Iraq
(Associated Press)

Map of the Middle East highlighting Iraq

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Across the South, a Clash of Doubt and Fervor

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1856 words

DATELINE: BILOXI, Miss., Jan. 8


The electronic sign in front of the Royal d'Iberville Hotel here carries a
message that can be found on billboards all over the South.

"Support . . . Support . . . Support Desert Shield!" it flashes out again and
again over the broad sandy beach leading down to the waters of the Gulf of
Mexico.

And to hear the people here and elsewhere in the South, traditionally a fortress
of patriotism, there is support for President Bush's demand that Iraq's troops
leave Kuwait, by force if necessary.

No Rush to War

But that support often seems to be qualified, hemmed in by doubts and qualms and
conditions. It may not be the kind of support likely to see President Bush
through a long, difficult war.

"I'm the wife of an Air Force sergeant, and I'll be a good soldier and follow my
President on Desert Shield," said Rita Garnier, an office manager at the Royal
d'Iberville. "But I say frankly and right up front that I'm against us being
over there, that I doubt there's any real reason for us to be involved, and that
I have more doubts the longer it all drags on."

In conversations with some 75 people during a weeklong, 1,500-mile journey by
car from the shores of the Atlantic near Norfolk, Va., to the shore of the Gulf
of Mexico here, the word that came up most often was "doubt."

Other words and phrases were common: "confusion" and "another Vietnam" and
"Talk, not fight" and, not least of all, "Go get 'em." But "doubt" was the word
most frequently uttered.

'I Still Don't Know'

It was the very first word used in the first of the 75 conversations, a word
spoken by Nellie Cutchins of Virginia Beach when she was asked to sum up her
thoughts on the American-led operation in the Persian Gulf.

"I want to be a good citizen and support our country," she continued, taking a
break from her work as a cleaning woman. "But I keep waiting for somebody to
explain to me why we are over there and whether it's worth it. I still don't
know, and it's been going on for months. I'm afraid we might be headed for
another Vietnam."

The ambivalence that surfaced in informal conversations with Southerners was
reflected in the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll, taken Saturday through
Monday. It showed that Southerners, like Americans nationwide, were evenly
divided on force versus sanctions in the gulf.

Among the respondents, 47 percent of Southerners favored military action if Iraq
does not withdraw its troops from Kuwait by the Jan. 15 deadline set by the
United Nations, while 47 percent of Southerners preferred to give economic
sanctions more time to work. Among Americans nationwide, 46 percent favored
military action and 47 percent favored continued sanctions.

The doubt about United States involvement in the gulf was most striking when
expressed by military dependents or by members of families with strong ties to
the military. Traditionally known for its staunch patriotism, the South is home
to an unusually large number of military bases and, further, sends an unusually
large percentage of its young people into the armed services.

There are military bases all around Biloxi, just as there are bases around
dozens of other Southern towns and cities, all the way back up to Montgomery,
Ala., and on to Atlanta and Florence, S.C., and Fayetteville, N.C., and into
Virginia Beach and Norfolk. And while each place has its "Support Desert Shield"
billboards, each also has its doubters.

Will 'Muddy' Politics Kill Her Husband?

In Fayetteville, home of the elite 82d Airborne Division, one of the first units
to head for the Middle East, Belvia Williams worries that her husband, Staff
Sgt. Andrew J. Williams 3d, might die fighting for oil and what she calls
"muddy" politics rather than to reverse an invasion and violations of human
rights.

"The President just hasn't told us enough about why we're there, and that's why
I have so many doubts," she said. "And I'm not sure we have negotiated enough. I
support our troops, and I certainly support my husband. And I keep to myself in
my letters and our few phone calls what I really feel."

In Norfolk, where streets and stores are noticeably quieter because so many
ships and troops have sailed for the Middle East, reservations about the
possibility of war have divided the Ogdon family.

A Father's Pride, A Yellow Ribbon

A few weeks ago, Glenn Ogdon, a 23-year-old Marine reservist whose military
speciality is operating landing craft, was called up.

His father, Donald, a retired psychology professor, was proud to see Glenn go.
He recalls wishing him him well and saying, "War is a terrible thing, but we've
got to stop Hussein."

Then the professor went out and tied a yellow ribbon around a tree in the front
yard.

Glenn's 20-year-old brother, Don, a rock musician, went out and slapped a new
bumper sticker on his car. It reads: "War Is Costly. Peace Is Priceless."

"It's a war over oil -- oil that we wouldn't need if we'd just spend war money
on energy research," Don argued.

"It's a war to stop a madman," his father countered.

The two agree on one thing: If war comes and does not end quickly, there will be
demonstrators in the streets.

"And I'll be one of them," Don said.

In Montgomery, Morris Dees, a leading civil rights lawyer, put it another way:
"I believe we have to do something about Hussein, and I hope talk will do the
job. But if it comes to war, George Bush better hope it goes the way Rambo would
do it."

Thus far, only Atlanta, a city with many residents born outside the South, has
seen big peace demonstrations. They have been organized in good part by the Rev.
McKinley Young, pastor of Big Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church, one of
the city's major black churches.

Mr. Young contends that United States troops have been sent to defend "the
richest refugees in the world -- Kuwaiti oil sheiks" and that President Bush
showed "extreme insensitivity" by setting a Jan. 15 deadline for Iraq to get out
of Kuwait.

"What he's done," Mr. Young said," is make Martin Luther King's birthday the
equivalent of D-Day for a war in which blacks will suffer the most. Blacks have
been forced by lack of other opportunities to volunteer for our army in
disproportionate numbers, and so they'll die in disproportionate numbers. If any
military person seeks refuge in our church, we will try to help him or her."

Most Southern blacks seem not to attach any racial or "third world" connotation
to United States involvement in the Middle East. However, from a broader
standpoint, many seem concerned about the disproportionately high number of
blacks in the armed services and what that means, in a war there or anywhere
else. Nationally, 29 percent of blacks said they favored military action in the
gulf instead of giving sanctions more time to work, according to the Times/ CBS
News Poll. Forty-eight percent of whites favored military action.

On Sunday, Mr. Young declared in his sermon, "Oil and land are never more
important than people." Then he and several hundred parishioners wrote antiwar
letters and cards and mailed them to members of Congress.

That night, at the First Presbyterian Church, a mostly white congregation in
Atlanta, there was a candlelight vigil for peace in the Middle East. One of the
thousand or so participants was Marjorie Chandley, an economic development
consultant for the state of Georgia.

"What I'm hoping for," she said, expressing a frequently heard point of view,
"is that the President will give negotiations and sanctions more opportunity to
work. It was O.K. for us to take action to protect Saudi Arabia, and Hussein
must leave Kuwait. But this country won't back this President in a war unless it
is convinced that talks and sanctions have been given enough time to work. I
have my doubts that is the case to this point."

Like Ms. Chandley, James O. Buchanan of Raleigh, N.C., believes that American
troops should have been sent to the Middle East and that Hussein must leave
Kuwait. But Mr. Buchanan, a B-17 bomber crew chief in World War II, is one of
those Southerners who also believes there has been enough negotiating, and that
economic sanctions have been given ample time to work.

"The point has come where we've got to move or we're going to get bogged down,"
he said. "The peace people are beginning to get involved. There's a danger of
another Vietnam. Let's do it -- quick and dirty. I learned about war the hard
way."

Not Everyone Says, 'Enough Is Enough'

In Montgomery, Mr. Buchanan's viewpoint was echoed by Mack Traywick, a
construction superintendent.

"Hussein has been given every possible chance to get out," he said. "Enough is
enough. Nobody likes war. But we're free in this country today because those who
went before us weren't afraid to take a stand. I trust the man who runs this
country. Let's get it over with."

But to many Southerners, among them Clay Herget of Raleigh, a Denison University
freshman home for the holidays, Mr. Buchanan and Mr. Traywick mistakenly see the
Middle East situation in too clear-cut a way.

"In fact," said Mr. Herget, "its a gray situation with all kinds of confusing
factors, from an illegal invasion of Kuwait to whether we have talked enough or
too much."

Still, Mr. Herget has no plans to become a peace protester. "For one thing, I
roomed with a Saudi prince for a while. For another, this isn't Vietnam. None of
my friends are going to volunteer to go. But on the other hand, if the draft
starts, they're not going to run into the streets or cut off their toes."

Mr. Herget's father, Barlow, a Raleigh City Councilman, and his mother, Millie,
a gift shop owner, say the threat of war is beginning to affect the South's
economy. Clay's sister, Casey, a senior at the University of Virginia, says many
of her friends already have lost their part-time jobs.

"People are afraid to make major economic decisions on things like construction
and major purchases because they don't know what's going to happen," Councilman
Herget said.

Mrs. Herget said that some of her stationery customers have said they will
return party invitations if war breaks out. "They don't feel it would be right
to have a good time when people are dying," she said.

In Florence, S.C., William Harper, owner of Sav-a-Ton Antiques, a glassware
business, said sales were off by half because of war worry. "We're being held
hostage, economically," he said. "There's a lot of politics in all of this Iraq
stuff, along with the craziness of Hussein. But that's life. We have to do what
we have to do. Southerners don't see a lot of sense in intellectualizing
something like this a whole lot. Just do it."

James T. Owens, a retired railroad engineer from the Atlanta suburb of Chamblee,
says he also sees no reason to intellectualize about the gulf crisis. But he's
not adverse to applying a little psychoanalysis. "I'm afraid we've got some
mighty big egos at work on both sides in this," he said. "How do you keep from
loosing face? Does that drive you to war?"

He pondered for a moment, then shook his head slowly. "I hope not," he said.
"But I have my doubts."

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Belvia Williams, Fayetteville, N.C.; "The President just hasn't
told us enough about why we're there, and that's why I have so many doubts. And
I'm not sure we have negotiated enough."; Donald Ogdon, Norfolk, Va.; "War is a
terrible thing but we've got to stop Hussein. . . . It's a war to stop a
madman."; Marjorie Chandley, Atlanta; "This country won't back this President in
a war unless it is convinced that talks and sanctions have been given enough
time to work." (Photographs by George Tames for The New York Times) (pg. A1);
James T. Owens, Chamblee, Ga.; "I'm afraid we've got some mighty big egos at
work on both sides in this. How do you keep from losing face?"; Nellie Cutchins,
Virginia Beach; "I want to be a good citizen and support our country. But I keep
waiting for somebody to explain to me why we are over there and whether it's
worth it."; The Rev. McKinley Young, Atlanta; "Oil and land are never more
important than people." (Photographs by GEORGE TAMES for The New York Times)
(pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
BUSH ASKS CONGRESS TO BACK USE OF FORCE IF IRAQ DEFIES DEADLINE ON KUWAIT
PULLOUT

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1440 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 8


President Bush called on Congress today to adopt a resolution supporting the use
of force against Iraq if it did not withdraw from Kuwait by Jan. 15. He said
such a vote would send a message to President Saddam Hussein that the United
States was united in its determination to make him withdraw from Kuwait.

Because Mr. Bush is unlikely to return to Congress again before sending American
troops into combat, the endorsement he requested today, if adopted, would be as
close as Congress would come to a formal declaration of war in advance of an
attack on Iraq.

He invited Congress to join him in sending "the clearest possible message to
Saddam Hussein that he must withdraw without condition or delay from Kuwait."
But he offered a political warning that "anything less would only encourage
Iraqi intransigence."

An End to Weeks of Indecision

The President's letter to Congressional leaders, ending weeks of White House
indecision over whether to seek support from Congress before sending American
forces into combat, sets the stage for a major debate in the House and Senate,
beginning on Thursday and due to last through Saturday.

In his letter, Mr. Bush also said a resolution "would help dispel any belief
that may exist in the minds of Iraq's leaders that the United States lacks the
necessary unity to act decisively in response to Iraq's continued aggression
against Kuwait." [Text, page A6.]

The President made his request as Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and
Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz of Iraq arrived in Geneva today for a meeting on
Wednesday that is considered perhaps the last chance for a peaceful resolution
of the gulf crisis before the Jan. 15 withdrawal deadline imposed by the United
Nations. Mr. Aziz said he was prepared to conduct "constructive talks," but
would not yield to American pressure. [Page A6.]

'All Necessary Means'

Mr. Bush's letter was the first Presidential request for Congressional backing
for offensive military action since President Johnson asked for the Gulf of
Tonkin resolution on the Vietnam War on Aug. 5, 1964.

Mr. Bush specifically asked both houses to adopt a resolution that "supports the
use of all necessary means" to carry out the United Nations Security Council
resolution of Nov. 29, which set the deadline. That resolution, like Mr. Bush's
letter, used the phrase "all necessary means" as a euphemism for military force.
Mr. Bush made the request only after Congressional leaders said in recent days
that he was almost certain to receive Congressional endorsement, though not
without a heated debate and divided vote that the President several times told
them he would prefer to avoid.

The letter arrived on Capitol Hill as several closed meetings were being held by
both parties in both houses, seeking to agree on language to propose when
Congressional debate begins later this week, probably on Thursday in both
houses, after Mr. Baker meets Mr. Aziz. Democratic and Republican leaders said
the direct Presidential request would be likely to win over some wavering
lawmakers.

Mr. Bush's request came as a New York Times/CBS News Poll, completed on Monday,
showed that the public remained evenly split between going to war or sticking to
sanctions after the 15th. Unlike some other polls, which asked only whether the
country should go to war, the Times/CBS News Poll offered continued reliance on
sanctions as an alternative.

The telephone survey of 1,348 adults, begun on Saturday, found that 46 percent
said that if Iraq did not withdraw from Kuwait by Jan. 15, then "the United
States should start military actions against Iraq." But 47 percent said the
United States should "wait longer to see if the trade embargo and other economic
sanctions work."

The difference was far less than the poll's margin of sampling error of plus or
minus three percentage points, and not significantly changed from a reading in
December, when 45 percent favored combat and 48 percent preferred waiting even
after Jan. 15.

The Times/CBS News Poll also found a sharply increased expectation of war from
the public, with 57 percent saying they anticipated that there would be fighting
with Iraq, compared with 44 percent last month. Sixty percent said they thought
Congress should have to vote a declaration of war -- a specific statement not on
anyone's current legislative agenda -- before American troops went into combat,
while 32 percent disagreed.

And although 51 percent expected the Baker-Aziz meeting to "involve serious
discussion," compared with 36 percent who said it was "mostly for show," 68
percent wanted a meeting with President Hussein himself before Jan. 15, a
meeting Mr. Bush has all but ruled out.

Even before Mr. Bush's letter arrived at the offices of the leaders of both
parties in both houses, the Hill buzzed with meetings and rumors of meetings to
draft language for resolutions, or at least to narrow and organize the options.

House Democrats met in the office of Representative Richard A. Gephardt of
Missouri, the majority leader, to plan language for two proposals, one asserting
Congress' sole power to decide when to go to war, and other contending that
while force could not be ruled out ultimately, the time had not yet come to use
it and sanctions should be tried for a longer time.

Mitchell and Nunn Meet

The second proposal was said to be patterned on one being discussed in the
office of the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell of Maine, involving him
and Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, the chairman of the Senate Armed Services
Committee.

Republicans were meeting among themselves and also seeking Democratic support
for a resolution doing what the President asked.

And Senator Bob Dole, the Republican leader, issued a statement complaining that
"it's long past time for Congress to get in the game."

Mr. Bush's letter said it would have been helpful for Mr. Baker to have had a
Congressional resolution at hand for his meeting in Geneva and maintained that
the President had "frequently stated my desire for such a resolution." But Mr.
Mitchell said that when Mr. Bush had made such a request orally, he had always
conditioned it by saying he wanted a resolution if it could be adopted
overwhelmingly and without much debate, something Congressional leaders replied
was not possible. Mr. Dole, citing the Bush letter, said, "If Tariq Aziz asks
Jim Baker, 'What have you brought from Congress?,' he'll have to say, 'Nothing.'
"

But Mr. Baker will be able to take the predictions of such leaders as House
Speaker Thomas S. Foley that a resolution supporting Mr. Bush would pass by this
weekend.

If adopted, the resolution would be cited by Administration officals as closing
off any remaining argument over whether Congress had used its war-making
authority to give the President an authorization the White House had often said
was not needed.

The Constitutional power of Congress to declare war has been invoked directly
and specifically only five times: in the War of 1812, the Mexican War, the
Spanish-American War and both World Wars. But the Gulf of Tonkin resolution,
sought by Mr. Johnson and approved by votes of 88 to 2 in the Senate and 416 to
0 in the House after reports of an attack on United States vessels, supported
Mr. Johnson in his bid "to prevent further aggression" and thus was seen by
supporters of the Vietnam War as the equivalent of a formal declaration. Many in
Congress later felt they had been deceived into hastily approving military
action against North Vietnam, which had in fact been planned months before the
incident.

While Mr. Nunn, who could not be reached for comment, was understood to be
preparing to advocate delay in using force, his House counterpart,
Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, said the right vote was a vote to
authorize Mr. Bush to use force.

Mr. Aspin's view was shared in a Senate hearing by Alexander M. Haig Jr.,
President Reagan's first Secretary of State, who said there was little
alternative to war and further reliance on sanctions would be "a profound
strategic blunder." He also predicted that once Iraq saw that United States
force would be used unstintingly, "I think there's a very good chance one of
Saddam's colonels will take him out."

At the Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearing, attended only by Democrats,
another view came from Cyrus R. Vance, who was President Carter's first
Secretary of State. Mr. Vance said that if the United States went to war, it
would soon find itself "virtually alone in a bitter and bloody war that will not
be won quickly or without heavy casualties."

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: 'Views on the Gulf' gives results of New York Times/CBS News
Poll on public opinion about the situation in the Gulf. (pg. A6)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1220 words



INTERNATIONAL A2-10

President Bush called on Congress to adopt a resolution supporting the use of
force against Iraq if it does not withdraw from Kuwait by Jan. 15. He said a
vote would underline the country's unified resolve. Page A1

Foreign Minister says Iraq will not yield to pressure A6

A United States attack against Iraq would come in phases, beginning with an air
assault against Iraqi troops, followed as a last resort by a ground attack, the
head of the House Armed Services Committee said. A1

Deployment of U.S. troops in the Gulf is nearly complete A8

Soviet ship thought to violate Iraq arms embargo is halted A8

King Fahd of Saudi Arabia is said to expect war A9

Southerners support the U.S. stance against Iraq, but their support is often
qualified. In the South, traditionally a fortress of patriotism, words like
"doubt" and "Vietnam" have become common. A1

Iraqis have begun preparing for war, forming long lines at gasoline stations to
store up on extra supplies. In Kuwait, people are marking off the days on their
calendars in anticipation of liberation on Jan. 15. A7

Iraq and Iran agree on a half- mile border zone A9

Wall Street is on a war footing, preparing for surge in volume D2

Has the prospect of war slowed down junk mail?  D1

Soviet Jewish immigration to Israel has already begun altering the face of
Israeli society. Most Israelis say the huge influx will give the nation new
wealth and power, despite a shortage of housing and other problems. A1

The White House criticized Moscow for its "provocative" plan to send troops to
seven restive Soviet regions. American officials said that violence or a
crackdown on political activity could endanger relations. A1

Lithuania's Prime Minister resigned along with her Cabinet in a dispute with the
republic's Parliament over economic and political policy. The move created a
further sense of instability in the Baltic region. A3

Nelson Mandela called for a congress of all of South Africa's political parties
to ease the writing of a new constitution that would transfer power to the black
majority. A3

Scattered gunfire was heard in Haiti as troops rounded up supporters of Dr.
Roger Lafontant, who led a failed coup attempt. At least 44 people died. Many
stores remain closed. A5

Medellin Journal: Colombia's elite flees after kidnappings A4

NATIONAL A12-18

Pan Am filed for bankruptcy. The airline, nearly out of cash, will continue to
fly and the filing will not affect customers, its chairman said. The airline is
the third large American carrier to file in 22 months. A1

Defense Secretary Cheney's decision to kill the Navy's new stealth fighter plane
has set off a scramble within the Pentagon to find a replacement and among
military contractors to offer new possibilities. A12

The scrapping of the Navy program will put thousands of people out of work. The
economy of Fort Worth, where General Dynamics would have built the plane, could
lose as much as $500 million in trade. A12

Astronaut, quitting NASA, urges overhaul of space station A18

Senator Alan Cranston was excused by the Ethics Committee from public question
in the investigation of the links five Senators had to Charles Keating after Mr.
Cranston's lawyer said he was too ill. A14

Republicans select Houston as site of 1992 convention A15

The morality of a suicide machine built by a Michigan doctor is being debated in
a courtroom. A woman with multiple sclerosis and relativesof a man who died from
AIDS told of the pain that drove them to seek relief. A14

Court says prisoners are entitled to witness fees A18

The St. Petersburg Times's owner, the Poynter Institute for Media Studies, may
have its tax-exempt status challenged by Yale University. If the challenge is
successful, paper would become Yale's property. A12

Archbishop in Milwaukee says he would ordain married men A16

MCA agrees to sell concession operations in Yosemite A18

Hispanic Americans lack insurance more often than any other ethnic group, and
they suffer disproportionately higher incidences of diabetes, high blood
pressure and other ailments, several reports say. A16

The nation's worst measles epidemic in decades was caused by a breakdown in the
vaccination system, a Federal panel said, warning that more epidemics may occur
unless the system is changed. A17

Panel says reducing pollution would assure safety of seafood A16

Cold fusion scientist leaves teaching for research A17

REGIONAL B1-5

New York City's drinking water will be safe for many years without the city's
having to spend billions of dollars to filter it, state health officials said,
reversing their position. A1

Cuomo will propose a trust fund for environmental projects B3

New York City will rebound soon, Mayor Dinkins said in his first State of the
City address, but he provided few indications of how he would grapple with the
city's most serious fiscal problems since the mid-1970's. B1

News analysis: Dinkins's hope clashes with harsh reality B3

Aid set aside for teachers' raises may have already been spent B2

Governor Florio outlined his agenda for 1991 in the State of the State speech.
His goals include mortgagehelp for first-time homebuyers and a program to create
7,000 jobs in new state construction projects. B1

News analysis: Florio's new goal is political repair work B2

O'Neill, still an elusive figure, left his mark on Connecticut B5

A Manhattan woman was killed after a purse snatcher grabbed her handbag and
pushed her between two cars of a subway train pulling out of an Upper West Side
Station. B1

Firefighters who fought the blaze that killed two in Queens said they plunged
into the burning house without any water because there was no pumper to hose the
flames. B1

Neediest Cases B4

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

The Living Section

Food

Savoring the tastes of China in streets and kitchens C1

Next in California: Wine, Italian style?  C1

Living

In London, it's the 40's. The good 40's of jive and jitterbugC1

Arts/Entertainment

Rancor at Hammer Museum C11

School of American Ballet opens headquarters C11

Mixed reactions to deal on stolen German artworks C13

Music: The Pop Life C9

Word and Image: NBC reviving vampire series C11

"The Limits of Interpretation" C15

Booknotes C15

The depths of cats C16
Obituaries

Marko Nikezic, a former Foreign Minister of Yugoslavia D20

Vasko Popa, a poet D20

Richard Maibaum, screenwriter D21

Robert Carter Cook, a geneticist D21

Sports

Baseball: Carew, Perry and Jenkins elected to Hall B7

Basketball: Celtics defeat Knicks B7

Bulls top Nets B8 Colleges: Measure to reduce coaching staffs approved B7

Column: Anderson on Hall of Fame B7

Football: Eagles dismiss Ryan B7

Hockey: Blues set back Devils B8

North Stars blank Islanders B8

Education Page B6

Magnet school becoming school of choice

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A20

Let depositors sleep securely

For Cheney, a hero's medal

A general picks democracy

The Pentagon's price for news

Letters A20

Leslie H. Gelb: A "new" Soviet policy A21

Tom Wicker: The iron medal A21

Roger Morris: Why war is irrelevant A21

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Pentagon's Price for News

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 367 words


The Defense Department's revised rules for covering a war in the Persian Gulf
are much less onerous than those originally proposed. Yet the Pentagon still
says all dispatches will be reviewed by officers in the field. Censorship in
wartime can be essential to safety and security. But when it becomes excessive,
citizens lose their chance to judge public policy.

Under the rules, combat coverage would be carried out exclusively by
representative groups of reporters known as pools, which would be assembled,
escorted and tightly monitored by the military. The pool reports would then be
submitted to a "security review" before being dispatched abroad.

The Pentagon sensibly dropped several earlier proposals. One would have banned
impromptu interviews with military personnel, thus limiting access. Another
would have required that all interviews be on the record, inhibiting candor.

The Defense Department's decision to limit coverage to pools is less
objectionable, even though journalists tend to regard pools as hostile to
individual enterprise. In Vietnam, for example, reporters were often able to get
around on their own; in the Saudi sands, the military is likely to be the sole
and indispensable means of getting around.

In exchange for access, the Pentagon extracts a heavy price: "security review."
The rules include the statement that "material will not be withheld just because
it is embarrassing or contains criticism." Even so, review may delay
dissemination of information to an anxious public and, worse, cause incomplete
and misleading reports.

Trust and forbearance are required of both sides. Reporters are obliged to
accept important limitations on what they may report. Within those limitations,
the military is obliged to allow reporters to file accurate and complete
accounts.

Such a bargain was struck in Vietnam. The press accepted ground rules; the
military imposed no censorship; and there were virtually no breaches of
security. That model might well work in the gulf. But unless the Pentagon
changes its mind, the media have little or no choice except to go along
grudgingly -- and hope the military will enforce its rules with understanding.


LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

A-12 Decision Starts Scramble For Alternatives

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 828 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 8


Defense Secretary Dick Cheney's decision on Monday to cancel the Navy's new
attack plane has set off a scramble in the Pentagon to find a replacement
aircraft and among military contractors to offer a solution.

The Pentagon today declined to discuss alternatives to the carrier-based A-12
warplane. Mr. Cheney canceled the $57 billion program because of delays and cost
overruns. The A-12 was to have replaced the A-6 Intruder, which first flew in
the Vietnam War.

But aviation experts said the alternatives include a short-term plan to modify
two existing fighter planes, the F-14 or the FA-18, for a new attack-oriented
mission, or to start from scratch and build a plane like the A-12, which was
planned as a deep-strike bomber that could be used in all weather and at night.
The plane was to use radar-evading stealth technology.

Whatever course the Pentagon takes will be dictated by forces larger than simply
the need to fill the Navy's aircraft gap. Since the Navy first began developing
the A-12, tensions with the Soviet Union have lessened and the military's budget
has been cut.

Ex-Navy Chief's Assessment

"The real issue is whether the threat out there warrants the huge costs of an
plane like the A-12," said John Lehman, who was Navy Secretary in the Reagan
Administration. "Is there any target in world worth that much money?"

Mr. Cheney's decision shocked many officials in other branches of the military.
The ruling, they said, broke a time-honored Pentagon tradition of bailing out
troubled programs that military officials said were essential.

The decision, for example, also terminated an Air Force version of the plane,
the Advanced Tactical Aircraft. The Air Force plane, which would have replaced
the F-111, would have been built in the late 1990's after the Navy's A-12
production line was operating.

The builders of the A-12, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation and the General
Dynamics Corporation, both of St. Louis, have said 9,000 workers would lose
their jobs. But it is highly unlikely that political pressure caused by the
layoffs will force Mr. Cheney to reverse his ruling.

Unlike some programs that Congress has financed over Mr. Cheney's objections --
like the V-22, or Osprey, aircraft -- lawmakers have sharply criticized the
costly A-12 program.

Each alternative to the A-12 has its own set of obstacles, but in the end the
Navy will almost certainly have to settle for a lesser plane than it originally
wanted.

Long-Term Budget Constraints

The Pentagon's long-term budget constraints will make it difficult to build a
plane as expensive as the A-12, even if future builders use the lessons, and
some of the technology and design, from the A-12 builders.

This approach, though, seemed to be the direction that Mr. Cheney was pointing
to on Monday when he said, "Stealth technology will be required if attack
aircraft are to elude advanced fighters and surface-to-air missiles in the
future."

If Mr. Cheney insists on a replacement for the A-6 that is as capable as the
A-12 of evading radar, "the plane is five to nine years years away," said a
Senate staff member said.

By taking a less costly route and modifying existing planes, the Navy would have
to accept an aircraft that would not fly as far as the A-6 or carry as many
bombs, or be as capable of evading radar as the A-12.

The A-6, still being built by the Grumman Corporation, can carry 10,000 pounds
of bombs to a target 650 miles away and was vital in missions like the United
States attack on Libya in 1986. The last of the A-6's are expected to come off
the line early next year.

The F-14, or Tomcat, also built by Grumman, is an carrier-based, air-to-air
fighter that can be modified to carry 8,000 pounds of bombs, but does not have
the A-6's range, a Navy official familiar with the planes said.

Problem With an Alternative

Another alternative, the FA-18, or Hornet, a carrier-based fighter-attack plane
built by McDonnell Douglas, has only about one-third the A-6's range. Even if
the FA-18 were upgraded to increase its bomb-carrying range to 600 miles from
400 miles, the Navy official said it would carry far fewer bombs than the A-6.

Neither plane was designed to accommodate the large amount of radar equipment
stored in the A-6 nose that gives it excellent ground-tracking ability in all
types of weather. Both planes could be refined to make them less observable on
radar, but neither would have the A-12's ability to avoid detection, the Navy
official said.

Some military analysts estimated that it could cost $2 billion to make the
changes needed to modify the FA-18. The analysts said that modifying the F-14
could be 20 to 30 percent less expensive than modifying the FA-18.

Most military analysts today ruled out another option: building a new, upgraded
A-6 model. The A-6 was first designed in 1954, and most aviation experts said
its technology has been stretched to its limits.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 10, 1991, Thursday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Pentagon's
cancellation of the A-12 attack plane misstated the starting date of the
aircraft's development. The Navy began developing it in the mid-1980's, not in
the 1950's.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 10, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
PENTAGON ADOPTS GULF NEWS RULES

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 393 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 9


The Defense Department gave its final approval today to a set of rules for
reporters covering a possible war in the Persian Gulf, despite widespread
objections from print and broadcast executives that the rules are needlessly
restrictive and amounted to an objectionable attempt at censorship.

Robert Hall, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, said the rules that were
distributed on Monday night were being adopted as official Pentagon policy with
few changes.

Most major newspapers and the television networks have protested the attempt by
the Pentagon to restrict news reporting from the Persian Gulf, should
hostilities break out. News executives said they would continue their protests,
and a number of them called on Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney to reconsider.

'Security Reviews' Deplored

The two most-criticized rules are that broadcast reporters could only cover
hostilities as part of officially designated "pools" of reporters operating
under a military escort, and that all reports from the pools would be subject to
a "security review" by the escort.

In the event of a disagreement, the escort's ruling could be appealed to senior
officers at a central base in Saudi Arabia and then to the Pentagon.

The rules represent a sharp departure from the Vietnam War, during which
reporters were generally unrestricted.

Max Frankel, the executive editor of The New York Times, said in a statement
today that the rules were "gravely flawed" and asked Mr. Cheney to reconsider
them.

"They envision an elaborate and impractical 'security review' that is tantamount
to censorship and an indefinite 'escort' routine in the guise of facilitating
pool coverage," he said. "Both imply that correspondents cannot be trusted, as
in the past, to safeguard military operations against disclosures that endanger
lives."

George Watson, the Washington bureau chief of ABC News, said it would be
sufficient to use the system used in Vietnam, in which reporters were given
clear guidelines and "they made it clear to us what they are and what could
happen if we violate them, that is they could suspend or revoke the
accreditation of the correspondent."

Mr. Hall, the Defense spokesman, conceded that there might be practical limits
to the military's ability to control the correspondents once they were away from
the battlefront.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 10, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
Gulf Tensions: TV's Cause and Effect

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 24; Column 4; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 748 words


With the approach of the deadline for possible war in the Persian Gulf,
television news has been contributing to the atmosphere of belligerent tension.
CBS has instituted a "Countdown to Confrontation" on its nightly news, inspired
perhaps by the sandwich boards that once announced the number of days to the
world's end. (If apocalypse is delayed, the figure can easily be altered.) And
there is Dan Rather, once again out in the field, speaking of "war drums beating
along the Potomac and the Tigris." Tom Brokaw made it to Geneva for NBC , and
yesterday afternoon all the networks carried the press conferences of President
Bush, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and the Iraqi Foreign Minister, Tariq
Aziz.

On Monday, the eve of the deadline, Peter Jennings is to anchor an 8 P.M.  ABC
News Special on the crisis. "Nightline" has been giving every night to it. In
television news terms, Ted Koppel, Mr. Jennings, Mr. Brokaw and Mr. Rather
represent a commitment of resources that exceeds the American commitment of
troops in the field. Such a battery of big guns cannot fail to excite dire
expectations. Add to that, the promise that should war break out, all the
networks, including CNN , will switch to 24-hour coverage.

That is not to say that any of the television anchors or correspondents has
personally been beating those war drums. On the contrary, most express dismay at
the prospect of hostilities. But television news is prone to exploit dramatic
elements, and the setting of a deadline, a standard theatrical device, gives a
narrative drive to any plot: a kidnapping note commands that the ransom be paid
in 48 hours, or else; suspense is injected, a climax projected; the audience is
caught. The players can hardly help but make the most of such a gift.

Now, in the spirit of things to come, television reporters who have been
treating the troops as boys and girlsin uniform now seem to be treating them
more as warriors. "In Saudi Arabia, the preparation for shooting steps up," Tom
Brokaw announces, and a captain in the 82d Airborne Division tells of its
readiness to fight. NBC also features an upbeat report that American military
planners, counting on the surrender of 200,000 Iraqis in the first week of
combat, have recruited as many M.P.'s as they can find. Is this a preview of
Pentagon spin control?


The Pentagon has proposed that in case of war, news organizations be permitted
to cover combat operations only through designated pools; the pool members would
have military escort at all times and their reports would be subject to formal
"security review" in the field. From the military standpoint, that makes sense;
you can't have reporters and, particularly, camera crews getting in the way of
troop movements and possibly delivering helpful information to the enemy.

But, of course, there is another reason for the tight supervision, growing out
of memories of Vietnam, when correspondents were able to visit combat zones in
relative freedom, without military escort. The reports they sent home,
especially the pictures, did not increase the nation's enthusiasm for war, and
there is no reason to believe that pictures of death in the desert will prove
more appealing than pictures of death in the jungle. The prospect that even one
or two or the many women (some of them mothers!) now in uniform will be killed
must send shudders through the Pentagon.

Public-affairs officers of all the services naturally prefer stories about the
number of Iraqi prisoners who will walk into the arms of the military police. Or
how about an inspiriting report like the one on ABC, about the competition
between the Marines and the Army over who will have the honor of striking first?


Military intelligence must have observed that television reporters have new
weapons for war: small, lightweight cameras and speedy means of transmitting
pictures back to the United States; the only sure defense is censorship. During
the invasion of Panama, the nation received a lesson in what the military likes
in the way of news: very little. In the Pentagon lexicon, to cover properly
often shades over into cover up.

When Mr. Jennings announced on Monday, "It is going to be a very tense week," he
was referring to last-hour efforts to forestall war. But tensions can also be
foreseen between generals and journalists, at least those who will not settle
for stories about Iraqis surrendering. Prepare for battles on that front, too,
if war comes.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: As the deadline for war approaches in the Persian Gulf,
television news has added to the tension. Leading the networks' reporting are,
clockwise from above, Tom Brokaw of NBC; Peter Jennings of ABC; and Dan Rather
of CBS. (NBC; ABC; CBS)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 10, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

PUBLIC & PRIVATE;
Informed Opinion

BYLINE: By Anna Quindlen

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 766 words


In Anthony Trollope's 1869 novel "Phineas Finn," the story of a neophyte
politician, a parliamentary veteran tells young Finn how things work:

"Many who before regarded legislation on the subject as chimerical, will now
fancy that it is only dangerous, or perhaps not more than difficult. And so in
time it will come to be looked on as among the things possible, then among the
things probable; -- and so at last it will be ranged in the list of those few
measures which the country requires as being absolutely needed. That is the way
in which public opinion is made."

Trollope captured the political process in cynical shorthand in that paragraph,
and he captured, too, how public opinion has been made on the question of war in
the Persian Gulf.  Some have moved slowly toward the inevitability of war.
Others have edged closer and closer to demanding the return of the troops.
Recent polls show a nation split down the middle.

Wherever we wind up, the fact is that public discussion that leads to public
opinion -- and public disagreement -- has been one of the great hallmarks of
this action. We've played out military scenarios, analyzed polls and plumbed
history, more like folks researching a Tom Clancy novel than plunging headlong
into war.

There's been nothing knee-jerk about most of our citizens. When he took the
temperature of the South on the conflict this week, B. Drummond Ayres Jr. of The
Times was moved to write, "The word that came up most often was 'doubt.' "

And yet most recently the Government has decided that its questioning people
should know less, not more.  The Pentagon says that if war comes, all stories
will be reviewed by officers in the field, and all combat reporting will be done
by pool reporters accompanied by military baby sitters.

You don't have to be in the business to understand how this affects coverage:
inhibiting the go-getter who is never chosen for the pool, providing reporters
glimpses only of what the brass wants seen, delaying copy while it is reviewed.
The Defense Department says all this is for security reasons, a rationale that
has a familiar ring. Sure sounds like spin control with a capital C to me.

Other guidelines were dropped, but they telegraphed what the Pentagon is after.
All interviews with military personnel would have had to be on the record. Any
reporter can tell you that some of the best information comes from people who
want the truth out but don't want to take the heat for providing it. The best
known of those was a person called Deep Throat, without whom we might still
believe that Watergate was a third-rate burglary.

What people keep demanding when they consider this war is more, more, more. More
information about Iraq and Kuwait. More information about our national interests
and the probable cost. I keep remembering John F. Kennedy's anger at David
Halberstam, the foreign correspondent who won a Pulitzer Prize by reporting not
what the Government said, but what was really happening in Vietnam.  "Don't you
think he's too close to the story?" complained the President.

There are some stories that demand that reporters get as close as they can,
standing in as they do for everyone at home. That's all we are: stand-ins,
permitted to go places most people cannot go so that most people can be there
through words and pictures.

War correspondents have always been mindful of security restrictions, and they
have had an excellent record of policing themselves. Vietnam taught us that when
the press and the military make a bargain, the press to be cautious and the
military to tell the truth, those with the notebooks keep their end better than
those with the guns. But it also taught us that telling the truth about war can
shift public opinion toward peace.  That's what the Defense Department fears,
particularly with this war, so wreathed in the gray smoke of national doubt.

No matter what happens in the Persian Gulf, we will know one thing about
ourselves. And that is that we have learned to seek education before reaction.
If this conflict ends in a peaceful solution, many people and philosophies will
be given the credit.  But one great player will have been the people of this
country. If there is war, the Government cannot expect them to go back to the
sidelines. Their stand-ins must be there. The cameras. The reporters. If we do
this awesome thing, we should know what it is that is being done in our name.
That's what the people need. That's what the press must provide. And it's what
the Government should allow.  That's how public opinion is made.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 11, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Reservist Headed for the Gulf Challenges Homosexual Ban

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 680 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Jan. 10


Just days before her scheduled deployment to the Persian Gulf, an Army reservist
declared in a letter to her post commander on Wednesday: "I am an open lesbian
and I wish to be deployed as such with my unit."

With her letter, the reservist, Specialist 4 Donna Lynn Jackson, mounted the
first known challenge of the military ban on gay and lesbian personnel since the
mobilization of United States troops to the Persian Gulf began.

Under Department of Defense regulations, homosexuals may not serve in the armed
forces, and more than 1,000 people are discharged for homosexuality each year. A
military lawyer at Fort Ord, 90 miles south of here, where Specialist Jackson
was recently reassigned as part of the 129th Evacuation Hospital for transfer to
the Persian Gulf, is investigating the case and will soon recommend to
commanders whether she should be discharged.

Wants to Be True to Herself

Specialist Jackson, 25 years old, of San Diego, says she is eager to go to the
Persian Gulf and wants only to be true to herself during her deployment.

"I want everyone to know that there's nothing wrong with being gay and serving
my country with pride," she said in an interview on Wednesday at the motel room
near Fort Ord where since Sunday she has spent evenings with her partner,
Christie Carr.

Gay advocates are cheered by Specialist Jackson's strong declaration.

"I hope it's the first of a whole series of people taking the stand that if
we're going to give our blood and spirit as Americans, our country can, at the
least, accept us as whole individuals," said James Woodward, a former naval
officer who runs a San Diego group for veterans who kept their homosexuality
secret while serving in the armed forces.

Gay leaders are also closely watching the Jackson case to see if the military
will ship her overseas and then discharge her after the crisis. A Vietnam War
veteran, Perry L. Watkins, acknowledged that he was a homosexual when drafted
and served 14 years with the Army until he was forced out as a homosexual in
1984. The Supreme Court ruled last November that the Army must allow Mr. Watkins
to re-enlist a fourth time because he was allowed to do so three previous times.

Gay advocates say a decision to send Specialist Jackson to the gulf would
underscore arbitrary enforcement and hypocrisy in the military's ban on
homosexuals.

Mr. Woodward said that when the military needed "cannon fodder," it would take
homosexuals "and anything else that comes along."

"But when it comes time to enjoy the harvest," he went on, "they say, 'Get out.'
"

Last February the Supreme Court refused to hear Mr. Woodward's appeal of his
dismissal from the Navy and another from a Milwaukee woman who had been in the
Army Reserve.

Specialist Jackson said the fear that she might serve in Saudia Arabia and later
be forced out of the Army prompted her to raise the issue of her homosexuality.

She said she was on active duty for two years with the Army right after high
school, later signing on with the Reserves. But she said the Pentagon policy
banning homosexuals was "not a consideration" for her earlier because she had
not been sure of her sexuality. Though she said she had questioned her sexuality
for years, she did not enter a lesbian relationship until a year ago.

Master Sgt. Richard Czizik, a spokesman at Fort Ord, said today that a decision
in the Jackson case would be made "very quickly," before the unit was sent
overseas. A Pentagon spokesman, Maj. Doug Hart, said that during the gulf crisis
there had been no change in the ban on homosexuals in the armed forces.

The Pentagon ban says homosexuals disrupt the military's ability to maintain
discipline and morale and pose a security risk because they may be blackmailed.

Reflecting on her recent experiences, Specialist Jackson said: "It's not really
a hard thing to deal with in the Reserves. You're only there one weekend a month
and for two weeks in the summer. Now that it's full time, it's a whole different
ball game. It's really hard to not be who you are."

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 11, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1170 words



INTERNATIONAL A2-13

Iraq is planning a peace initiative shortly after Jan. 15, Arab diplomats said.
Under it, President Hussein would agree to pull out of Kuwait and call for a
conference on the Palestinian question. Page A1

Congress debated going to war. Amid a strong sense of history, lawmakers argued
whether an early attack on Iraq or continued reliance on economic sanctions was
more likely to force Iraq to withdraw. A1

A Republican Senator balances party and constituency A9

Bush appeals for support in a letter to college newspapers A9

Reservist challenges the military's ban on homosexualsA14

An antiwar movement has emerged, growing slowly and quietly since October. It is
already stronger and more mature than the one that arose in the months after the
bombing of North Vietnam in February 1965. A1

Baker meets with King Fahd to discuss timing of an attack A10

U.S. officials say Iraq went to Geneva prepared to stall A10

European Community struggles to continue its peace efforts A10

Israel is moving toward war footing. As the Defense Ministry told citizensto
prepare for a possible Iraqi attack, Israelis flocked to stores, stocking up on
war supplies. A11

Arab rivals in the Mideast warn of the dangers of conflict A11

Foreign diplomats leave Baghdad as mood grows grimmer A11

Saudi Arabia has spent its oil windfall on cost of defense A13

President Gorbachev told Lithuania to halt its defiance of Soviet authority
immediately. The implicit threat increased fears that the Kremlin might move
forcibly against the separatist republic. A1

Serbia's president warns of demands for more territory A5

Plataresti Journal: Romania's neglected children A4

Supporters of Haiti's President-elect, the Rev. Jean-Bertrand Aristide, are
working to calm fears that the leftist priest's election would unleash a wave of
violence. A3

Japan agrees to stop fingerprinting its ethnic Korean residents A3

China grows more fearful of foreign electronic eavesdropping A3

De Klerk's son is reportedly engaged to mixed-race womanA6

Fighting is said to intensify in Somalia's capital A6

NATIONAL A14-20

Interest rates have been cut almost every week by the Federal Reserve. But the
Fed has done so reluctantly -- not convinced that the recession or the banking
crisis will be severe. A1

The affluent became more affluent in the 1980's, the Census Bureau said. They
gained substantially more wealth while other Americans barely kept up with
inflation, widening the gap between rich and poor. A1 F.C.C. plans television
frequency just for ordering goods D1

Plans for a national survey on AIDS were abandoned by the Federal Centers for
Disease Control after initial studies were ineffective. The survey had been
intended to determine the prevalence of AIDS infection. A14

Female cardiologist is chosen to direct Institutes of Health A17

Goya Foods resumes ads on Spanish-language TV network A16

An ex-lobbyist for Charles Keating told the Senate Ethics Committeethat she had
used "a bit of hyperbole" to get his attention when she wrote that his efforts
to pressure Federal regulators were working. A16

Washington Talk: Laws and crises, illusions and realities A16

Dinkinson Journal: Patriotism has its price: 99.9" a gallon A14

A judge who ordered a child abuser to have a birth control device implanted in
her arm as a condition of probation said he would not reverse himself. But he
welcomed the defendant's lawyer promise to appeal. A17

Philanthropies form foundation to promote energy efficiency A14

Six police officers have been indicted for a series of incidents of brutality,
theft and cover-ups in the latest of several cases of police misconduct in Los
Angeles. A18

Ohio's Governor commutes death sentences of 8 inmates A14

Ex-Bolivian official convicted in Miami on drug charges A18

REGIONAL B1-4

An investigation of Mayor Dinkins concluded that there was circumstantial
evidence that he might have lied under oath about a transfer of stock to his
son, but it found insufficient proof to warrant prosecution. A1

Felix Rohatyn to remain at fiscal watchdog agency for now B3

Salomon Brothers considers moving jobs out of the city B3

New York City sues to get piece of escrow insurance money B4

Plans for a New York City school for black and Hispanic young men have met
criticism. A number of current and former school officials said politics, as
much as educational philosophy, lay behind the idea. B1

The deputy commissioner of bridges in New York City was fired. He had spoken out
against cuts in bridge maintenance and warned that they would endanger public
safety. B1

State monitors barred Bridgeport, Conn., from considering bankruptcy and imposed
a plan to balance the city's budget. The Mayor had said bankruptcy might help
save the financially battered city. B1

Weicker and the Assembly: A new era of leadership B2

A scheme to cheat welfare recipients of money they were given to buy furniture
was uncovered in New Jersey. Two welfare workers were indicted and a store owner
pleaded guilty. More indictments are expected. B3

Florio needs $800 million to balance budget for 1992 B2

The family of a woman who died chasing a mugger who stole her purse came to the
scene of the crime to reach out to her spirit and try to make sense of her
death. B1

Fire Department investigates why pumper truck arrived late B3

Neediest Cases B4

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

Weekend

Images of animals C1

Eating before the show C1

Clubs for all tastes C1

Yale names drama school dean C5

Grammy nominations C11

Theater: On Stage, and Off C2

Film: At the Movies C8

"Not Without My Daughter" C8

Music: "Roberto Devereux" C6

Paquito D'Rivera C17

Dance: Peter Pucci opens series C30

Art: New from Barbara Kruger C12

Works of Cheryl Laemmle C16

Auctions C27

Restaurants C22

Word and Image: TV Weekend C28

Against the "old celibates" C30

Law Page B5

Judge's overruling of crack law brings turmoil

Prosecutors of Noriega are set to defend U.S. action

Obituaries

J. McVicker Hunt, a psychologist B6

Rev. Gerard Mahoney, leader at St. John's and Niagara B7

Sports

Pete Rose was effectively barred from baseball's Hall of Fame when a special
committee recommended a change in the admission rules to exclude any person
banned from baseball. A1

Rose case debated A24

Basketball: Knicks can't talk and can't win A23

Bradshaw pours it on A24

Column: Berkow on the Rose situation A23

Football: Giants and Bears wary of wind A23

Track and Field: Johnson returns A23

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A28

Iraq's untenable argument

Eloquence without money

Avarice and audacity in Texas

Topics: A legacy of law

Letters A28

Anthony Lewis: It's not over A29

A. M. Rosenthal: Support the President A29

Edward W. Said: A tragic convergence A29

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 11, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
War and Peace: A Sampling From the Debate on Capitol Hill

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 4293 words


Senator George J. Mitchell
Democrat of Maine

Today the Senate undertakes a solemn constitutional responsibility to decide
whether to commit the nation to war. In this debate, we should focus on the
fundamental question before us: what is the wisest course of action for our
nation in the Persian Gulf crisis.

In its simplest form, the question is whether Congress will give the President
an unlimited blank check to initiate war against Iraq at some unspecified time
in the future under circumstances which are not now known and cannot be
foreseen.

                                    .  .  .


This is not a debate about whether force should ever be used. No one proposes to
rule out the use of force; we cannot and should not rule it out. The question is
should war be truly a last resort when all other means fail or should we start
with war, before other means have been fully and fairly exhausted.

This is not a debate about American objectives in the current crisis. There is
broad agreement in the Senate that Iraq must fully and unconditionally withdraw
its forces from Kuwait. The issue is how best to achieve that goal. Most
Americans and most members of Congress, myself included, supported the
President's initial decision to deploy American forces to Saudi Arabia to deter
further Iraqi aggression. We supported the President's effort in marshaling
international diplomatic pressure and the most comprehensive embargo in history
against Iraq.

I support that policy. I believe it remains the correct policy, even though the
President abandoned his own policy before it had time to work. The change began
on Nov. 8, when President Bush announced that he was doubling the number of
American troops in the Persian Gulf to 430,000 in order to attain a credible
offensive option. The President did not consult with Congress about that
decision; he did not try to build support for it among the American people. He
just did it.

In so doing, President Bush transformed the United States' role and its risks in
the Persian Gulf crisis. In effect, the President, overnight, with no
consultation and no public debate, changed American policy from being part of a
collective effort to enforce economic and diplomatic sanctions into a
predominantly American effort, relying upon the use of American military force.

Despite the fact that his own policy of international economic sanctions was
having a significant effect upon the Iraqi economy, the President, without
explanation, abandoned that approach and instead adopted a policy based first
and foremost upon the use of American military force. As a result, this country
has been placed on a course toward war. This has upset the balance of the
President's initial policy, the balance between resources and responsibility,
between interest and risk, between patience and strength.

                                    .  .  .


It may become necessary to use force to expel Iraq from Kuwait, but because war
is such a grave undertaking, with such serious consequences, we must make
certain that war is employed only as a last resort.

Representative Robert H. Michel
Republican of Illinois

I speak from the prejudice of being a combat veteran of World War II. And those
of our generation know from bloody experience that unchecked aggression against
a small nation is a prelude to an international disaster.

Saddam Hussein today has more planes and tanks and, frankly, men under arms,
than Hitler had at the time when Prime Minister Chamberlain came back from
Munich with that miserable piece of paper -- peace in our time. I'll never
forget that replay of that movie in my life.

And I have an obligation, I guess, coming from that generation, to transmit
those thoughts I had at the time to the younger generation who didn't experience
what we did. Saddam Hussein not only invaded Kuwait, he occupied, terrorized,
murdered civilians, systematically looted and turned a peaceful nation into a
wasteland of horror. He seeks control over one of the world's vital resources,
and he ultimately seeks to make himself the unchallenged anti-Western dictator
of the Mideast.

Either we stop him now, and stop him permanently, or we won't stop him at all.

Now the President has clearly presented the reasons why we can't stand by idly.
In his words, and I quote them -- we're in the gulf because the world must not
and cannot reward aggression, and we're there because our vital interests are at
stake. Now we're told by some that we must show patience. We must wait for
sanctions to work.

We must wait six months or a year before forces are used. We must stay the
course. My question is this -- stay what course? A course that allows Saddam to
know he is freed from surprise attack, free from sudden offensive movement for
six months or a year or more? And I guess to you who advocate that course, I
would have to ask you to do -- what you would do about the attitude of the
American people in that interval period of time? How long is the American people
-- will the American people put up with that?

Senator Strom Thurmond
Republican of South Carolina

Mr. President, how much longer can we expect them to maintain their combat
readiness? How much longer can we expect our soldiers' families to carry on
under the tremendous burdens they are carrying? They are not only dealing with
the uncertainty of not knowing how much longer their loved ones will be gone
from home but also with anguish that war could break out at any moment.

Mr. President, the Congress must act and let its voice be heard. The time to end
the debate is now. I implore this body to demonstrate to the world and
especially Saddam Hussein that we are behind our President and the United
Nations. A vote in support of the President is a vote for peace. I urge my
colleagues to stop the debate and show our solidarity with the President and
resolve to get Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait. Solidarity, we need it now, not
division, but solidarity.

Senator Edward M. Kennedy
Democrat of Massachusetts

I urge the Senate to vote for peace, not war. Now is not the time for war. I
reject the argument that says Congress must support the President, right or
wrong. We have our own responsibility to do what is right, and I believe that
war today is wrong.

War is not the only option left to us in the Persian Gulf. The President may
have set Jan. 15 as his deadline, but the American people have not. Sanctions
and diplomacy may still achieve our objectives, and Congress has the
responsibility to insure that all peaceful options are exhausted before resort
to war. Unless we reach that stage, Congress ought not to authorize the
President to use force.

At this historic moment, it may well be that only Congress can stop this
senseless march toward war.

                                    .  .  .


Let there be no mistake about the cost of war. We have arrayed an impressive
international coalition against Iraq, but when the bullets start flying, 90
percent of the casualties will be Americans. It is hardly a surprise that so
many other nations are willing to fight to the last American to achieve the
goals of the United Nations. It is not their sons and daughters who will do the
dying. Most military experts tell us that a war with Iraq would not be quick and
decisive, as President Bush suggests; it'll be brutal, and costly. It'll take
weeks, even months, and will quickly turn from an air war to a ground war, with
thousands, perhaps even tens of thousands, of American casualties.

The Administration refuses to release casualty estimates, but the 45,000 body
bags the Pentagon has sent to the region are all the evidence we need of the
high price in lives and blood that we will have to spare. Military experts have
used Israel's two recent desert wars as reliable indicators of the casualties we
will suffer. In the Six-Day War in 1967, Israel suffered 3,300 casualties out of
a force of 300,000, including 7,000 dead. In the heavier fighting that lasted 20
days in the 1973 war, Israeli casualties were 11,000 out of a force of a similar
size, with 2,600 dead.

In other words, we're talking about the likelihood of at least 3,000 American
casualties a week, with 700 dead, for as long as the war goes on.

Senator John C. Danforth
Republican of Missouri

The one and only chance to accomplish our objectives without war is to maintain
sanctions accompanied by a credible military threat. Without a credible military
threat, our alternative is sanctions followed by nothing at all. The key to
peace is maintaining a credible military threat, and this is precisely the point
our pending votes will address.

Those who would give sanctions a chance before military action is even possible
would decouple the two components which must be kept linked if we have any
chance of getting Iraq out of Kuwait without a fight. They would foreclose any
possibility of a just peace.

This is why I cannot vote for sanctions alone. This is why I cannot vote to
deprive the President of the credible threat of force. It is indeed a supreme
irony that it is only through the threat of force that a stable world can be
maintained. But that is an irony that we have recognized ever since World War
II.

Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan
Democrat of New York

Suddenly, on behalf of Kuwait, in opposition to Iraq, we see the largest array
of armed force since the -- mankind has seen since the Second World War. And we
see a President declaring -- assserting that he has the right to send those
armed forces into battle independently of any judgment of the Senate. . . .

Now how could this happen? The first post-cold-war crisis, as we have had it
described. I'd like to suggest, Mr. President, and I hope this might help us
think about the subject -- I'd like to suggest that despite the assertions that
this was the first post-cold-war crisis, and the way in which we've proceeded in
that mold and which manner obtained the universal support of the country, and
the Senate here -- or as near to it as makes no matter -- suddenly there is an
institutional lurch back in to the manner and mode of the cold war.

                                    .  .  .


Then the assertions we have heard in the past months, after the lurching from a
defensive, deterrent position -- which we responded to very well -- into an
offensive position, on Nov. 8; a measure taken in secret and that certainly
suddenly turned what had been a collective security operation, with the complete
support of the country and the world, into a crisis situation. And all through
those things, the President as Commander in Chief, secretly moving to create the
ongoing permanent Orwellian crisis.

                                    .  .  .


What we find here is a kind of time warp in which we don't -- we're acting in an
old mode with response to a new condition. I find it, for example, extraordinary
that the President should so personalize the encounter with this particular thug
in Baghdad -- the most recent thug in Baghdad, not the last by any means;
there'll be others, they'll succeed each other. We are not in an international
crisis in the sense that events that took place on Aug. 2 necessitate the
confrontation of the largest set of armed forces since World War II. Nothing
large happened. A nasty little country invaded a littler, but just as nasty,
country.

                                    .  .  .


Mr. President, our armies have been on the Rhine for 45 years, and that is to
stop a Roman legion. I mean, we're still at Panmunjom. We have had naval force
with some land facilities -- a base facilities -- in the gulf since the Second
World War.

Well, 12 months have passed, 18 months have passed, life will go on and we will
not have the wrenching Constitutional crisis that will come about with the
President committing a massive use of our armed forces in a distant region of
the world without the specific declaration of war by Congress.

Senator Orrin G. Hatch
Republican of Utah

Mr. President, I have been watching this debate with a great deal of interest
today and frankly I'm very concerned about some of the comments that have been
made. I think President Bush has gone the extra mile in trying to avoid the use
of force. I don't think there's any question about that. And I think it's time
for Congress to help rather than hinder the President.

I think it's time for the Congress to join with the President and get behind him
and our young men and women over there sitting in the sand and show that we're
willing to back the use of force. I never thought I'd see the day when a timid
organization like the United Nations would come out and agree and authorize the
use of force by Jan. 15 and all members of Congress are unwilling to back their
resolution, some of them.

Unless Saddam Hussein believes that the threat of war is real, he will not
budge. I think we've learned that. The only way to avoid war, in my opinion in
this particular situation, is to be prepared to go to war and to show that our
resolve is for real. If Hussein won't even accept a letter from President Bush,
he certainly is not going to accept Congressional clues that Iraq pull out from
Kuwait. Our actions should be decisive.

If we back the President overwhelmingly we will maximize the pressure on Iraq,
we will enhance the chances that we can avoid war. If the vote is close, Saddam
Hussein can conclude that he can divide our country if he will only hold out. If
we fail to back the President, war will become inevitable.

Senator Bill Bradley
Democrat of New Jersey

President Bush and Secretary Baker apparently have not addressed these four most
probable outcomes from using massive military force. They have not apparently
thought through how to deal with the potential power vacuum in Iraq, or how to
cushion the negative Arab reaction to the use of massive force or how to resist
pressure from our Arab coalition partners to sell out Israel, or how to prevent
an isolationist reaction to a bloody war whose purpose has been inadequately
explained.

Because they have not prepared for tomorrow's reaction, they should not commence
offensive action today.

Senator Claiborne Pell
Democrat of Rhode Island

As amongst those who've served their country in war, and one who has pressed in
the United States Senate for the toughest possible nonmilitary response to years
of Iraqi lawbreaking, I believe that at this time, peace and the continuation of
comprehensive sanctions is the wisest course, strongest course, best course for
our nation.

Senator Arlen Specter
Republican of Pennsylvania

I personally remain hopeful, Mr. President, that war will be avoided. But it
seems to me that the best way to avoid a war is to put Iraq squarely on notice
with a very strong support by the Congress of the U.N. resolution and the
President that we mean business and we're prepared to fight.

We wonder about the state of mind of Saddam Hussein. We wonder if he's a madman,
Mr. President, and I submit that he is not. Senator Shelby and I had an
opportunity to visit for an hour and 20 minutes with President Saddam Hussein
just about a year ago today and I found him very poorly informed about the U.S.
policy, very poorly informed about Western attitudes, did not have an
understanding of our attitude about the problems of the Mideast. But he was
certainly far from a mad man.

And there was later another Senate delegation with Senator Dole and Senator
Metzenbaum and Senator McClure, Senator Murkowski, Senator Simpson and those
senators also had a discussion with President Saddam Hussein and concluded that
he was not a mad man. And we wonder what is his calculation.

It seems to me that if the current course is followed and force is used, that
President Saddam Hussein will lose his country but he must have some other
calculation. He may have a calculation of involving Israel in a war. He may have
a calculation of trying to bring the coalition into disintegration so the Arabs
will fight the Israelis. Or what he really may have in mind, and it's obviously
speculative to try to figure out what is President Saddam Hussein's state of
mind, he may have in mind the state of mind of the United States Congress. And
that is a more perplexing state of mind than the mind of Saddam Hussein.

The comments have been made, I think it was the distinguished majority leader
who raised that question about what was the will of Congress, doubt about the
will of the Senate, always doubt about what we are undertaking, but if we
unequivocally put Iraq and its President on notice of our intentions by a solid
vote, it is my judgment that we will have an excellent chance to avoid that war.


Representative Richard A. Gephardt
Democrat of Missouri

I want to say tonight that if Saddam Hussein listens to this debate -- and we're
told that he does pick up some American television -- I hope that he will take
no comfort from this debate. We are united in our purpose in this country and in
this Congress. Some have expressed concern that when there is a division of
opinion even on strategy, that that lends help to the other side. I hope that
we'd never mistake disagreement on means as disunity within our country. I can't
remember a time when our country has been as unified around a set of goals, as
focused on what we're trying to do, in as much agreement and unity as I think we
are tonight.

Representative Patricia Schroeder
Democrat of Colorado

I rise in support of the gentleman from Indiana and Congressman Gephardt's
resolution. I think it fits exactly what we know about leadership. What we have
learned over and over and over again about leadership is first you commit the
nation and then you commit the troops. Tonight we're talking about are we going
to go even further and commit the troops way beyond where the nation is
committed. I think the Hamilton-Gephardt resolution fits exactly where we are in
our commitments.

No. 1, it protects U.S. forces. It allows use of force if our U.S. forces
overseas are attacked. That's very important.

No. 2, it keeps our commitment to defend Saudi Arabia and use force if Saudi
Arabia is attacked. The American people support that, and that makes sense.

Then it also allows for use of force if the sanctions are violated in any
manner, and that's our commitment, and that makes sense. What it does not do is
say that we're going to put everything out there and go for it on the 15th. I do
not know why we cut off our options and decided that on Jan. 15 we had to give
the President what is the equivalent of a declaration of war.

Senator William V. Roth Jr.
Republican of Delaware

The fact remains, such a united coalition is truly historic. A coalition that
reflects the worldwide concern about Saddam Hussein, his belligerent character
and frightening objectives. This alignment is the result of several important
factors, factors that we must consider as we debate the resolutions before us.

Perhaps the first and foremost factor concerns Iraq's growth in both quantity
and quality of military power. It continues at a threatening pace, despite the
fact that Hussein's war with Iran is long ended.

Let no one be caught sleeping. To close an eye now would allow him the deadly
latitude to consolidate his power and amass a nuclear arsenal. He is willing to
bend any law and make almost any sacrifice toward these ends. He is an
unpredictable as a desert storm and as deceptive as a mirage.

One can only imagine what devastating consequence would fall should his
dominance be allowed in the oil-rich Middle East. And this is the second reason
why he must be stopped. When I speak of the danger that would result from his
control of this region, I'm not talking about consequences to major oil
companies -- quite simply, I'm talking about jobs. I'm talking about the raw
material of human endeavor.

Oil runs the economy of the world. It fuels our factories, heats our homes.
Carries our products from manufacture to market. It's as basic to the economy as
water is to life. And the free trade and international supplies is critical, not
only for the industrial democracies, but the fragile third world nations that
depend on this precious resource even more than we do.

Any attempt to disrupt these supplies will send a devastating quake to these
economies, lengthening unemployment lines, boosting inflation in the industrial
democracies and crushing the economies of developing countries where day to day
existence depends on imported energy sources.

Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr.
Democrat of Delaware

If there's a war, 95 percent of the casualties on the world's side will be
American. If there's a war, we will prevail, we will win the battle, but 95
percent of the enmity of the Arab world outside of Iraq, to the extent there is
any, will be directed at the United States.

                                    .  .  .


In light of this, Mr. President, it seems almost impossible to believe that
we're having a serious argument in this country today about whether under the
Constitution the President alone can take a nation to war. The Constitution's
language says that the war powers rest with the Congress. And from James Madison
to John Marshall, the Constitution's fathers all understood this to be a key
principle of the republic.

And lest anyone in this body or anyone listening wonder why I'm raising this
question since there's already a resolution before us, I'm raising it because
the President continues to insist he does not need, does not need the will of
the people spoken through the Congress as envisioned by the Constitution to
decide whether or not to go to war.

On Tuesday President Bush asked this Congress to debate and decide whether to
take the nation to war yet unfortunately the President stopped short of
abandoning his previous claim that he has the power acting alone to start a war.

And just yesterday, as I mentioned earlier, the President himself said that he
alone has the constitutional authority to initiate war. No President before him
has ever said anything like that. No President in our history has ever made such
an assertion. To put it simply these views are at odds with the Constitution.
They may accurately describe the power of leaders of other countris, but they do
not describe the power of the President of the United States.

                                    .  .  .


If the President, at least in his statements, appears willing to violate our
Constitution to achieve those objectives, if this crisis is really about
upholding the law of nations, I suggest the President acknowledge that he start
here by upholding the law at home and clearly acknowledge that only the Congress
can take this nation to war.

Senator Paul D. Wellstone
Democrat of Minnesota

I rise to speak in this chamber for the first time with a very heavy heart. I
wanted my first speech to be about children and education and health care and a
credible energy policy and the environment. I never thought that the first time
I would have an opportunity to speak in this chamber the topic would be such a
grave topic -- life and death, whether or not to go to war, to ask America's men
and women, so many of them so young to risk life and limb, to unleash a
tremendous destructive power on a foreign country and a far away people. This is
the most momentous decision that any political leader would ever have to make
and decide we must.

And let no one doubt that the Congress has the responsibility to make this
decision. The Constitution is unambiguous on this point: Congress declares the
war, not the President.

                                    .  .  .


The policies that I am afraid the Administration is pursuing, the rush to war
that I am afraid is so much of what is now happening in our country and the
world, will not create a new order, Mr. President, it will create a new world
disorder. What kind of victory will it be? What kind of victory will it be if we
unleash forces of fanaticism in the Middle East and a chronically unstable
region becomes even more unstable further jeopardizing Israel's security?

                                    .  .  .


Some causes are worth fighting for, some causes are worth fighting for. This
cause is not worth fighting for right now. We must stay the course with economic
sanctions, continue the pressure, continue the squeeze, move forward on the
diplomatic front and Mr. President, we must not, we must not rush to war.

Senator Paul Simon
Democrat of Illinois

Mr. President, there is a grim mood here in Congress as I do not recall. When
you and I were elected to the House, Mr. President, in 1974, we were already
involved in the Vietnam War but it was being pulled down and I have not
experienced this kind of a mood before in Washington D.C. We face unprovoked
aggression. No question about it. And there is no question in the minds of
anyone here that Saddam Hussein and the Iraqi troops have to get out of Kuwait,
one way or another.

When you grow up in rural America and live in rural America you learn something
very simple: don't corner a rattlesnake. Give the rattlesnake a way to get out.
And that's what we have to do in the situation over there. But I have to say the
diplomatic option looks very, very difficult.

The second option is the economic option, sanctions. This was imposed by the
President, and the President and the Secretary of State and Secretary of Defense
appear to have all but given up on this. And I suggest the evidence is pretty
overwhelming that this has a chance to succeed if we stick with it. No one can
guarantee it but I think it has a chance.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Senatro George Mitchell (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times);
Representative Robert H. Michel (Associated Press); Senator Paul D. Wellstone
(C-Span)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 11, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Antiwar Effort Buds Quickly, Nurtured by Activism of 60's

BYLINE: By MICHAEL deCOURCY HINDS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1220 words


Before a shot has been fired between allied forces and Iraq, an antiwar movement
has been building quietly in the United States since late October, drawing on
the legacy of Vietnam War peace activists.

Every leading religious denomination in the country officially opposes a gulf
war now as morally unjustifiable and maintains that economic sanctions need time
to work and that negotiations have not been fully explored.

For essentially the same reasons, nine large unions, representing six million
workers, announced their opposition to a war yesterday, a sharp contrast to
unions' support of American involvement in Vietnam. Hundreds of district offices
of other unions have already stated their opposition to a war, which they say
would be largely fought by the children of blue-collar workers.

Political bodies are taking stands, too. In Montana, for example, the
Legislature, the Missoula County Commission and the Missoula City Council are on
the verge of passing resolutions calling on President Bush and Congress to
pursue diplomatic and economic remedies to the gulf crisis, said Representative
Pat Williams, a Democrat who has represented Missoula and the western half of
Montana in Congress for seven terms.

"This is Middle America speaking," Mr. Williams said.

Although many influential institutions have spoken out against a gulf war, polls
show the nation as a whole divided on the question. The latest New York
Times/CBS News poll shows almost the same support for a war now as for giving
sanctions more time.

In part the antiwar effort reflects the number of anti-Vietnam War campaigners
who now hold positions of power in mainstream institutions. In part it is an
artifact of antiwar positions that the institutions themselves eventually
adopted during the Vietnam War, said Todd Gitlin, professor of sociology at the
University of California at Berkeley.

The movement has grown slowly in the past five months in the face of widespread
public support for Mr. Bush's efforts in bringing nearly worldwide condemnation
of Iraq. Support for his policy began to develop hairline cracks after Nov. 29,
when the United Nations approved the use of force if Iraq did not leave Kuwait
by Jan. 15.

"But even in this climate it is rather difficult for the antiwar movement to
find clarity," said Raymond S. Franklin, director of the Michael Harrington
Center for Democratic Values and Social Change at Queens College of the City
University of New York.

Signs in the Polls

Demographic variations in polling results suggest where the antiwar movement may
be drawing its support from. Whites are evenly split on the use of force, but
blacks favor continued reliance on sanctions by a 2-to-1 ratio. A majority of
Republicans support military action; a majority of Democrats favor sanctions.
Men support the use of force by a 3-to-2 ratio, while women support reliance on
sanctions by an identical ratio.

There appears to be no division among churches. On Monday, 18 church leaders,
representing every major denomination in America, published "A Message to the
American People" as an advertisement in The New York Times. "Our nation must not
submit to the inevitability of war," it stated. "By acting now on a very broad
scale, we as people of faith will mobilize on behalf of a peaceful alternative."

One author of the message was Auxiliary Bishop Thomas J. Gumbleton of the Roman
Catholic Archdiocese of Detroit. "Our only hope is to stop the war before it
starts," he said in an interview, "because once it starts, I am afraid our
protests will do little good because the military says it will bring the war to
a horrendous conclusion quite quickly."

An overwhelming majority of the 300 bishops at the National Conference of
Catholic Bishops in November endorsed a resolution opposing a gulf war as
morally wrong, Bishop Gumbleton said, adding that the conference did not oppose
the Vietnam War until 1971.

The Rev. Joan Brown Campbell, General Secretary-elect of the National Council of
Churches and a co-author of the Times advertisement, said, "The depth of
opposition among church leaders is very strong and would continue if there was a
war, possibly moving into the realm of civil disobedience." The council,
representing 42 million parishioners, is the nation's largest ecumenical
organization.

Nine union presidents wrote an "open letter" to Mr. Bush, published yesterday as
an advertisement in The Washington Post. Under the headline "Let the Sanctions
Work," the officials said they "emphatically oppose the initiation of offensive
military action by the United States at this time."

The unions represented in the letter stretch across the work force, from the
National Education Association to the Communications Workers of American and the
International Longshoremen and Warehousemen's Union.

This kind of institutional leadership provides a national structure and,
organizers of peace rallies say, incalculable support for the otherwise
fledgling antiwar movement. Included in the movement's nucleus are peace groups,
Vietnam veterans associations, women's organizations, minority advocacy groups,
families of soldiers, and those who want the Government to spend money on
generating jobs, housing the homeless, caring for AIDS patients and
rehabilitating drug addicts instead of financing a war.

Many people who have long been active in peace movements say there is no clear
sense that today's antiwar movement will develop into a large resistance
movement.

"I would say it is too early to judge," said Philip F. Berrigan, who was
arrested Dec. 30 with 11 other demonstrators after they poured red dye, symbolic
of the blood that could flow in a Middle East war, into a fountain on the White
House grounds."

The first real measure of the antiwar movement's strength may come Monday night,
on the eve of the United Nations deadline, when candlelight marches, all-night
prayer vigils and rallies are scheduled to take place in Washington and in
hundreds of cities and towns. Antiwar coalitions are also planning large
demonstrations at the Capitol on Jan. 19 and 26.

While the Jan. 19 march is solely intended to oppose the American role in the
gulf, organizers of the second one have a broader agenda -- a United Nations
peace conference "to end all foreign occupations in the Middle East," including
Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip and Syria's of most of
Lebanon.

While some Jewish peace organizations like the New York chapter of the
International Jewish Peace Union have endorsed the second march, national Jewish
organizations have generally steered clear of the antiwar movement.

If war breaks out, the United States could become sharply polarized, said
Charles Chatfield, professor of history at Wittenberg University in Springfield,
Ohio.

"The historical pattern is that in the opening scenes of war there is strong
public affirmation of the Government and the war; then ambivalence starts to
sink in as the body bags come home," said Dr. Chatfield, who with Charles
DeBenedetti wrote "An American Ordeal" (Syracuse University Press; 1990), a
chronicle of the antiwar movement in the Vietnam era.

"But there is already great public ambivalence about this war," he added, "and
antiwar activism could rise very quickly."

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 12, 1991, Saturday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, the opening paragraphs of an article yesterday
about the antiwar movement misstated the extent of religious opposition to a war
in the Persian Gulf. Leading Christian denominations in the United States have
announced opposition to such a war; national Jewish organizations have not been
a part of the antiwar effort.


GRAPHIC: Photo: As the deadline for war in the Persian Gulf draws nearer, an
antiwar movement is building in the United States. A teach-in at Michigan State
University on Wednesday discussed the possibility of the military draft being
re-enacted. A student, above, in favor of the draft, was shouted down. (Robert
Killips for The New York Times) (pg. A11)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 11, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Antiwar Effort Buds Quickly, Nurtured by Activism of 60's

BYLINE: By MICHAEL deCOURCY HINDS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1220 words


Before a shot has been fired between allied forces and Iraq, an antiwar movement
has been building quietly in the United States since late October, drawing on
the legacy of Vietnam War peace activists.

Every leading religious denomination in the country officially opposes a gulf
war now as morally unjustifiable and maintains that economic sanctions need time
to work and that negotiations have not been fully explored.

For essentially the same reasons, nine large unions, representing six million
workers, announced their opposition to a war yesterday, a sharp contrast to
unions' support of American involvement in Vietnam. Hundreds of district offices
of other unions have already stated their opposition to a war, which they say
would be largely fought by the children of blue-collar workers.

Political bodies are taking stands, too. In Montana, for example, the
Legislature, the Missoula County Commission and the Missoula City Council are on
the verge of passing resolutions calling on President Bush and Congress to
pursue diplomatic and economic remedies to the gulf crisis, said Representative
Pat Williams, a Democrat who has represented Missoula and the western half of
Montana in Congress for seven terms.

"This is Middle America speaking," Mr. Williams said.

Although many influential institutions have spoken out against a gulf war, polls
show the nation as a whole divided on the question. The latest New York
Times/CBS News poll shows almost the same support for a war now as for giving
sanctions more time.

In part the antiwar effort reflects the number of anti-Vietnam War campaigners
who now hold positions of power in mainstream institutions. In part it is an
artifact of antiwar positions that the institutions themselves eventually
adopted during the Vietnam War, said Todd Gitlin, professor of sociology at the
University of California at Berkeley.

The movement has grown slowly in the past five months in the face of widespread
public support for Mr. Bush's efforts in bringing nearly worldwide condemnation
of Iraq. Support for his policy began to develop hairline cracks after Nov. 29,
when the United Nations approved the use of force if Iraq did not leave Kuwait
by Jan. 15.

"But even in this climate it is rather difficult for the antiwar movement to
find clarity," said Raymond S. Franklin, director of the Michael Harrington
Center for Democratic Values and Social Change at Queens College of the City
University of New York.

Signs in the Polls

Demographic variations in polling results suggest where the antiwar movement may
be drawing its support from. Whites are evenly split on the use of force, but
blacks favor continued reliance on sanctions by a 2-to-1 ratio. A majority of
Republicans support military action; a majority of Democrats favor sanctions.
Men support the use of force by a 3-to-2 ratio, while women support reliance on
sanctions by an identical ratio.

There appears to be no division among churches. On Monday, 18 church leaders,
representing every major denomination in America, published "A Message to the
American People" as an advertisement in The New York Times. "Our nation must not
submit to the inevitability of war," it stated. "By acting now on a very broad
scale, we as people of faith will mobilize on behalf of a peaceful alternative."

One author of the message was Auxiliary Bishop Thomas J. Gumbleton of the Roman
Catholic Archdiocese of Detroit. "Our only hope is to stop the war before it
starts," he said in an interview, "because once it starts, I am afraid our
protests will do little good because the military says it will bring the war to
a horrendous conclusion quite quickly."

An overwhelming majority of the 300 bishops at the National Conference of
Catholic Bishops in November endorsed a resolution opposing a gulf war as
morally wrong, Bishop Gumbleton said, adding that the conference did not oppose
the Vietnam War until 1971.

The Rev. Joan Brown Campbell, General Secretary-elect of the National Council of
Churches and a co-author of the Times advertisement, said, "The depth of
opposition among church leaders is very strong and would continue if there was a
war, possibly moving into the realm of civil disobedience." The council,
representing 42 million parishioners, is the nation's largest ecumenical
organization.

Nine union presidents wrote an "open letter" to Mr. Bush, published yesterday as
an advertisement in The Washington Post. Under the headline "Let the Sanctions
Work," the officials said they "emphatically oppose the initiation of offensive
military action by the United States at this time."

The unions represented in the letter stretch across the work force, from the
National Education Association to the Communications Workers of American and the
International Longshoremen and Warehousemen's Union.

This kind of institutional leadership provides a national structure and,
organizers of peace rallies say, incalculable support for the otherwise
fledgling antiwar movement. Included in the movement's nucleus are peace groups,
Vietnam veterans associations, women's organizations, minority advocacy groups,
families of soldiers, and those who want the Government to spend money on
generating jobs, housing the homeless, caring for AIDS patients and
rehabilitating drug addicts instead of financing a war.

Many people who have long been active in peace movements say there is no clear
sense that today's antiwar movement will develop into a large resistance
movement.

"I would say it is too early to judge," said Philip F. Berrigan, who was
arrested Dec. 30 with 11 other demonstrators after they poured red dye, symbolic
of the blood that could flow in a Middle East war, into a fountain on the White
House grounds."

The first real measure of the antiwar movement's strength may come Monday night,
on the eve of the United Nations deadline, when candlelight marches, all-night
prayer vigils and rallies are scheduled to take place in Washington and in
hundreds of cities and towns. Antiwar coalitions are also planning large
demonstrations at the Capitol on Jan. 19 and 26.

While the Jan. 19 march is solely intended to oppose the American role in the
gulf, organizers of the second one have a broader agenda -- a United Nations
peace conference "to end all foreign occupations in the Middle East," including
Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip and Syria's of most of
Lebanon.

While some Jewish peace organizations like the New York chapter of the
International Jewish Peace Union have endorsed the second march, national Jewish
organizations have generally steered clear of the antiwar movement.

If war breaks out, the United States could become sharply polarized, said
Charles Chatfield, professor of history at Wittenberg University in Springfield,
Ohio.

"The historical pattern is that in the opening scenes of war there is strong
public affirmation of the Government and the war; then ambivalence starts to
sink in as the body bags come home," said Dr. Chatfield, who with Charles
DeBenedetti wrote "An American Ordeal" (Syracuse University Press; 1990), a
chronicle of the antiwar movement in the Vietnam era.

"But there is already great public ambivalence about this war," he added, "and
antiwar activism could rise very quickly."

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 14, 1991, Monday

CORRECTION:

A picture caption on Friday about the movement against a Persian Gulf war
misidentified the university at which a teach-in was held to oppose a possible
draft. It was Michigan State University, not the University of Michigan.


GRAPHIC: Photo: As the deadline for war in the Persian Gulf draws nearer, an
antiwar movement is building in the United States. A teach-in at Michigan State
University on Wednesday discussed the possibility of the military draft being
re-enacted. A student, above, in favor of the draft, was shouted down. (Robert
Killips for The New York Times) (pg. A11)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 12, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
New U.S. Weapons: Facing Their First Combat Test

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Jan. 11


Whether a war with Iraq can be won swiftly and with relatively little bloodshed
will depend partly on the performance of a host of new American weapons that
have yet to stand the test of combat.

Ever since the Vietnam War, military officers, civilian analysts, military
contractors, members of Congress, lobbyists and journalists have been wrangling
over the worth of many expensive weapons systems. Whatever else it may do, a war
in the Persian Gulf may at last settle some of these questions.

Much of the longstanding debate has to do with tanks and anti-tank weapons,
which would have decisive roles in a desert war.

The M-1 tank, which incorporates many revolutionary features, has been
characterized by its advocates as a "supertank" and as "king of the killing
ground." But it has been branded by critics as a fussy machine and, at a cost of
nearly $3 million per tank, as a numbingly expensive weapon whose desirable
innovations may be outweighed by new vulnerabilities.

For every argument raised on behalf of the M-1, its detractors seem to have an
answer, and vice versa.

Debate Over Turbine Engine

For instance, M-1 defenders say the tank's gas turbine engine, the only such
tank engine in the world, gives it matchless agility, acceleration and power for
its weight. The critics say, however, that high speed and quick turns can easily
result in the loss of a track, especially in the desert, immobilizing the tank.

The turbine engine, moreover, produces a blast of hot exhaust air that is easily
detected from a distance by enemy infrared vision devices. But supporters of the
M-1 note that its engine is substantially quieter than traditional gasoline or
diesel power plants, and can therefore approach an enemy closely.

The M-1 tank is protected by the most elaborate system of armor plating ever
devised -- layer upon layer of steel, ceramics, special composite materials and
nonradioactive uranium, separated from each other by air spaces engineered to
sap the energy of a penetrating projectile.

Congressional critics have argued, however, that live-fire testing of the M-1
has never adequately simulated the threat represented by the 125-millimeter
Soviet cannon used by Iraqi tanks.

Questions About the Cannon

The M-1's own cannon have also been hotly disputed.

Modern tank guns do not fire explosive shells. They launch long rods made of
tungsten or uranium, which fly at immense speed, vaporizing or melting the armor
they hit and sending showers of white-hot metal inside.

To destroy a target, these projectiles must be both heavy and fast, traveling at
nearly one mile per second. The larger the gun, the heavier the projectile it
can fire.

The cannon on the earlier M-1 tanks is one with a bore of 105 millimeters in
diameter. It was deemed by many experts to be inadequate for battle with
top-of-the-line Soviet tanks, and the Defense Department ordered a new,
high-powered cannon, a 120-millimeter gun designed in Germany, which is now
standard on the new M1-A1 tanks reaching United States Army and Marine Corps
units here. It is also replacing the smaller guns in some of the earlier M-1's.

Ammunition Called Bulky

But critics say the better weapon has some drawbacks. The ammunition for
120-millimeter guns is so bulky that the tank can carry only 40 rounds.

By comparison, the early M-1's could carry 55 cannon rounds, and the M-60, an
older diesel-powered tank that still outnumbers the M-1 in Saudi Arabia, could
carry 63 rounds.

Some armor experts contend that in a fast-paced desert battle, many shots would
inevitably miss, and that the number of projectiles a tank can fire without
resupply may be critical.

Another debate that has caused dissension among senior Army commanders and
policymakers has to do with the weapons foot soldiers can bring to bear against
tanks.

American infantrymen rely for self-protection against tanks on two wire-guided
missiles: the Dragon and the TOW, an acronym for tube-launched, optically
tracked, wire-guided missile.

Both missiles are guided to their targets by a gunner who even after he fires
must keep the sights of his launch tube trained on the target until the missile
hits. This sighting sends signals to the missile through a wire trailing behind
it, correcting its course.

Exposed to Enemy Fire

But the great drawback of both the Dragon and the TOW cited by critics is that a
gunner must stand or sit facing his target, exposed to enemy fire for up to 10
seconds.

Military optimists, however, point out that aircraft carrying much larger and
more effective anti-tank missiles will be on hand over the desert to protect
ground forces. The main Air Force anti-tank weapon is the slow but heavily armed
and armored A-10 attack plane, carrying Maverick missiles.

The A-10, which has an armor-piercing 30-millimeter cannon as well as Maverick
missiles, is generally regarded as one of the most formidable tank destroyers
ever designed. But even Pierre Sprey, a former Defense Department consultant who
played an important part in the A-10, has doubts about the Maverick. He said in
a recent interview that its infrared guidance system can be easily confused by
heat sources other than the target -- hot desert sand, for instance.

Pentagon officials contend, however, that the Maverick scores well on tests.

Many other arguments about military hardware remain to be resolved. "No matter
how realistically you test a weapon," as an Army officer put it, "you never know
for sure how well it will do in war. There's just no substitute for the real
thing."

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Diagram of the M1-A1 tank. (Source: Periscope data base, Jane's Armor
and Artillery 1990-91)

TYPE: Military Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 12, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Southern Democrats Are Torn as Vote Nears

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 734 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 11


Until Thursday, Senator J. Bennett Johnston said, "I thought sanctions were the
way to go." But the Louisiana Democrat emerged from a meeting at the White House
supporting President Bush. "The die was cast," he said, and it is important for
senators to "present a united front."

"I thought he wouldn't attack without the Congress being strongly behind him,"
he added. "But I do now."

Senator Bob Graham also said, "I'm inclined to support the judgment of the
President." Nevertheless, the Florida Democrat is worried because Mr. Bush is
leading "a very divided nation."

But Senator Lloyd Bentsen, a Texas Democrat who describes himself as having "a
somewhat hawkish background" and who supported United States action in Korea and
Vietnam, said, "I want more time to see if the sanctions will work."

Senator David Pryor also opposes military action. "It's not like the Gulf of
Tonkin vote," the Arkansas Democrat said, referring to the resolution used to
justify the Vietnam War. "The issue is very clear on this vote."

For Southern Democrats, not bound to the President through party loyalty, the
planned vote on giving the President the authority to go to war against Iraq is
especially tortured.

Their region has a tradition of supporting a President and the armed forces. But
many Southern Democrats have accepted the leadership of Senator Sam Nunn, the
Georgia Democrat who is chairman of the Armed Services Committee and sponsor of
a resolution to oppose military action and continue reliance upon economic
sanctions.

Although their votes are crucial to Mr. Bush's hopes of victory in the Senate,
they say that with the exception of the few invited to meetings with the
President, they have not been lobbied by the White House.

More than 40 percent of the civilian reservists in the gulf come from nine
Southern states, and some senators say that the South has been economically
devastated by their departure.

"They come out of communities that are totally dependent on the military,"
Senator Wyche Fowler Jr., a Georgia Democrat, said of 80,000 troops shipped out
of Georgia bases. "In Savannah, the real estate market has been totally
devastated, and automobile dealers haven't sold a car in months."

Mr. Fowler said his constituents were saying that they wanted Saddam Hussein out
of Kuwait, but without the loss of American lives. "In other words, they have
conflicting hopes and envision conflicting results," he said. When questioned in
depth, the Senator said, Georgians say, "We want you guys to do everything short
of war, and then, if that doesn't work, you resort to force." That, Mr. Fowler
said, is his position as well.

Mr. Fowler said he believed that the public had been seduced by the mini-wars in
Grenada and Panama. "They think any military action will be over in a weekend,"
he said.

The Southern senators say their mail on the issue is divided. Because of the
complexity of the issue, its intensity is "not even close to Bork," Mr. Johnston
said, referring to the debate over President Reagan's unsuccessful nomination of
Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court.

Mr. Johnston, who attended West Point and was a first lieutenant in postwar
Germany, said that at the meeting with Mr. Bush, "I told him I continued to
favor sanctions and asked if there was any way to withdraw any of the troops."
He said Mr. Bush told him there was not. "If you cannot withdraw the troops, you
have made the decision to go to war," the Senator said.

"You just can't keep 400,000 troops sweating in the desert," he said. "Students
were pulled out of schools, doctors were pulled away from lucrative practices."

Mr. Graham said he supported the President although "I'm very concerned about
the failure of the American people to be educated to the necessity" of waging
war. "We'll be starting with a fractured America," he said.

Senator David L. Boren acknowledged that his opposition to the President was a
departure from his previous positions. "I've been such a strong advocate of
speaking with a single voice," the Oklahoma Democrat said. "But this is one of
the most serious mistakes the country could possibly make."

Above all, Southern Democrats fear the nation is too divided to take military
action. "There's a great division across this country," Mr. Bentsen said.

Agreeing, Mr. Fowler said, "You should never commit your troops before you
commit your country."

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "I'm inclined to support the judgment of the President," said
Senator Bob Graham, above, Democrat of Florida. Senator J. Bennett Johnston,
Democrat of Louisiana, said it is important for Senators to "present a united
front." "These kids are not from the corporate board rooms or the country
clubs," said Senator David Pryor, Democrat of Arkansas, who opposes military
action. (Photographs by Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 12, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Wilson D. Hall, Radio and TV Correspondent, 68

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 147 words


Wilson D. Hall, a former NBC News radio and television correspondent, who was
acting chairman of the department of journalism at the University of Tennessee
at Martin, died Thursday at Jackson-Madison County Hospital in Jackson, Tenn. He
was 68 years old and lived in Martin, in northwestern Tennessee.

He died of pulmonary disease, said his former wife, Laurier King Hall of Silver
Spring, Md.

Mr. Hall, a graduate of Yale University, was at NBC for 26 years and worked in
Korea, the Middle East, Cuba, Vietnam, New York and Washington.

He left the network in 1978 and then worked for a CBS televison affiliate in
Albany and at the University of Bridgeport in Connecticut. He went to the
University of Tennessee in 1984.

He is survived by two children, Kevan and Kimberley , both of Silver Spring, and
a brother, Robert, a retired Air Force colonel, of Pensacola, Fla.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 12, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Lennon's Son Expands a Song of Peace

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 15; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 352 words


An all-star recording and music-video of John Lennon's antiwar anthem, "Give
Peace a Chance," with new lyrics by the slain Beatle's 15-year-old son, Sean,
will be released Tuesday by Virgin Records. Among the more than 20 stars
participating on the record, which was conceived and produced by Lenny Kravitz,
are M. C. Hammer, Bonnie Raitt, Tom Petty, Peter Gabriel and L. L. Cool J.

The new version of the song retains the original chorus, "All we are saying is
give peace a chance," but includes four new verses, the second of which
addresses the Persian Gulf crisis and pleads indirectly against going to war and
in favor of giving the United Nations' sanctions against Iraq more time to work.
It goes like this: "Everybody's talkin' 'bout/ Civil war/ Revolution/
Armageddon/ No solution/ Are we facing Vietnam?/ We don't want to drop the
bomb."

Mr. Kravitz conceived the idea for the record the day after the United Nations
voted to impose a deadline of Jan. 15, which will be Tuesday, for Iraq to
withdraw from Kuwait, said his manager Danny Goldberg.

Ten days ago, Mr. Kravitz telephoned Yoko Ono with the concept, and a week ago
yesterday, they and Sean Lennon stayed up most of the night discussing the
situation, and Sean wrote the lyrics.

The instrumental track was recorded the next day at a studio in Hoboken, and the
first vocals were recorded Monday in Manhattan. Sessions took place in Los
Angeles on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday and in London on Thursday. The
music-video was supervised by Nigel Dick, who six years ago directed the video
of the Band Aid charity single, "Do They Know It's Christmas?"

The other New York participants are Run D.M.C., Cyndi Lauper, Skid Row, Little
Steven and the rapper Q-Tip. The others in the Los Angeles continent are Bruce
Hornsby, Iggy Pop, Duff McKagan (of Guns 'n' Roses), Michael McDonald, Randy
Newman, Little Richard, Teena Marie, Terence Trent D'Arby and Ofra Haza (an
Israeli singer singing in Hebrew). The other London participants are Jazzy B.
(of Soul 2 Soul), Dave Stewart and Amina, a Moroccan pop singer singing in
Arabic.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sean Lennon (Larry Busacca)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 12, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Day 2: Lawmakers Debate War and More Time for Sanctions

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 4023 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 11


Following are excerpts from the debate in Congress today on President Bush's
request for support for military action in the Persian Gulf, as transcribed by
The New York Times:

Senator Bob Graham
Democrat of Florida

I think the past of this, which I will define as that which occurred prior to
the invasion of Kuwait, is unfortunately characterized by a failure of strategic
vision. Some very basic things are occurring in this region of the world to
which we have not been appropriately attentive. Just to cite three, an emerging
fundamentalism, not just religious but cultural fundamentalism, the rejection of
Western values. This movement of fundamentalism is especially troublesome, as it
has attracted such a large number of younger people throughout this region. The
enormous disparity between rich and poor, which are fueling basic animosities,
and the fact that, in part, through the United States participation, the Middle
East has become the parking lot for the military weapons of the world. We end up
with a relatively small nation of 15 million people with a 1.3 million army,
with 5,700 tanks and over 700 combat aircraft, enormous disproportion of
military strength and incredible need for those weapons.

We make a basic mistake, I suggest, if we think that what we are dealing with is
one man -- Saddam Hussein. I see Saddam Hussein not as the cause of those
fundamental events, but rather as the guileful person who has taken advantage of
those and other fundamental factors occurring in this region.

We also, drastically, have contributed to the past. We have accommodated Iraq
over a period of more than a decade, accommodated in terms of covertly assisting
them in the war with Iran, within the shadow of the invsion of Kuwait,
continuing to extend substantial economic assistance to Iraq.

We also have contributed to the past by our failure to have a sustained
commitment to a rational national energy policy, failure which has made us
increasingly hostage to the circumstances in the Middle East and the
personalities of today's and tomorrow's Saddam Husseins.

Looking to the future, I would suggest that as we attempt to assess how we
should respond to the current crisis today we should ask ourselves what do we
want to have as some of the consequences not just of the next 10 or 60 days, but
over the next decade in this region and what do they say about U. S. policy
around the world in this new post-cold-war era.

I am going to support the [Mitchell-Nunn] resolution, which will give the
President of the United States the authority to use force. I am going to do so
because I believe that the President of the United States deserves to have a
presumption of correctness of his actions, and that he especially deserves to
have a presumption of correctness of his actions, and that he especially
deserves to have a presumption of correctness as it relates to matters of our
national security and relations with other nations.

Senator Sam Nunn
Democrat of Georgia

A sanctions policy is not perfect. No guarantees here. But it has to be weighed
against the alternatives.

The Bush Administration is correct when they point out that sanctions do not
guarantee that Iraq will leave Kuwait. But the story does not end there. What
guarantees do we have that war will be brief? American casualties will be light?
No one can say whether war will last five days, five weeks or five months. We
know we can win and we will win. No doubt about that. No doubt about who wins
this war.

Our policy and our military planning, however, cannot be based on an expectation
that the war will be concluded quickly and easily. In large measure the scope
and scale of the hostilities, once begun, will be determined by Iraq's
willingness to absord massive punishment and to fight on.

.  .  .

Mr. President, those who support prompt military action argue that delay will
allow Iraq to strengthen its defensive positions in Kuwait, thereby adding to
the eventual cost of forcing Iraq out of Kuwait. A couple of observations on
this point: This would have been a better argument in September of last year,
and October, than it is today.

Iraq already has had five months to dig in and to fortify and they have done so
in a major way. Kuwait has fortifications reminiscent of World War I. This
argument also overlooks the cost to the Iraqi military of sitting in Kuwait with
a 500,000-man force while its logistical support degrades because of the
sanctions.

.  .  .

Supporters of prompt military action also argue that our offensive military
capability will degrade if our huge force sits for months in the Saudi desert.
This is also true. And for several months I have suggested that we should
institute a policy of unit rotation commencing with quick reaction forces such
as the 82d Airborne that might be needed on short notice elsewhere in the world.
We should take full advantage of the coalition's superiority in air and sea
power while establishing the capability of deploying additional ground forces to
the region quickly if needed.

.  .  .

In summary, Mr. President, I believe that on balance there is a reasonable
expectation that continued economic sanctions backed up by the threat of
military force and international isolation can bring about Iraqi withdrawal from
Kuwait.

.  .  .

I believe that before this nation is committed to what may be a large-scale war,
each of us in the Senate of the United States in reaching a decision which will
be very personal and very difficult for all of us, we should ask ourselves a
fundamental question: Will I be able to look at the parents and the wives, the
husbands and the children in the eye and say that their loved ones sacrificed
their lives for a cause vital to the United States and that there was no other
reasonable alternative?

Mr. President, at this time I cannot.

Representative
Barbara F. Vucanovich
Republican of Nevada

I come from a military family. Two of my brothers were West Point graduates. My
dad, a career Army officer, taught at West Point. And my grandfather, also a
career Army officer and a doctor, was in the Medical Corps. One of my brothers
gave his life at Anzio, and I can remember the day my mother was notified of my
brother's sacrifice. It was a day that was permanently etched in my memory.

With this clearly in mind, do I look forward to casting a vote which could mean
the loss of even one life of an American man or woman in the gulf? No, of course
not. I'm sure none of us do. The decision to cast this vote should be made only
after each of us examines our innermost conscience.

I think we need to reflect what the consequences will be, however, if we don't
stop Saddam Hussein now. There can be no reward for brutal aggression. If we do
nothing, and Saddam Hussein pays no price for swallowing up the country of
Kuwait, destroying people's property, torturing, raping and killing innocent men
and women and children, we are as guilty as he is.

Representative
Donald W. Riegle Jr.
Democrat of Michigan

Most of the forces that we have over there on that front-line situation right
now are very young; they're not much older than these pages sitting down here in
the well of the House, in the well of the Senate. A few years older, but they
haven't lived very long. And if the bullets start flying, there are going to be
a lot of them that are not going to live much longer. And that's just the sheer,
miserable fact of war. War is about fire and steel and people dying.

I'm convinced in my own mind that if the sons and daughters of all of us, of the
President, the Vice President, the Cabinet were all over there in the Persian
Gulf right now, right up on the front line and were going to be part of that
first assault wave that would go on into Kuwait, I think we'd be taking more
time. I think we'd be working harder on the sanctions policy. I think we'd be
trying to squeeze Saddam Hussein in every other way that we could, short of a
shooting war.

Senator John McCain
Republican of Arizona

In this new world order, it is clear to me that if we fail to act there will be
inevitably a succession of dictators, of Saddam Husseins -- of which around this
globe there are an abundance, either in reality or would-be. And those dictators
will see a green light, a green light for aggression, a green light for
annexation of its weaker neighbors. And, indeed, over time a threat to the
stability of this entire globe.

Representative Byron L. Dorgan
Democrat of North Dakota

It is a fig leaf to call this a multinational force. It is an American force and
would be an American war. And we will decide to spend money we don't have,
borrowed from our allies, to send American kids to risk their lives to protect
allied oil. When will we understand that it is time for America to ask our
allies to bear their fair share of the burden? And let me finally today say I'm
here today because I'm concerned about Iraq, concerned about war, concerned
about our role in the world. But I'm concerned about something else. I'm
concerned about America. Choking on debt and threatened with an economic crisis
from within, I see a President and a Congress standing tall, exhibiting steely
resolve to stand up and talk tough to a tin-horn dictator in the Persian Gulf;
willing to borrow money from abroad and risk our troops' lives to protect our
allies' oil.

Senator Joseph I. Lieberman
Democrat of Connecticut

The issue before us is not to pick a day or time for hostilities to begin or to
determine how a war is waged. No, that, in my opinion, is the clear
responsibility of the President, as Commander in Chief under Article II of our
Constitution.

The issue before the Congress under Article I, Section 8 is whether or not we
authorize the President to use force to achieve our goals in the Persian Gulf --
whether or not we think that war is justified -- if the President chooses to
wage it. On that issue, I will vote to authorize the President to have the power
to go to war. I will do so in the knowledge that war may indeed be the result
and that many good people may die. But I will cast that vote in the hopes that
by so doing, I will make the prospects of peace more real. . . .

Representative Major R. Owens
Democrat of Brooklyn

Nearly one-third of our soldiers in Operation Desert Shield are
African-American, many of them with families in districts like mine, the 12th
Congressional District of Brooklyn. My district is the 10th poorest district in
the nation.

My district is the second -- has the second-largest number of African-Americans.
Young African-American men and women are three times more likely to be in the
armed forces and involved in this impending war in the sand as young whites are.
There is a reason for this.

When people can't get jobs they find the Army and the Navy and the other
military units as an opportunity to be utilized. There are many very bright
young people who never looked for a job but who are recruited from high school
and told that you can go to college after you go through the military and get
those advantages. And there are many -- there are a few others who are officers,
quite a number are officers -- are African-American men and women who went to
military academies or they used the benefits of the R.O.T.C. as the only way
they could make it. For this reason you have this disproportionate number.

These are the same people who are penalized when President Bush refuses to pass
a civil rights bill because it has a quota -- he claims it has a quota. There is
some kind of ugly reverse quota operating when 33 percent of the troops on the
front line are poor and African-American.

Representative Ike Skelton
Democrat of Missouri

The issue, Mr. Speaker, is whether the dream of Franklin Roosevelt will be
fulfilled by reliance on the United Nations and the rule of law. This is a grave
issue. It is, however, but a replay of the past. The faces are different but the
issues and the challenges are the same.

So the question is, have we learned anything from the lessons of history. It's
1936, Adolf Hitler entered the Rhineland. Those great powers of the day, Great
Britain and France, did nothing. Nineteen thirty-eight, Adolf Hitler demanded
part of Czechoslovakia and got it, based upon a promise of no more territorial
demands. It was Great Britain's Chamberlain, the Prime Minister, who returned
from the Munich meeting with Adolf Hitler, proclaiming "peace in our time." How
wrong he was.

The lesson in history of which I speak is found in the phrase, "We should have
stopped him when we could." How many British, French and, yes, American families
said that about Adolf Hitler after World War II?

Applying that sad lesson of history, we must stop Saddam Hussein now.

Senator Tom Harkin
Democrat of Iowa

Certainly naked aggression must be responded to, but what about a few weeks ago,
when there was naked aggression in Chad by Libya? We didn't rush over there with
our troops. How about Syria? Not too long ago, Syria -- now one of our allies --
Syria went into Lebanon and massacred 750 civilians. Well, that's naked
aggression. We didn't do anything about it. Now Assad's on our side.

What about Indonesia's bloody excursion into East Timor, where they basically
wiped out a country, killed a lot of people? We didn't do anything. Or when
Saddam Hussein gassed the Kurds in his own country. That's naked aggression. We
didn't do anything.

So what does this mean that we want to stop naked aggression. Does this mean
that we are now going to say that the United States will indeed become the
policeman of the world, and that we will respond to every instance of naked
aggression? Or does it mean that we're just going to kind of pick and choose
which ones we want to respond to or not.

How about the Soviets putting down the Lithuanians. Are we going to respond to
that? I dare say we're not. So we're just going to kind of pick and choose which
kind of naked aggression we want.

Representative Michael Bilirakis
Republican of Florida

I earnestly believe that what we will decide in the coming days goes far beyond
the price of gas or the re-establishment of a desert sheikhdom, as I have heard
alleged. No, what hangs in the balance here is nothing less than global order,
the legitimacy of recognized boundaries around the world and the primacy of
international law.

.  .  .

We in this chamber would like nothing better than to believe that Saddam Hussein
will be convinced by economic sanctions to leave Kuwait in peace. However, I
have seen absolutely no evidence of this in the past six months, and without the
threat of armed force being used against him at any time, I do not foresee
Saddam altering his course of pillage, murder, rape and destruction.

Representative John Lewis
Democrat of Georgia

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak for peace. The decision we are about to make
is too much to be made by one mortal. The representatives of the people must
participate in this grave decision. These are very difficult times for all of
us, yet we have a moral obligation, a mandate and a mission to do what we can to
prevent war. In our time, we have seen too much violence, too much conflict and
too many killings in the Middle East. We have an opportunity, my colleagues, to
slow down this rush to war.

Representative Gerry E. Studds
Democrat of Massachusetts

I am unwilling to put my faith or American lives in the hands of those who tell
us so confidently that a war will be quick, easy and successful. Yes, we can
probably win. But we do not know how long it will take to win. We do not know
how many American soldiers and innocent civilians will die. We do not know how
many young men and women and children will be left without homes, without
parents, without arms or legs or eyes, without the capacity to live a normal
life. No computer, no politician, no so-called expert, not even our best and
brightest, can do more than guess at the human costs of this war.

We cannot predict the economic costs of violence in the Persian Gulf. It will
mean higher and perhaps far higher oil prices for God knows how long. The reason
we are in the Persian Gulf is oil -- to protect our economy. By surrendering to
war we will in that sense surely and ironically defeat ourselves.

And finally, if we go to war now, we will never know whether that war was
necessary. Think about that. Think about the lives that'll be cut short, the
families that will be shattered, the heartbreak that will be endured and ask
yourself how much greater the pain will be if we are not certain whether those
sacrifices had to occur.

.  .  .

Mr. Speaker, our choice today is whether to persevere on the path of patience
and determination and peace or to stray from that path into the wilderness of
war. Whether to walk together the extra mile or the extra two miles in pursuit
of a bloodless resolution to this crisis or to declare war and fight war and
count the bodies and bury the bodies and never know whether a single American
soldier really had to die.

Representative James H. Bilray
Democrat of Nevada

My own family disagrees with me on this vote. My daughter who is a junior in
high school last night spent an hour at dinner telling me what a bad vote I was
making. My daughter who is a senior in college spent 15-20 minutes just a few
minutes ago telling me this was the worst vote I'd ever make. I understand their
anguish. I understand the anguish of my parish priest who walked out of Mass
this week and told me, please, let's not give the President the power to fight.

But I believe if we spit in the President's face, and that we deny him the
ability to use whatever weapons are at his disposal to achieve peace, then we
are going to cause war. Our only hope is that by giving the President the right
to use force, he will not have to use that force.

Representative

Joseph P. Kennedy 2d
Democrat of Massachusetts

This country, and everybody in this chamber, ought to be willing to look at
themselves in the mirror and say whether or not we're here to protect some way
of life that allows us to drive cars that get minimum gas mileage, that allows
us to live in houses that are energy sieves, that allows us to work in buildings
such as this one that are energy sieves as well, in order to protect some notion
of a conservative aspect of our history that says that that's capitalism.

.  .  .

And lastly, we're there to help our so-called Kuwaiti and Saudi friends. Need I
remind the members of this chamber what the Kuwaitis and Saudis did to this
country in 1973? Did to us again in 1979? We're there to protect these so-called
friends? Ladies and gentlemen, these fickle friends have never proven that they
are worth the kind of price that President Bush is committing.

.  .  .

I understand that at the end of his remarks, Mr. Solomon from New Yorkquoted my
uncle, President Kennedy, as suggesting that somehow or another there would be a
tone of appeasement if he had not responded in the way he did to the Cuban
missile crisis in 1962. I would just point out that President Kennedy
established an embargo against Cuba in 1962. That is exactly what we are
advocating on this side in 1990, is to create an embargo that will work.

Representative Gary L. Ackerman
Democrat of Queens

This is not why I came here, to vote for war. Yet over the last several weeks I
have found myself at war with my own conscience. All my life, I've decried
violence and all who commit it. All my life I've been and I am a peacemonger. I
opposed Vietnam, and even Grenada. I oppose the death penalty. I don't think
boxing is a sport. I'm even against killing animals without purpose. Toy guns
and war games have always been banned from my house. I'm a father who wants his
children to grow up in a world at peace.

.  .  .

There were lessons in Vietnam. Saddam Hussein thinks he's learned one, that the
United States has no national resolve, that Americans will do anything short of
shedding blood, that the Congress will pick apart the President and undermine
our troops and our strategy, and let him have his violent way.

Mr. Speaker, let us learn him a new lesson. The best chance for peace that we
have is for a message to be sent from here today that the American people
through their Congress is behind their President and their soldiers and are
willing to stand up to his vicious aggression.

.  .  .

I will not cast this vote with any sense of joy, I tremble at the thought of
playing God and having to cast it. The only thing I fear more would be sitting
on the rocker on the porch if God grants me the years to reach retirement, and
having some little girl, who hopefully would look a little like her grandmother,
look at me and ask, "Grandpa, why didn't anyone stop him?"

Senator John Glenn
Democrat of Ohio

Certainly Iraq is an ideal embargo target. And if the embargo ends in failure,
we still have the military option. And I will fully support that course at that
time. I believe the Persian Gulf is that important. But to again loose the
terrors of war and the thousands of lives that hang in the balance, should not
be the first resort. And just saying that Kuwait was attacked or that hostages
have been mistreated will not be of much solace if flag-draped coffins for both
male and female soldiers and sailors and marines and airmen line up in the
hangars in Dover, Del.

Senator Christopher S. Bond
Republican of Missouri

Now I know that compelling arguments can be and have been made, arguments which
are popularly appealing, arguments against war. Here's a good one, and I quote:
"How horrible, fantastic, incredible it is that we should be digging trenches
and trying on gas masks because of a quarrel in a faraway country between people
of whom we know nothing. It seems still more impossible that a quarrel which had
already been settled in principle, should be the subject of war." In case you
don't recognize that quote, it was from Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain in a
London broadcast on Sept. 27, 1938.

I believe the better policy then and the policy -- better policy now was summed
up by Winston Churchill in the dark days leading up to World War II. Churchill
said civilization will not last, freedom will not survive, peace will not be
kept unless a very large majority of mankind unites together to defend them and
show themselves possessed of a constabulary power before which barbaric and
atavistic forces will stand in awe.

I believe the reason we must adopt the resolution supporting the position of the
U.N. resolution is very simple and straightforward. The simple reason we must
act is that we cannot allow Saddam Hussein to profit from his aggression. The
world stands poised at a critical moment in history. The cold war has come to a
close and the world is entering into a new era. . . . If we allow Saddam Hussein
to succeed in this venture -- the first of the truly post-cold-war era -- we
will pay the price for years to come. . . .

Representative Barbara Boxer
Democrat of California

I have seen the weapons that are arrayed against Iraq. I've seen them up close,
in the Persian Gulf. They're awesome! We can inflict the ultimate pain on the
people of Iraq, make no mistake. We will win this war -- quickly! Maybe two
weeks, maybe two months -- that's quick. Maybe at most six months -- that's
quick, I guess.

But my colleagues, it won't come free. There's a huge price if we choose this
route, even in the best of circumstances. The price is in body bags, in babies
killed, in an uncertain, unstable Middle East even after the crisis. In a decade
that will be lost as we once again have put our resources into war and weapons
and rob our people of what they need in this country.

I had a community meeting in my district, I had two in one day. A thousand
people came out. I've never seen anything like it. We voted on how they would
vote on a resolution to go to war and 95 percent voted no. That's my district in
California.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 15, 1991, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

A subheading on Saturday with excerpts from the Congressional debate about the
Persian Gulf referred incorrectly in some copies to Donald W. Riegle Jr.,
Democrat of Michigan. He is a Senator, not a Representative.

Because of an editing error, debate excerpts from comments by Senator Bob Graham
of Florida referred incorrectly in some copies to the resolution that he
supported. He said he would vote to authorize the President's use of force in
the gulf, not to favor continued sanctions.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Senator Sam Nunn. (NYT); Representative Barbara F. Vucanovich
(Stan Barough); Representative Major R. Owens.

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Late News From Afghanistan

BYLINE: By Bill Keller; Bill Keller is the chief of the Moscow bureau of The New
York Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1357 words



THE HIDDEN WAR
A Russian Journalist's Account of the Soviet War in Afghanistan.
By Artyom Borovik.
Illustrated. 288 pp. New York:
A Morgan Entrekin Book/The Atlantic Monthly Press. $19.95.

The great contraction of Soviet power that continues to this day began, we tend
to forget, not at the Berlin Wall but at the Salang Pass. Across that icy
passage through the mountains of northern Afghanistan, young Soviet soldiers
completed their retreat in February 1989, after the expenditure of a million
Afghan and at least 15,000 Soviet lives. It was there that the Brezhnev
doctrine, justifying military intervention to defend kindred "revolutions,"
first went into remission.

The decision by Mikhail S. Gorbachev and his associates to abandon the nine-year
venture in Afghanistan probably began as a deliberate geopolitical calculation:
the war was a major obstacle to better relations with the United States and two
southern neighbors, China and Iran. It undermined the marketing of Mr.
Gorbachev's new political thinking and endangered the potential dividends of
detente: a suspension of the arms race; access to Western investment, credits
and technology.

When the Kremlin began looking for a way out in 1986, it had little call to
reckon with domestic public opinion. Andrei D. Sakharov, who had been sent into
exile for complaining too loudly about the war, resumed his calls for withdrawal
immediately after Mr. Gorbachev freed him in December 1986, but outside a small
circle of dissidents the war was not much of an issue. This was not the United
States in the Vietnam years. The church was utterly submissive, the campuses
were apathetic refuges from the draft and the influential intelligentsia (whose
children, like their American counterparts, often managed to avoid serving) were
intoxicated with the novelty of glasnost.

The general public knew little about the war, and was content not to know. The
heavily censored Soviet press reports portrayed the Soviet troops as something
akin to the Peace Corps, building hospitals in squalid villages while the Afghan
army bore the brunt of the fighting. In the Soviet press, Soviet soldiers did
not die, or desert their comrades, or commit atrocities, or come home addicted
to drugs and haunted by nightmares.

Once the disengagement from Afghanistan was set in slow motion, however, the
censorship was gradually relaxed. Among the first to give the public an honest
glimpse of the war was Artyom Borovik, then 26 years old. His reports in the
summer of 1987 in the popular weekly Ogonyok, compiled in the first section of
"The Hidden War," gave Soviet readers a taste of the death, boredom and horror
of a guerrilla war in an exotic place.

If Mr. Borovik's officers tend to be noble and his soldiers rather poetic, they
are also at times frightened and disoriented. Occasionally they are less than
heroic. A helicopter ferrying injured soldiers to their base runs out of gas,
and as it spirals toward the earth the navigator and mechanic crawl past the
wounded to bail out. Mr. Borovik describes the drugs, and the trauma of
returning home to an ungrateful motherland. He uses an interview with a veteran
American war correspondent, Peter Arnett of CNN, to make the analogy with
Vietnam.

It may be hard for an American reading these dispatches today to grasp what an
impact they had. At the time, in the hypersensitive climate of early glasnost,
the articles and their implicit doubt -- What are we doing here? -- were a
sensation at home. And by exposing the hardships of men at war, Mr. Borovik
became a hero to the soldiers themselves. I recently asked a former paratrooper
in the central Russian city of Sverdlovsk if he recalled Mr. Borovik's articles.
He went to his desk and pulled out a dogeared copy of the three-year-old
dispatches. "He got it right," the paratrooper said appreciatively. "The salt
and dirt of war."

Such reporting, by Mr. Borovik and a few others, like Gennadi Bocharov in the
Moscow weekly Literaturnaya Gazeta, did not generate an antiwar movement. But it
helped undermine the rationale for the war, made the withdrawal irreversible and
contributed to the imperial malaise that made any other such venture -- say, to
hold Eastern Europe by force -- unthinkable.

By the time he returned to witness the end of the war in 1989, Mr. Borovik had
outgrown the last of his illusions about the war, as indeed had much of the
country. The Communist cause that was ostensibly being defended in Afghanistan
was now discredited at home. The American threat (I have talked to many young
soldiers who genuinely believed the United States intended to put missiles at
their southern border in Afghanistan) seemed absurd as the great imperialist
adversary became the great capitalist role model.

In the second and more powerful section of this book, based on his material from
the closing months of the war, Mr. Borovik describes his visits to a Kabul
mental ward, recounts stories of atrocities against Afghan civilians, tells of
botched operations and soldiers in despair. He writes about how various soldiers
and officers behave in retreat, some rising above the absurdity, others
succumbing to it. He interviews, not unsympathetically, Soviet deserters who
have made their way to the United States.

"In Afghanistan we bombed not only the detachments of rebels and their caravans,
but our own ideals as well," he writes. "With the war came the reevaluation of
our moral and ethical values. In Afghanistan the policies of the government
became utterly incompatible with the inherent morality of our nation."

An introductory section includes a wide range of interviews with subjects from
Alexander Haig to the former Afghan leader Babrak Karmal, in which they
speculate about why Moscow went into Afghanistan in the first place. The
finger-pointing -- the foreign ministry blames the military, the military blames
Mr. Karmal, Mr. Karmal blames the Soviet "failure to understand Afghanistan" and
everyone blames the K.G.B. -- is amusing but inconclusive.

"The Hidden War," however, is not about how the Soviet Union fell into this war,
but about the cost in lives and spirit that, once it sank in, assured the
venture will not soon be repeated. Anyone who wants to understand why Mr.
Gorbachev today dares not commit troops to another Islamic desert, in the
Persian Gulf, will find answers in this book.

CORRUPTED BY FRATERNAL STRUGGLE

We were obsessed with our messianic mission and blinded by arrogance. How could
we have possibly hoped to teach the Afghans anything when we ourselves never
learned to manage our own economy properly? . . .

"If you want to learn about a strange country," say experienced travelers,
"disappear in it." But in Afghanistan we couldn't even manage to do that. During
the nine years of war we were constantly separated from the country by eight
millimeters of bulletproof glass through which we stared in fear from inside our
armored carriers.

We thought that we were civilizing a backward country by exposing it to
television, to modern bombers, to schools, to the latest models of tanks, to
books, to long-range artillery, to newspapers, to new types of weapons, to
economic aid, to AK-47s. But we rarely stopped to think how Afghanistan would
influence us -- despite the hundreds of thousands of Soviet soldiers and
officers and the scores of diplomats, journalists, scholars, and military and
political advisers who passed through it.

It's difficult to determine exactly what we managed to teach Afghanistan. It is
relatively easy, however, to assess Afghanistan's effects on the Soviet people
who worked and fought there. With a mere wave of Brezhnev's elderly hand they
were thrown into a country where bribery, corruption, profiteering, and drugs
were no less common than the long lines in Soviet stores. These diseases can be
far more infectious and dangerous than hepatitis. . . .

The war in Afghanistan dragged on for nine long years -- fully an eighth of
Soviet history.

With each passing day, the war more and more resembled the sexual performance of
an impotent. -- From "The Hidden War."


LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Soviet soldier on a street in Afghanistan, 1988. (P.
Robert/Sygma)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Four Generations in the Projects

BYLINE: By Nicholas Lemann; Nicholas Lemann is a national correspondent for The
Atlantic. This article is adapted from his book, "The Promised Land: The Great
Black Migration and How It Changed America," to be published in March by Alfred
A. Knopf.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 17; Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5374 words


In Chicago the fates have avenged themselves on the fighting liberals of the
first half of the 20th century. Their names live on in the titles of the city's
most infamous public housing projects. Ida B. Wells, Henry Horner, Harold L.
Ickes, Jane Addams, John Peter Altgeld -- all instantly call to mind stories of
children falling out of windows, broken heating that never gets fixed and gun
battles between teen-age gangs. The most memorialized liberal of all was Robert
R. Taylor, the first black chairman of the Chicago Housing Authority; the Robert
Taylor Homes are Chicago's (and America's) biggest project, 28 16-story brick
buildings laid out in a narrow two-mile strip, housing more than 25,000 people.

Robert Taylor lost the great battle of his public career, as liberals often do
in Chicago. When the Truman Administration's Federal Housing Act of 1949
provided funds for the construction of 800,000 new units of public housing,
Democratic Chicago got its fair share of them. Taylor quickly produced a list of
the sites where he intended to build. Most of them were on vacant terrain in
white neighborhoods.

At the time, black migrants from the rural South, pushed off the land by the
development of machines that could pick cotton and pulled to Chicago by the
booming unskilled labor market there, had been coming to town at a rate of more
than a thousand a month. As the poorest people in Chicago, the black migrants
were the most obvious candidates for billets in the new housing projects.
Taylor's list of sites was received as a master plan for neighborhood racial
integration on a grand scale.

But Robert Taylor's list engendered a furious response from the neighborhood
"improvement associations" of white Chicago. In 1950, the City Council rejected
most of his sites and approved its own list, which put almost all the new public
housing in black neighborhoods, on land to be made available by tearing down
existing slums. Humiliated and bitter, Taylor resigned as chairman. Ten years
later, the Robert Taylor Homes rose on the former site of one of the poorest
tenement neighborhoods in black Chicago -- just the kind of place where Taylor
didn't want new public housing to be built. Taylor and his executive secretary
at the Chicago Housing Authority, Elizabeth Wood, had dreamed that black and
white tenants would live side by side in the new projects; the Robert Taylor
Homes have always been essentially all black. The monument to Robert Taylor's
memory encapsulates exactly the principles he found repellent, and fought
against for years.


AMONG THE ORIGINAL TENANTS of the Robert Taylor Homes when they opened in 1962
were Ruby and Luther Haynes. Both Ruby and Luther had grown up near Clarksdale,
Miss., a medium-sized town in the rich-soiled Delta region that had been the
epicenter of the cotton plantation culture in the post-Civil War South. Both of
their families made their livings as sharecroppers. Ruby and Luther, who didn't
know each other in Mississippi, moved to Chicago in the late 1940's when they
were in their 20's and quickly found work -- Ruby with a janitorial service and
Luther in a succession of small factories. Ruby, herself the child of a
15-year-old unmarried mother, had two children out of wedlock in Mississippi. In
Chicago, she had two more children and went on welfare, before getting together
with Luther.

They met in 1953. Luther, who had split with his first wife, had dropped by the
apartment Ruby shared with her aunt, a gathering place for recent migrants from
rural Mississippi. Through the rest of the decade, Ruby and Luther lived
together. It was a stormy relationship: Luther was a hard worker, but he drank
and ran around with other women; Ruby was independent-minded and hot-tempered.
They changed apartments a lot. Their financial condition ranged from lower
working class at best to hungry-poor at worst. Over the years there was much
dodging of landlords, creditors and welfare caseworkers, who would have kicked
Ruby off the rolls if they could have proved she was living with a man. Ruby and
Luther had four children together.

In 1961, during a moment of relative prosperity, they bought a house in a South
Side neighborhood called Englewood, which was in the process of changing from
white to black. In those days, real-estate agents sold houses to black families
"on contract." Under this system, the down payment was very low (in Ruby and
Luther's case, $200), but if the family fell behind on the much steeper monthly
payments, the agent could repossess the house. Luther, much to Ruby's
displeasure, bought a new Pontiac, and the burden of the car payments made them
miss a couple of house payments. As winter drew near, they were kicked out, and
had no choice but to move back to the slums.

Meanwhile, the Robert Taylor Homes were going up. Their construction offered an
impressive display of Mayor Richard J. Daley's municipal puissance: a crew of
2,000 workers, laying half a million bricks a week, finished the project nearly
a year ahead of schedule. To the Haynes family, the project looked like a
paradise. It had large apartments, elevators, reliable plumbing and heating,
fresh paint, no rats and very low rents -- many less than $100 a month. Ruby
went to the Chicago Housing Authority office to apply for a three-bedroom
apartment there.


ACOB A. RIIS'S "HOW THE Other Half Lives," the sacred text of urban social
reform in the United States, ends with a ringing call for the construction of
new "model tenements" as the great solution to all the problems of the slums and
urban poverty. Riis's idea had a long run of respectability -- from roughly 1890
until 1961, when Jane Jacobs's "Death and Life of Great American Cities"
demolished the idea of all-encompassing city planning. During the 1930's,
because of the influence of the leading European architects, particularly Le
Corbusier, the American establishment became persuaded that high-rise projects
surrounded by large open plazas should be the form of the new public housing.
Certainly Robert Taylor and Elizabeth Wood believed in high-rise projects; so
did the leadership of the Chicago Democratic machine -- for different reasons.

The machine's main goal, during the boom years of public-housing construction in
Chicago, was, in a word, segregation. Mayor Daley and his ward leaders
(including Chicago's leading black politician, William L. Dawson) wanted to keep
the entire black migration to Chicago housed within the confines of
traditionally black neighborhoods. High-rise projects, with their large
population density and relatively low land-acquisition costs, offered the best
hope of accomplishing this. They also promised to be wonderful generators of
municipal patronage.

An important part of the public-housing vision was that the projects ought to
have a settlement-house aura of social improvement. In its early days in the
30's and 40's, the Chicago Housing Authority undertook elaborate screening of
prospective tenants to make sure they would contribute to the hoped-for
atmosphere of uplift. One casualty of this policy was Ruby Haynes, who had filed
her first application with the housing authority back in 1949, and had been told
that there was an inviolable rule against admitting unwed mothers to the
projects.

By the time Ruby reapplied in 1962, the rule was still in effect, but
half-heartedly enforced. The sheer volume of the Robert Taylor Homes, with
nearly 4,300 apartments, made a careful selection process impossible.
Nevertheless, a social worker at the Housing Authority told Ruby that to get an
apartment at Robert Taylor she would have to produce a marriage license. The
next day, Ruby and Luther went down to the courthouse and got married. Ruby
brought the license back to the social worker, and her application was
immediately approved.

On Oct. 12, 1962, the Haynes family moved into Apartment 902 of 5135 South
Federal Street, a yellow-brick building toward the southern end of the project.


UBY'S SECOND-OLDEST son, Kermit, then 17, had started to metamorphose into a
troublesome teen-ager during the months before the family took up residence in
the Robert Taylor Homes. There was one ominous sign the day the Hayneses moved
in: a group of tough-looking boys whose families were also about to become
tenants at 5135 South Federal came up to Kermit and greeted him effusively. One
of them said, "Hey, man, we're gonna be together." Ruby didn't know these boys.
It turned out that their connection to Kermit was that they all belonged to a
gang called the Vice Lords.

Soon Kermit became one of the leaders of the gang and began getting into serious
scrapes. He was regularly picked up by the police. Once, while cleaning his
room, Ruby found several bicycle chains and a set of homemade brass knuckles
under his mattress. Another time she came home in the evening to find Kermit
lying bleeding and barely conscious on one of the project's baseball fields,
having been beaten up in a gang fight. Kermit and Luther began quarreling
constantly, too. Kermit was not Luther's son and showed no respect for his
authority as head of the household. Respect had become a sore point for Luther,
who had hit a rocky stretch and was bouncing from job to job. Luther blamed Ruby
for not keeping Kermit in line.

A couple of years after moving into the project, Ruby discovered that Luther was
having an affair with a woman downstairs. They had several confrontations about
it, each ending inconclusively. Finally, on the night of July 19, 1965, Luther's
mistress telephoned him at the apartment. Ruby, listening in on an extension,
lost her temper, and a terrible fight began. Kermit was visiting a neighbor, but
when he heard the shouting he ran home, burst through the door and grabbed
Luther in a choke hold. Ruby had to call in the police to pry Kermit and Luther
apart. The police told Luther he'd better leave before somebody got hurt. He
did. (Today, he and the woman from downstairs are approaching their 25th wedding
anniversary and living on the South Side, far from the project.) From then on,
Ruby was a single mother.


THE FATE OF THE Haynes family was replicated all over the Robert Taylor Homes.
As the unskilled job market dried up and welfare regulations became less
stringent, the project degenerated into a community with few employed adult men.
As a result, the most powerful male figures were teen-age gang members. Since
Taylor's buildings were made up almost entirely of large apartments, there was
an unusually high proportion of children and teen-agers living there. As
vacancies developed, the screening procedures became vestigial; almost every new
tenant was a single mother on welfare.

The architecture of the Taylor Homes failed to produce the benefits intended by
Le Corbusier and his followers. People threw things off the open breezeways that
led from the elevator bank to the apartments on each floor. The breezeways had
to be enclosed in wire mesh. It was impossible for mothers to watch their
children unless they were kept inside -- once they left the apartment, they went
totally unsupervised. The elevator lobby in each building too easily fell under
the control of the gangs and often became a checkpoint for extortion and
physical threats. The spacious plazas outside, intimidatingly large and
unconnected to the life of the buildings, deteriorated into empty wastelands,
bereft of greenery.

The Taylor Homes were designed to be a world unto themselves: there are stores,
churches and elementary schools within a stone's throw of the project, and
Chicago's best-known black high school, DuSable, is right across the street. But
what was supposed to provide convenience ended up cutting off the project from
the rest of society. Children were often educated from nursery school through
12th grade within a few hundred feet of home, and their mothers usually didn't
have jobs away from the project to go to.

As crime in the high-rise buildings got worse, visitors from the outside world
-- firemen, emergency medical technicians, delivery men, salesmen, social
workers, maintenance workers, truant officers -- found excuses not to go there.
After several incidents in the late 1960's and early 1970's in which Chicago
policemen were fired on by snipers, even police officers became a rare sight.
The Illinois Department of Public Aid eventually stopped making home visits and
instead merely required residents to get their welfare status recertified every
six months.

New Federal guidelines in 1969 fixed tenants' rent at a percentage of their
income. This was meant to help the poor but succeeded in driving out the
employed, who found their rents rising with their salaries and often decided
they'd be better off in the private housing market. The Chicago Housing
Authority had by now dropped all pretense of being an agency of acculturation;
most of its executives' energies went into determining who would get the big
subcontracts rather than keeping the buildings in an attractive state. There
were heating problems, plumbing problems and, most of all, elevator problems --
at the worst point, 75 percent of the elevators in the Taylor Homes were
nonfunctional.

In the 1970's, the neighborhood surrounding the Taylor Homes, like many of the
older black districts of big American cities, began losing population as its
better-off residents escaped the crime of the ghetto and moved out to formerly
all-white middle-class neighborhoods and suburbs. The project itself started to
show a substantial vacancy rate. Between 1970 and 1980, the section of the South
Side where the Taylor Homes are located lost a third of its residents. The
emigrants took with them a good deal of the neighborhood's institutional webbing
-- churches and stores and associations and employment grapevines. Forty-Seventh
Street, once the leading thoroughfare of black Chicago, home to bustling
department stores, theaters, hotels and restaurants, became a semiabandoned
slum. There had always been poor people in the area, but now there were only
poor people, living in what William Julius Wilson, the former chairman of the
University of Chicago sociology department, calls "social isolation."


RUBY HAYNES'S oldest child, George, was grown up and living on his own by the
time the family moved into the Taylor Homes. He was married, had a job as a meat
cutter in a grocery store and lived and worked on the West Side of Chicago. When
the West Side went into decline -- it was where Chicago's race riots in the late
1960's took place -- he moved his family into the Taylor Homes.

Kermit, the next child after George, managed to survive gang life, and, as he
passed out of his teens, settled into a pattern of drifting from job to job and
from one girlfriend's apartment to another. The next child, Larry, who was 12
when the Hayneses moved into the project, joined the Army after high school and
fought in Vietnam, an experience he credits with putting him on the road out of
the ghetto. Today he is a postal-service employee, living in the Chicago suburb
of Evanston. The next child, Terrell, was raised in the town of Massillon, Ohio,
by a friend of Ruby's. The parceling out of "gift children" by poor,
hard-pressed families to friends and relatives in more comfortable circumstances
is a longstanding tradition among black migrants from rural Mississippi.

The next two sons, Johnnie and Robert, were the most substantially shaped by the
Robert Taylor Homes. Both dropped out of DuSable. Both enlisted in the Job Corps
but left before completing their training. Both then went into the military:
Robert got kicked out of the Navy for returning late from shore leave, while
Johnnie came home from his Army service in Germany with a drug habit.

Through his older brother George, Johnnie met a young woman on the West Side
named Connie Henry. The daughter of a poor, alcoholic single mother who had been
shot and killed by another woman during a fight in a tavern, Connie already had
two daughters and was four months pregnant with a third daughter. She then had
another daughter with Johnnie, got an apartment in the Taylor Homes and soon
married him. Robert fathered a son out of wedlock. Meanwhile, his best friend,
Thomas Chairs, another child of Mississippi-born migrants who lived at 5135
South Federal, had a daughter with Juanita Haynes, Ruby's first daughter and
seventh child. Soon afterward, Juanita dropped out of DuSable.

Robert and Thomas were both members of a gang called the Cobra Stones and ran
into their share of trouble. In 1970, Thomas suffered a flesh wound when he was
shot by a member of a rival gang; later that year he spent a month in jail for
driving a stolen car. A few years later, on an elevator in one of Taylor's
buildings, two young men Robert and Thomas were hanging around with pulled guns
on them. Thomas was shot again, more seriously than the first time.

Then, just after Thomas Chairs's and Juanita's daughter was born, Thomas got
into a fight with a gang member named Robert Shaw in the entryway of 5135 South
Federal. He became so enraged that he ran up to his mother's apartment, got a
shotgun, ran downstairs and shot Shaw dead. He was convicted of first-degree
murder and sent to Joliet State Penitentiary. After that, Juanita, who had been
dreaming of marrying Thomas and finishing her education, went on welfare.

Families often pigeonhole their children. In the Haynes family, Kermit was the
bad boy, Larry the good boy, Johnnie the handsome one, Robert the smart one.
George was the steady, dutiful son, the only one willing to throw himself
wholeheartedly into a strong-back trade of the kind that most men of his
parents' generation plied in Chicago. Many times over the years George had
baby-sat for Ruby, brought over groceries when the family ran out of food and
otherwise acted as a stabilizing force. But in the late 1970's, problems in his
marriage somehow pushed him over the edge into emotional instability. A few
weeks after his wife threw him out of their apartment in the Taylor Homes, he
was treated in the emergency room of a South Side hospital for an overdose of
barbiturates. He spent some time in a mental hospital, then lived for a while on
the streets of Los Angeles. Robert went out and brought him home for
Thanksgiving of 1977.

On Feb. 26, 1978, the day his divorce became final, George told Ruby he was
going to his former wife's apartment to see his children. It was a bitterly cold
day, with temperatures below zero. George didn't come home. Ruby became alarmed
and called the police, but they told her not to worry about it; George would
turn up.

He didn't turn up. When the spring thaw came in early April, George's naked body
was found washed up on the South Side shore of Lake Michigan. The police listed
George's death as a suicide, but Ruby always suspected that he had been
murdered. There was nothing she could do to prove it, though. George was simply
gone, profoundly mourned by her but unavenged.

George's death brought to an end all the hopes Ruby had invested in Chicago when
she'd moved there 30 years earlier. Now she hated the city, and hated the Robert
Taylor Homes, which, like Chicago, had initially been an emblem of possibility
for her. Having come north thinking she was leaving Clarksdale, Miss., forever,
she decided to return home. On April 5, 1979, the first anniversary of George's
wake, Ruby took up residence in a housing project in Clarksdale -- a small one,
made up of scattered two-story buildings, and located in a middle-class
neighborhood. She lives on a Social Security check, and on what she earns
working part-time in a flower shop.


RUBY TURNED OVER Apartment 902 at 5135 South Federal Street to her daughter
Juanita, who was 20 years old at the time. Being ensconced in her own place in
the Taylor Homes wasn't a healthy situation for Juanita. She was away from her
family, a prison widow, a single mother of one child, and on welfare. Her one
link with mainstream life was a part-time job she got with the Comprehensive
Employment and Training Act program. A brief romance with a man in the next
building had produced another child. Because of a legal technicality, Thomas
Chairs was paroled from prison only four years into his murder sentence, but his
relationship with Juanita foundered over the issue of the new son she had borne
in his absence.

In the early 1980's, a friend of Juanita's introduced her to cocaine. Juanita
got hooked, and her apartment became a hangout for the building's younger
residents who were also users. By 1985, Juanita's life was falling apart. She
decided to send her oldest child to Clarksdale to live with her mother. During a
reunion with Thomas Chairs, she became pregnant again, smoked cocaine all
through the nine months and miraculously avoided giving birth to a "drug baby,"
as a couple of her friends had. She then sent her second child down to
Clarksdale. At the time she was so deeply in debt to her dope man that she had
to turn over her welfare identification card to him, and to sell her food stamps
at 70 cents on the dollar at the neighborhood's little Palestinian-owned "Arab
stores." She begged food from friends. She stole clothes from Marshall Field and
Carson Pirie Scott, the big department stores in the Loop, and resold them in
the project. She got pregnant by another man.

Finally, at the end of a long evening when a friend brought over a bag of
cocaine that was laced with amphetamines, Juanita went into cardiac arrest and
was taken to the hospital to be revived. This terrifying episode shook her out
of the haze of addiction long enough for her to pack her things and take a
Greyhound bus south to Clarksdale, where she and her kids moved in with Ruby.
Today Juanita has an apartment in Ruby's project. She is clean and healthy, and
works as a sales clerk in a convenience store.

Apartment 902 passed, in the spring of 1986, to Juanita's brother Johnnie, who
had broken up with his wife, Connie, in the late 70's over his drug use and
philandering. According to the rules, a single man wasn't supposed to have such
a large apartment, but by this time the housing authority rarely checked the
building, so Johnnie got away with it. A male friend moved in, and they began
dealing cocaine out of the apartment.

The business didn't last long. Johnnie and his friend were both skimming cocaine
out of the pouches they sold, cheating their customers and each other. One
afternoon they got into a wrangle about it that ended with Johnnie's friend
setting the apartment on fire. The fire department came and got Johnnie out, but
he could no longer stay in number 902. The housing authority didn't get around
to fixing up the apartment for years.

Many of the places the Haynes family called home in Chicago no longer exist.
During the chaos of neighborhood transformation that followed the black
migration, hundreds of houses that were once decent or better than decent were
burned down, some by arsonists in the hire of landlords, or simply abandoned and
left to deteriorate. In a sense, Apartment 902 of 5135 South Federal belongs on
that list of vanished residences. Seat of the Haynes family in Chicago for a
quarter of a century, it was, until recently, just a burnt-out, unoccupied
shell.

Three floors down, in Apartment 610, live Johnnie's former wife, Connie, and her
five children, the last members of the clan left in the Robert Taylor Homes;
5135 South Federal is quite possibly the worst place in the country in which to
raise a family. Federal census tract 4002, which includes 5135 South Federal, is
the third poorest in the United States; the poorest is census tract 3817, which
is immediately to the north and also wholly within the Robert Taylor Homes. In
the context of the rest of the world, the social disorder in the project is even
worse than the poverty: plenty of places outside the United States have lower
per-capita incomes, but very few can match the Taylor Homes in such measures as
infant mortality, life expectancy, crime and family disunity.

The entrances to the buildings in the Taylor Homes are bleak and forbidding.
Most of the time they are littered with empty bottles and piles of uncollected
garbage. Gang symbols are spray-painted all over the lobbies. The elevators are
jerky and unreliable, sometimes stopping on the designated floor and sometimes
not. All the access points to the buildings -- the elevator cabs, the stairwells
and the hallways -- reek of urine and cheap wine. Gang members regularly shoot
out the lights in the breezeways and stairwells.

On the average, buildings in the Taylor Homes are about a fifth vacant. The
empty apartments are centers of gang activity, drug dealing, weapons storage and
illegal residency by homeless men and newly released criminals. In most
buildings, one gang is in control. A "falcon," or building captain, and a
lieutenant live there, holding weekly meetings in vacant apartments. Often rival
gangs control adjacent buildings, which insures constant warfare in the area.

At the age of 8 or 9, boys in the buildings begin to receive the attentions of
gang recruiters. They are asked to prove their fitness for gang membership --
and their manhood -- by stealing, selling drugs and publicly "showing out"
(denouncing the authority of) their mothers -- unless their mothers have agreed
to become "den mothers" and let the gangs use their apartments. If the boys
don't join, they are taunted, provoked and sometimes beaten.

Crack cocaine made its first appearance at 5135 in 1986. Crack did not
fundamentally alter the life of the building, because so many other drugs were
already around. Smoking cocaine, in the way that Juanita did, is still
considered preferable to smoking crack, although it is more expensive. Karachi,
a powerful form of heroin, is another popular new drug in the building. But the
substance most widely abused there is still alcohol.

Minor crime never stops, and major crime is no rarity. In the course of one
year, 1988, according to building residents, a girl who lived on the ninth floor
at 5135 was taken to a vacant apartment and shot by a group of young men; in
5201, a boy was killed on one of the breezeways on Halloween night by a shot to
the head from a .357 Magnum; in 5001, a boy was shot in the head and left to die
on a breezeway, twin girls were shot but survived and a boy was shot and killed
in one of the elevators. Quite often those who commit murder in the Taylor Homes
are never brought to justice, in large part because witnesses are afraid that if
they cooperate with the police, the gangs will kill them later.

Connie, lacking the usual resources of money, education, marriage, family and
community, still managed, solely through her own formidable force of will, to
create a home life that put her five children on the right track. Maxine, her
oldest daughter, graduated from DuSable and from a community college on the
South Side, and is now studying computer science. Marlo, the next daughter,
studied at a secretarial college in the Loop. Melanie, the next daughter and the
star of the family, was valedictorian of the DuSable class of 1987, and is
majoring in psychology at the University of Illinois's Chicago campus. The
youngest daughter, Melissa, had a baby at 16, to Connie's great displeasure, but
she stayed in school and graduated from DuSable last spring. Connie's youngest
child and only son, Melvin, just started high school at Edwin Tilden, which is
outside the immediate neighborhood; he and his mother both say they felt that
DuSable, whose students come mostly from the Taylor Homes, would be too perilous
for boys, who are under constant pressure to demonstrate their masculinity in
destructive ways -- chief among them joining a gang.

Connie's strategy for dealing with life in the Taylor Homes is to try to tune it
out as much as possible. She doesn't socialize with neighbors much; when she
passes them in the lobby or the breezeway, she just nods and keeps on walking.
She has instructed her daughters, who are regularly hooted at and called
"bitches" by other girls in the project because of their commitment to studying,
to do the same.

Connie's apartment looks different from the others in the building, even from
the hallway. Her doorway is free of graffiti and debris, and has a neatly
glued-on apartment number. Inside, the atmosphere is calm and orderly. On the
walls are pictures of Isaac Hayes, Prince, the Last Supper and Garfield the cat.

On weekend nights, Connie goes to lounges around the South Side, where she
listens to music and tries to meet men. She has had a few relationships, but
nothing serious. She has found that once you tell a man you live in the Robert
Taylor Homes, he usually loses interest, because visiting the projects in the
evenings is not a prospect that most South Siders relish.

At the end of the 80's, there was a sign of change for the better at 5135 South
Federal. For years the Chicago Housing Authority had been embroiled in a series
of scandals. Finally, in 1988, a developer of subsidized housing named Vincent
Lane was put in charge. Lane had a combination of managerial skill and moral
passion that made him immune to the usual shoulder-shrugging attitudes of
Chicago officials toward conditions in the projects. He immediately began to
clean house. In the Taylor Homes, Lane set up security systems in some of the
buildings, stationing doormen in the lobbies; tenants had to show identification
cards and visitors had to be vouched for by a tenant. Connie's building was one
of the first to be converted to the new system.

But Connie, having heard many promises of change over the years, was initially
skeptical about this reform. She appreciated the presence of the doorman, but at
night, when the building's security sergeant went home, the two or three guards
on duty would often slip away, leaving the front desk unattended. There was
still a great deal of crime and drug-dealing, in part because some of the
perpetrators were themselves residents of the building. Connie had once caught
her own next-door neighbors trying to break into her apartment.

For years Connie has had an application on file with the Chicago Housing
Authority for a grant from Section 8, a Federal program that, among other
things, gives poor people money to find their own private housing outside the
projects. Section 8 is underfunded, and grants are awarded according to need;
the Federal Government operates on the assumption that people in high-rise
projects are already decently housed, so they get stuck with a low-need rating.
People in the Taylor Homes like to say that if you apply for Section 8 when your
children are young, your grant won't come through until they are grown up.
Connie hopes that day is coming for her soon. After nearly two decades in the
Robert Taylor Homes, she feels weary and depressed. What she wants more than
anything is to get out.


TODAY, THE ROBERT Taylor Homes have the feel of a historical moment that is
fading. As their population slowly declines, the level of tension and danger
seems to be lessening slightly, though, of course, that is a subjective
judgment. Obviously the Taylor Homes represent some kind of colossal failure --
but a failure of what? Of liberalism, as most people now seem to think? But this
project was constructed and operated by nonideological machine Democrats. Of
architecture? Chicago is full of high-rises that work, including the Chicago
Housing Authority's high-rises for the elderly. Of big government? Big
government seemed to do fine in Chicago until it began to address the problems
of the urban ghettos.

Whatever else their deeper meaning, it's quite plain that the tragedy of the
Taylor Homes can be properly understood as part of a larger if less unrelievedly
tragic saga, namely the history of race relations in this country. There isn't
an obviously unjust set of laws, like Jim Crow in the South, causing the
suffering in the Taylor Homes -- but there is suffering just the same. Perhaps
if that suffering were thought of as an out-and-out moral crisis, rather than
just an unfortunate situation, then it might, at last, be ended.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cover photo: Connie Henry with her grandsonm Darrin, who represents the
fourth generation of the Haynes family to live at 5135 South Federal in the
Robert Taylor homes in Chicago. (Eli Reed for The new York Times); Photos: A
sign at the dedication of the Robert Taylor Homes in 1962. Proposed as the great
solution to the problems of urban poverty, the project has instead become a
haven for gangs. (Chicago Housing Authority); A member of the Vice Lords in a
stairwell. (pg. 17); Ruby Haynes and her family were among the original tenants
of the Taylor Homes. But after nearly two decades of frustration, and the death
of her oldest son, she returned home to Clarksdale, Miss. (pg. 18); Connie
Henry, the former daughter-in-law of Ruby Haynes, and her family are the last
members of the clan still living in the Taylor Homes. Though improvements have
been made in her building, she says her goal is to leave the projects. Connie's
daughter Melissa had a baby at the age of 16. But she stayed in high school and
graduated. (pg. 19); The project's playgrounds have deteriorated into cement
wastelands, becoming the turf of gangs. Melvin Haynes, Connie's youngest child,
is a student at a high school outside of the immediate neighborhood. He avoided
the local school, DuSable, because he feared he would be forced to join a gang.
(pg. 20); Fires in the Robert Taylor projects are not uncommon. Some apartments
in the 28 buildings have become burnt-out shells. (Pg. 21)(Photographs by Eli
Reed/Magnum for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hers;
Our Toys Are Us

BYLINE: BY PEGGY R. ELLSBERG; Peggy R. Ellsberg teaches in the English
department at Barnard College.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 12; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1259 words


At 9 o'clock this morning, my son, age 4, was still sound asleep in his
Ghostbusters sleeping bag. He was wearing Superman pj's. In one fist he was
clutching a food fighter -- Major Munch, I think. His Dino-Riders, with
motorized walking action and full battle accessories, were waiting nearby. So
the first thing he would see when he woke up would be the scaly faces of
accurate models of the extinct giant lizards of prehistory, framed colorfully
with plastic brain-packs and laser cannons.

I surveyed the shelves around his room, decked with Transformers and Micro
Machines, an Ectomobile and a few Lego pirates. My son's room seemed to be
decorated by Saturday morning television. He didn't have just toys -- he had toy
systems, whole categories of playthings that had been brought to his attention
by deregulated advertising. I stood there puzzling over how this could have
happened. I think of our style as "organic"; we have a picture of Gandhi in our
kitchen. How could all this fluorescent plastic have invaded our simple taste?

I still have a few of my old toys, which I hoped Nicholas would like to play
with -- a wooden nesting egg and a 30-odd-year-old Steiff teddy bear, one ear
and one paw thoroughly sucked on and bald. And this morning, just as the
metaphysical Grand Canyon that stretched between old Ted and Nicholas's
Ghostbusters wall unit threatened to engulf me in a reverie about what has
happened to toys -- and to the world -- in the last three decades, my son's own
reverie intervened. He began to stir, and to murmur. "What is it, sweetie? Mommy
is here," I reassured him.

"No Mommy," he said. "Mutant. Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles."

I ADORE TOYS. I remember the first toy I bought for my child, the day before he
was born. There was a wonderful "all natural" shop for children in our
Cambridge, Mass., neighborhood called the Shepherd and the Lamb. It sold baby
slings and midwifery supplies and block-printed cotton baby togs and tiny
sweaters hand-knit in heather tones, and in the last weeks of my pregnancy, when
I was too cumbersome to do anything else, I liked to hang around there. My water
broke in the Shepherd and the Lamb, flooding my Birkenstocks as I yearningly
studied the toys -- rattles made of natural wood, bunnies made of natural
fibers, ecologically and politically perfect objects that I imagined my baby
playing with for many years to come. As I made my carefully chosen purchase (a
rag doll hand-sewn in Appalachia), no one could have convinced me that exactly
four years later I would be standing at another cash register at a most
un-Shepherd-like store called Caldor, buying a G.I. Joe tank.

Because i have not entirely surrendered the idea that I can influence my child's
tastes, I still frequent toy stores. I love them the way some people love shoe
stores. Toy stores, it turns out, have the same distinctions and diversities as
fashion boutiques and restaurants. There are Henri Bendel-type toy stores and
Russian Tea Room-type toy stores. And any canny child of 6 can size up a
shopping situation in seconds, determining whether a store might actually yield
My Little Pony or merely a plain-shaped wooden thing that by its very absence of
interest is supposed to stimulate juvenile creativity.

The toy store that I grew up with was a tiny, dark, overcrowded affair called
Maxie's. Maxie sold penny candy out of dirty old jars -- inexpressibly delicious
wax lips for a nickel, sourballs, fireballs, licorice and Tootsie Rolls for a
penny. The rest of the little shop was jampacked with toys. Maxie never bowed to
fads or to the allure of glitz: there were no Tiny Tears dolls, no Roy Rogers
holsters. Maxie carried a plain, mainstream doll with molded blond hair and a
plain, unlabeled cap gun. To me, Maxie's store was the very heart of mystery and
desire. One snowy December night, while my father shopped for sandpaper next
door, I, penniless, browsed the penny candy. Maxie went to the back of the shop
and then returned with a dusty cylinder of Tinker Toys. "Here you go," he said.
"A Christmas present from me." It might as well have been the Hope Diamond.

If Maxie's seemed wonderful, it was probably because I had never seen F. A. O.
Schwarz in New York. Nicholas, on the other hand, was there recently, amid the
almost intolerable raptures of Christmas displays.

As the doorman in the busby let us in and we entered this Taj Mahal of toys,
Nicholas fell silent with reverence. He was dressed to the milk teeth in his
best outfit, to mark this occasion. I led him toward the fluffy, darling stuffed
animals. His face was set like Mount Rushmore. He pulled me along, past all the
toys I like, until we reached some plastic vampires. Respectfully, he pointed to
a garish skeleton in a bloodstained purple cape. "I want Santa to bring that,"
he whispered.

It was an arduous process that brought me from the Shepherd and the Lamb to
Dracula. Once Nicholas got past the early phase of toymanship, when he was
perfectly happy to play with a paper bag or the car keys, he began to show
strong preferences that had absolutely nothing to do with me or what I liked.
"Lala daba," he said over and over again at 11 months, pointing at trucks
rumbling by. On his first birthday, we drove by a construction site.
"Payloader," the baby said clearly, pointing at a yellow tractorlike thing. "Is
that a payloader?" I asked my husband nervously. "I haven't the slightest idea,"
he said.

At 2 years, our little angel wanted a He-Man monster doll. "Heemy," he would
whimper pathetically. "Absolutely not," I said firmly. "They're vulgar and
inappropriate." A few days later, Uncle Jack showed up with a two-headed green
figure with fangs and a truncheon. "Heemy!" crowed the baby. He slept that night
with the He-Man doll, and in the morning I discovered him rocking it in his
arms, trying to feed it a bottle of apple juice. "I love Uncle Jack" was
Nicholas's first complete sentence.

And so it went. It soon became clear that my child did not want what I wanted
him to want. Instead, he wanted what his culture wanted him to want. Other kids
would show up at the sandbox with Robocops and Barnyard Commandos. I began to
suppose that values are communicated the same way as the common cold.

We still have the Appalachian rag doll. I pick it up and play with it myself
every so often, grumbling all the while about the bad habits of our world. And I
am invariably flooded with recollections.  The first is of my mother's button
drawer. There was a narrow wooden drawer in her old Singer sewing machine,
filled to the brim with buttons -- large and small and tiny buttons of every
color and texture, hooks and eyes, snaps, bone buttons and horn buttons and
pearl buttons and big black buttons with faded bits of cloth still stuck to
them. The drawer smelled of roses. How I desired that drawer! Playing with those
buttons, arranging them into little groups, is perhaps one of the deepest and
strongest memories I have of my childhood.

Another, equally strong, is that I was not allowed to have a Barbie doll.
"Absolutely not," my mother said firmly. "Vulgar and inappropriate." Well into
my teens, I secretly longed for Barbie and her clothes. Then, suddenly, I woke
up one morning worrying about nuclear reactors and the Vietnam War, and Barbie
slipped away.

I know that Nicholas will not reach adulthood longing for a vulgar,
commercialized, politically inappropriate toy -- he has plenty of them and got
more for Christmas. But I do think I should start a button drawer.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: FAST FORWARD;
Heads It's Sell; Tails They Rent

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section 2; Page 26; Column 5; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 520 words


Around video the current hot topic is "sell through," the industry's term for
that portion of the business -- roughly 30 percent of it by some estimates and
growing -- involving sales of cassettes rather than rentals. Many sales are of
older titles, but nothing stirs video's blood like a new smash hit that sells in
the millions -- a "Pretty Woman," say, or a "Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles."

Or, looking around the bend a bit, perhaps "Ghost" or "Home Alone." Both movies
are thriving in theaters, of course -- "Ghost" at the $205 million mark in
box-office receipts and "Home Alone" at close to $155 million -- but both are
expected on video later this year from Paramount and CBS/Fox, respectively.
"We'll probably announce before the end of January," says Eric Doctorow,
executive vice president of Paramount. As for "Home Alone," according to G.
Bruce Pfander, vice president of marketing for CBS/Fox, there will be a decision
in the next few weeks.

Fine, but what will they decide -- sales or rental? Video people note a
similarity between "Ghost" and "Pretty Woman." Both are popular with women and
are watched over and over, two strong points for sales. But there are other
variables, from price to scheduling. "We're doing the arithmetic," says Mr.
Doctorow. Release is expected in late March.

"Home Alone" would be CBS/Fox's first major theatrical sales title. "As the box
office goes up, there's a tendency on our part to look at it as sell through,"
says Mr. Pfander. "It has the signs all over it." Release could be in late
spring.


Rocky Who?



In New York City and environs another celebrated CBS/ Fox release seems to have
mellowed into just another mild-mannered video title. Well, sort of. A dozen
stores report "The Rocky Horror Picture Show" selling moderately at anywhere
from $24.95 for used rental cassettes to the full $89.98 retail price. In two
Greenwich Village stores copies earmarked for sale were snapped up immediately
at full price after the Nov. 8 release date, leaving only rental copies, some of
which will soon go on sale as used cassettes. Elsewhere, supplies seemed
adequate for both sale and rental.

In October, CBS/Fox had cut off dealer orders, saying there would be no more
copies available for at least two years. Nationwide there are only about 300,000
cassettes in circulation. "We fed the demand," says Mr. Pfander. "Retailers
wanted more, but there was no going back."


As the Russians Tell It



Videos about the Soviets are flowing into this country. From MPI comes "Inside
the Soviet Union," 20 films on assorted subjects by Soviet film makers from the
1960's to 1982. The tapes are produced by White Production Archives of Alsip,
Ill., and some of them, says Matthew White of W.P.A., give an unusual view of
the Soviet side of international issues. "Vietnam, the Hot Red War," for
instance, is a documentary shot in the Vietnamese countryside immediately after
the war; "South Africa: The Black Red War," depicts the anti-apartheid struggle
from the standpoint of the African National Congress. The tapes are $14.95 to
$24.95.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Reporter's Notebook;
Mindful of History, Congress Agonizes Over Going to War

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 795 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12


These have not been glory years for Congress. Ethical storms, budget squabbling
and the chronic appearance of political deadlock have all left their mark on the
image of this proud institution.

But over the last few days, as the House and Senate debated whether to authorize
the President to go to war in the Persian Gulf, the lawmakers have struggled to
step up to what the framers of the Constitution had in mind.

One by one, congressmen and senators took the floor and reached for the legacy
of history, for Kennedy and Roosevelt and Churchill. They spoke, too, of their
children, and the children of their constituents, and of past wars and the
lessons they taught. Throughout the debate was the wrenching, sobering
consciousness of their own responsibility.

The lights burned late on Capitol Hill. The Senate did not adjourn until 2:39
A.M. Saturday, and returned by 8 A.M.; the House was in session until 4:08 A.M.
"In 26 years in the House of Representatives, I have never seen this House more
serious nor more of Representatives, its heart and mind on a question than they
are at this time, on this day," said Thomas S. Foley, the Speaker of the House.

Both the press and the public galleries were full, and the lines stretched round
the halls. Aides in the Senate said they could not recall the galleries so full
since the debate over the Panama Canal Treaties in 1978. Sue Sexton, a
24-year-old teacher in Washington was among those waiting to enter the
galleries. "The last war was when I was six years old," she said. "This is the
first time I've ever experienced a crisis like this and it's very frightening."

Nearby was Bob Scalese, visiting from Montana, who said simply, "I think we've
got to go to Iraq and kick some butt."

In Congressional offices, the phones kept ringing: more than 3,000 calls to
Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole's office on Friday, more than 100 calls to
Representative Les Aspin's office this morning alone.

The floor of the House and Senate is often virtually deserted when debate is
waged on one piece of legislation or another. Not so today. The senators sat in
their seats, quiet and subdued, as their colleagues concluded debate over the
Persian Gulf resolutions.

At 11:35, when the voting began, Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West
Virginia and proud guardian of the Senate's tradition and prerogatives, rose to
ask that the clerk repeat each senator's name and vote so "that their responses
may be clearly audible." But the members and senators already knew there was no
hiding, no ducking this moment.

The Speaker of the House rarely votes, but Mr. Foley broke with that custom
today to take the floor in support of a resolution urging continued reliance on
sanctions. "I would not feel it right to stand behind the usual custom -- not to
speak and not to vote," the Democrat from Washington said, his craggy face
reflecting the grim nature of the moment.

Earlier, he had delivered an impassioned defense of Congress's right to debate
the President's policy without being open to the charge of giving comfort to
Saddam Hussein. It would be tragic, the Speaker said, if Saddam Hussein were
given the capacity "to cripple our own Constitutional institutions."

The Prism of War



The burden of history was heavy in these halls, not just in what was said but in
the lives of many of the men who were waging this debate. In the Senate, for
example, a visitor could look across the floor this morning and see Senator Bob
Kerrey of Nebraska, who lost a leg in Vietnam; Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, who
suffered grievous injuries in World War II; Senator John McCain of Arizona, who
spent five years as a prisoner of war in Vietnam, and Senator Daniel Inouye, who
lost his arm in Italy in World War II.

Many of the lawmakers brought the prism of their own war, the war that they
experienced, in service or outside it, to this debate. "I guess younger members
are tired of hearing World War II types always using the prelude to that war as
a model for foreign policy," Representative Robert H. Michel, the Republican
leader, told the House this afternoon. "For so many of you, your war was the
Vietnam war. That war shaped your thinking, one way or the other. Different war,
different lessons."

But there was anguished debate over how these lessons applied to the Persian
Gulf, and gnawing fear that the wrong lessons would be drawn.

When the Debate Ended

In the end, when the votes were over, the lawmakers somberly filed out. Senator
Sam Nunn, the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, who led the fight
to give sanctions more time to work, said as he left the floor today, "If the
President decides to go to war, I will be backing the military men and women in
the field."

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
CONGRESS ACTS TO AUTHORIZE WAR IN GULF; MARGINS ARE 5 VOTES IN SENATE, 67 IN
HOUSE

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1533 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12


After three days of solemn, often eloquent debate, Congress today voted to give
President Bush the authority to go to war against Iraq.

The Senate approved the use of military force by a vote of 52 to 47. The
majority included 42 Republicans and 10 Democrats, mostly Southerners who were
convinced that economic sanctions would not force Iraq from Kuwait or who were
unwilling to vote against the President. Two Republicans joined 45 Democrats in
opposing force.

In the House, the vote was a more comfortable 250 to 183, as 164 Republicans and
86 Democrats voted for force, while 179 Democrats, 3 Republicans and 1
independent were opposed.

'All Necessary Means'

The measure, the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq
Resolution, said Mr. Bush was authorized "to use United States armed forces
pursuant to United Nations Security Council Resolution 678," which authorized
member nations to use "all necessary means" against Iraq if did not withdraw
from Kuwait by midnight Tuesday, Eastern standard time.

Mr. Bush asked Congress for this declaration last Tuesday, and its passage
removed the last political obstacle to an attack by United States-led forces
against Iraqi troops occupying Kuwait.

Under the terms of the resoluton, before force may be used Mr. Bush must send a
message to Congressional leaders saying that diplomacy and sanctions will not be
effective in geting Iraq out of Kuwait. [Excerpts from the debate and roll-calls
of the votes, page 10; excerpts from the debated resolutions, page 11.]

'Last Best Chance for Peace'

At a news conference immediately after the votes, President Bush said the action
by Congress "unmistakably demonstrates the United States's commitment to enforce
a complete Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait."

The President added that he was inclined to order military action against Iraq
"sooner rather than later," but suggested that he might hold back if President
Saddam Hussein began a large-scale withdrawal from occupied Kuwait before
Tuesday. [Page 8.]

Just before the Senate voted, Senator Bob Dole, the minority leader, said the
time to authorize the use of force had come. "Let's not pull the rug out from
under the President when the pressure is building on Saddam Hussein by the
minute," he said. "Let's don't give him any relief."

Foley Favored Sanctions

The losing argument for continued reliance on sanctions was voiced by Speaker
Thomas S. Foley in a rare speech to the House. He said all members owed Mr. Bush
their "informed and reasoned judgment." And he said, "If you believe that more
can be done, if you believe that Saddam Hussein is growing weaker every day, if
you believe that the coalition will hold," then members should vote to continue
reliance on sanctions and not support force now.

Their comments were just two examples of a remarkably full, thoughtful debate by
more than 268 Representatives and 93 Senators, many of whom waited until the
early hours this morning for a chance to go on the record. And today, both
chambers usually had majorities of the members sitting and listening as the
final arguments were offered.

Today's action was the first time since Aug. 7, 1964, when the Gulf of Tonkin
Resolution was adopted, that Congress had voted directly for offensive military
action. But today's votes were far closer than the 88-2 Senate margin or the
414-0 result in the House for the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which was cited for
years afterward by foes and supporters of the war effort as Congress's critical
move.

The last time Congress was comparably divided in deciding to go to war was with
its votes to launch the War of 1812; the House voted 79 to 49 in favor and the
Senate followed, 19 to 13.

Sanctions Lost in First Votes

Before voting for force, each House foreshadowed its crucial decision by
defeating resolutions urging continued reliance on sanctions.

In the Senate, the vote was 53 to 46, with only 1 Republican, Senator Charles E.
Grassley of Iowa, joining 45 Democrats in the losing effort. In the House, the
vote was 250 to 183, with 179 Democrats, 3 Republicans and 1 independent in
favor and 164 Republicans and 86 Democrats opposed.

The House also passed, 302-131, a measure reasserting Congress's exclusive
constitutional authority to declare war.

But whatever resolution was formally before the House or the Senate, the
arguments seemed interchangeable, whether for force or for sanctions, for
support of the President or the United Nations, or warning of the costs in lives
or dollars, or complaining of the level of support from other nations.

'How Can We Turn Our Backs?'

Representative Robert H. Michel of Illinois, the minority leader, said:
"President Bush has openly and forthrightly asked for our help. How can we turn
our backs on him?"

Representative David E. Bonior, Democrat of Michigan, urged members to "pause
before you cast your vote."

"Ask the same question that thousands of Americans are asking their families
today," he said. "Is this the cause for which you would ask your son or daughter
to risk their life?"

Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, who got his political
start running a campaign based on opposition to the Vietnam War, said the
circumstances were fundamentally different today.

'Economic Jugular of the World'

He urged support for the use-of-force resolution that he took the leading role
in writing and said, "If we prevail, we will have prevented a brutal dictator
from getting his hands on the economic jugular of the world."

Mr. Foley and Dante B. Fascell, the chairman of the House Foreign Affairs
Committee, who supported the authorization to use force, each warned members not
to think of the vote as anything less than the equivalent of a declaration of
war.

But William H. Broomfield of Michigan, the senior Republican on the Foreign
Affairs Committee, argued that today's vote was a vital diplomatic bargaining
chip that might persuade Iraq to quit Kuwait.

In the Senate, Mr. Dole predicted that today's votes would be the last chance to
persuade Saddam Hussein to withdraw from Iraq. He said it was the time "to send
the mesage that we want a peaceful world."

'Defining Moment in Our History'

Representative Jim Slattery, Democrat of Kansas, said "Saddam Hussein will not
see our threat as real" until Congress votes to authorize force. Predicting
victory for the resolution authorizing force, he said "today is a defining
moment in our history."

Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, the chairman of the Armed Services Committee,
argued that with sanctions weakening Iraq: "We are playing a winning hand. I see
no compelling reason to rush to military action."

Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority leader, said that the greatest risk in
supporting force is the loss of human life. "How many people will die? How many
young Americans will die? And for the families of those young Americans who die,
for every one of us, the truly haunting question will be, did they die
unnecessarily?"

Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, scorned the other members of
the anti-Iraq coalition, "a coalition that has allowed us to take on 95 percent
of the sacrifice across the board."

$2 Billion a Day for War

Senator David L. Boren, Democrat of Oklahoma, called Japan's $4 billion
contribution "paltry" and said that if war came it would cost $2 billion a day
at a time when scarce tax dollars "are needed to solve problems at home, to
rebuild the strength of this country, to get American ready to compete as a
world leader in the next century."

"We can't even get countries like Japan to pay their pledged share," said
Representative Mary Rose Oakar of Ohio.

Before voting on the competing issues of war and sanctions, the House adopted
the resolution asserting the exclusive authority of Congress to declare war and
insisting that Congressional authorization was required for any offensive
actions against Iraq.

The resolution won the support of 260 Democrats, 41 Republicans, and one
independent, and was opposed by 126 Republicans and 5 Democrats.

Significance for the Future

One of its sponsors, Representative Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois,
said the resolution was important, not perhaps for the moment, but for the
future. "Over the long term," he said in an interview after the vote, "it was a
major statement by the House about its relationship with the White House."

Throughout the day, Senators and Congressmen spoke of their votes as the most
important they would cast in their careers, and compared them to others.
Representative Charles E. Bennett, Democrat of Florida and a Silver Star veteran
of World War II, said that "Out of the 17,000 votes I have cast, the only one I
really regret was the one I cast for the Bay of Tonkin Resolution."

Today the 80-year-old lawmaker urged opposition to war, but told his younger
colleagues "a vote ought to be cast on the basis of what you think is best for
our country, not best for the Republican or the Democratic Party, not best for
the President, not best for you, but what's best for our country and what's best
for the world."


LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Senator George Mitchell, left, the majority leader, and Senator
Bob Dole, the Republican leader, entering Mr. Mitchell's office after the
Congressional vote authorizing President Bush to use force against Iraq (George
Tames/The New York Times) (pg. 1); Representatives Stephen J. Solarz, left,
Robert H. Michel, Dante B. Fascell, and Les Aspin after the House voted to
approve use of military force. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg. 11)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Bush's Limited Victory

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1126 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12


They were no clarion calls to battle, but today's Congressional votes were
probably enough for President Bush to take the country to war, provided it is
the short, sharp conflict he has envisaged.

Facing their plainest choice between war and peace since World War II, with the
first shots in the Persian Gulf perhaps only three or four days distant, the
Senate and the House of Representatives reluctantly backed what Speaker Thomas
S. Foley termed "the practical equivalent" of a declaration of war. They gave
Mr. Bush the benefit of the doubt, but they could express no profound national
commitment.

Now Mr. Bush can assert, if he decides sometime in the days and weeks to come
that he must use force to evict Iraqi troops from Kuwait, that he has the
Constitutional authority to do so, as well as the permission of the United
Nations. But if he does act, he will do so knowing that he "takes a divided
nation into battle," as Representative Ron Dellums, a California Democrat,
commented today.

The legal requirements have been met, but it is still open to question whether
the President has the solid political base that he needs.

In Baghdad, President Saddam Hussein will have to look at the outcome -- a very
narrow victory for Mr. Bush's policy in the Senate, a somewhat broader one in
the House -- and judge its meaning for himself. Not an easy proposition.

Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, the most influential figure among those who wanted
to wait longer before authorizing military action, also tried to convince the
Iraqi President that he should ignore what happened in Congress this week.
Combat would transform the situation, he said; country and Congress would rally
around the President, and "there will be no cutoff of funds for our troops as
they engage your forces on the field of battle."

No doubt that is true. Even as committed an isolationist as Arthur Vandenberg
said on Dec. 8, 1941, "I have fought every trend which I thought would lead to
needless war, but when war comes to us, I stand with my Commander in Chief for
the swiftest and most invincible reply of which our total strength may be
capable."

Mr. Bush would begin a war with similar backing. The danger is duration. If the
allied troops in the desert get bogged down, will the American public stay with
Mr. Bush, given their doubts now?

Doubts Evident in Senate

Those doubts were most evident in the Senate, where the resolution authorizing
the President to attack passed by only 52 to 47. Three votes changed from "yes"
to "no" would have reversed the outcome there, and the Senate would have denied
Mr. Bush the authority he sought and the House would have given it -- an
uncertain trumpet indeed, hurtful to those girding for battle.

It is not hard to see who might have cast the requisite three votes: Al Gore
Jr., Democrat of Tennessee, who had sounded, at hearings a month ago, much like
Mr. Nunn; Bob Graham, Democrat of Florida, usually a supporter of the party
leadership, and James M. Jeffords, Republican of Vermont, who agonized until the
very last minute.

But in the end all three joined the vast majority of Republicans and a small
band of Democratic rebels, led by Southern conservatives, the two senators from
conservative Nevada and Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, a Bush supporter
since the debate began.

The debate -- subdued, extended, often impassioned -- was exactly the sort of
clash between opposing views on a great issue that has been absent from most
American political campaigns in the last decade. It took place, however, not
between Republicans and Democrats but mostly within the Democratic party.

2 Republicans Desert Bush

In the Senate, only two Republicans deserted the President: Mark O. Hatfield of
Oregon, a longtime anti-war campaigner who was one of the first Americans to
enter Hiroshima after World War II, and Charles Grassley of Iowa, perhaps the
most antiwar state.

The position taken by the majority of the Democrats holds considerable peril for
their party. If there is no war, it will not matter much. If there is a war and
it goes badly, they will look prescient, and their number will grow. But should
Mr. Bush decide to fight, and should American troops and their allies score a
famous victory, the electorate's old suspicions that Democrats are soft on
national security would probably be rapidly rekindled.

Since the Vietnam War and the Presidential campaign of 1968, the Democrats have
been identified as the anti-war party. Republicans have questioned their
patriotism, sometimes not very subtly, as did Mr. Bush with his flag-factory
visits in 1988. Southern white males, in particular, have deserted them.

For Mr. Bush, the calculations are reversed. A bungled war, too long or too
costly or both, could make him a one-term President. The example of Lyndon B.
Johnson and Vietnam is never far from the minds of the President's aides.

Two key Democrats, both Southerners, both potential Presidential candidates next
year, made two different judgments on the facts of the Persian Gulf crisis, and
perhaps on its politics as well. Mr. Gore, well established in his party
nationally and seen as a member of its mainstream, needs to shore up his
regional base. He voted with the Southern bloc and against the party leadership.
Mr. Nunn, established as a conservative on national defense and well established
regionally, is plagued nationally by a perception that he is more a Republican
than a Democrat on most issues. He voted with the leadership.

Weak Hand Played With Skill

Mr. Bush played a relatively weak hand in Congress with considerable skill. For
those who believe that the moment to fight has not yet arrived, today's vote
came at the worst possible time, long after the United Nations had authorized
the use of force, long after a second huge contingent of troops had been
dispatched to the Middle East, just after a dramatic, widely televised example
of the intransigence of Baghdad in Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d's
meeting in Geneva with Tariq Aziz, the Iraqi Foreign Minister.

A truer test of sentiment in the country, uncolored by some legislators'
reluctance to undercut the Commander in Chief with combat so proximate a
possibility, would have come in late October or early November, on Mr. Bush's
plan to greatly expand the American force in the region and transform it from a
defensive instrument into an offensive one. But the President made that
decision, perhaps the most crucial one short of war, without consulting anyone
outside his inner circle, and he sprang it on the country and Congress just
after the mid-term elections.

Now Congress has finally had its say, and it remains only for Saddam Hussein and
George Bush to have theirs.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Bush's Remark's After Congress Authorized War

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12


Following is a transcript of President Bush's news conference today after the
vote in Congress authorizing him to use military force in the Persian Gulf, as
recorded by The Associated Press:

                               OPENING STATEMENT


I have a brief statement, and then I'll be glad to take a few questions.

First, let me just say that I am gratified by the vote in the Congress
supporting the United Nations Security Council resolution. This action by the
Congress unmistakably demonstrates the United States commitment to the
international demand for a complete and unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait.

This clear expression of the Congress represents the last best chance for peace.
As a democracy, we've debated this issue openly and in good faith, and as
President, I have held extensive consultation with the Congress.

We have now closed ranks behind a clear signal of our determination and our
resolve to implement the United Nations resolutions. Those who may have mistaken
our democratic process as a sign of weakness now see the strength of democracy.
And this sends the clearest message to Iraq that it cannot scorn the Jan. 15
deadline. Throughout our history, we have been resolute in our support of
justice, freedom and human dignity.

The current situation in the Persian Gulf demands no less of us and of the
international community. We did not plan for war, nor do we seek war. But if
conflict is thrust upon us, we are ready and we are determined. We've worked
long and hard as have others, including the Arab League, the United Nations, the
European Community, to achieve a peaceful solution.

Unfortunately, Iraq has thus far turned a deaf ear to the voices of peace and
reason. Let there be no mistake, peace is everyone's goal. Peace is in
everyone's prayers. But it is for Iraq to decide.


                             QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS


Q. Mr. President, does this mean now that war is inevitable --

A. No.

Q. And have you made the decision in your own mind?

A. No, it does not mean that war is inevitable. And I have felt that a statement
of this nature by both Houses of the United States Congress was, at this late
date, the best shot for peace. And so let us hope that that message will get
through to Saddam Hussein.

Q. Have you made the decision in your own mind?

A. I have not because I still hope, hope, that there will be a peaceful
solution.

Q. Mr. President, there's only three days left until the deadline, which isn't
enough time for Saddam Hussein to pull out his troops. In fact, you, yourself,
wouldn't let Jim Baker go to Baghdad on this date because there wouldn't be
enough time. Do you see a possibility of anything happening in these last few
days that could avert war or any chance for -- that he will pull his troops out?

A. Well, in terms of the chance, I'd have to say I don't know, and in terms of
what could avert war, you might say an instant commencement of a large scale
removal of troops with no condition, no concession, and just heading out could
well be a -- the best and only way to avert war, even though it would be at this
date I would say almost impossible to comply fully with the United Nations
resolutions.

Q. Mr. President, are you satisfied that countries in the international
coalition like France, Syria and Egypt will take part in offensive operations in
the event of hostilities in the gulf?

A. Yes.

Q. The second part of that question, sir, you've said that if hostilities come,
it will not be another Vietnam. What kind of assumptions are you making about
the duration of the conflict, and can you assure the American people that
hostilities would not expand beyond the current period of operations?

A. Well, I am -- I am not making any assumptions in terms of numbers of days.
But I have said over and over again that the differences between what is
happening in the gulf and what happened in Vietnam are enormous in terms of the
coalition aligned against the Iraqis, in terms of the demographics, in terms of
the United Nations action and, I am convinced, in terms of the force that is
arrayed against Iraq. So I just don't think there is a parallel.

. . . I have gone over all of this with our Secretary of Defense and with the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs and all three of us . . . are determined to keep
casualties to an absolute minimum.

Q. The polls have shown people's support moving fairly quickly after the 15th.
Would that be your intention?

A. Well, I have said and without trying to pin it down, or in any sense go
beyond what I'm about to say, sooner rather than later. And I got into a
discussion, and I know that's perhaps not of much help. But I think the worst
thing you'd want to do is if a determination was made to use force to signal
when you might be inclined to act. That would not be -- that would -- that
would, in my view, put the lives of coalition forces needlessly at risk.

Q. The crackdown was still going on today in Lithuania. What is your answer to
those who say that you putting the Lithuania and the Baltics under the rug
because of the Persian Gulf?

A. Well I don't think that's true. I've had an opportunity to express myself
directly to President Gorbachev on that. We had a statement on it. The Soviets
know our position clearly. So I don't . . . think that's a fair charge at all.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Prophets of War;
Men Plan; Battle Has a Mind of Its Own

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1120 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


IT was a week of high drama and, for many, a passage of painful uncertainty. But
as the deadline decreed by the United Nations for Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait
drew ever closer -- so close that the time remaining could be counted in hours
-- there were some, convinced that war was imminent, who thought they could
foresee the shape of the conflict.

President Bush himself said confidently that he could guarantee this would not
be "another Vietnam." He seemed to be betting that a war could be won quickly
enough and at modest enough human cost that deep-seated public doubts, reflected
in the anguished votes in both houses of Congress on war-authorization
resolutions, would not have time to sour into outright antiwar sentiment.

A gaggle of retired generals, admirals, colonels and majors were ready with
scenarios, casualty estimates and projections of combat duration. Col. Trevor N.
Dupuy, a noted military historian, said that a combined air-land campaign that
used envelopment tactics would last about 33 days and cost about 9,000 American
casualties, including 1,500 dead.

Representative Les Aspin, a Wisconsin Democrat, issued the most detailed
description yet of what a War of the Persian Gulf might look like, a 26-page
white paper outlining a sustained campaign of aerial and naval bombardment
followed by a ground assault.

Most of the prophets predicted a short, sharp war, forgetting, perhaps, the
haunting tales of those English schoolboys, so soon to be caught in the awful
carnage of Flanders, who fretted about missing the glory of combat.

No one ever knows. Not even with computers and modern war games. Not even Mr.
Aspin, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee and a skilled defense
analyst with a splendid academic pedigree.

That is the great lesson of campaigns past.  And that is one of the main things
that made last week's political calculations, by legislators casting what many
of them described as the most difficult votes of their careers, and by George
Bush and Saddam Hussein and their advisers, so hideously hard.

Caution has certainly found its voices. Prominent among them has been that of
Sam Nunn, the sober Georgia Democrat who heads the Senate Armed Services
Committee. In Friday's debate, he asked his colleagues: "What guarantees do we
have that war will be brief, that American casualties will be light? No one can
say whether war will last five days, five weeks or five months."

Reaching back to the fifth century B.C., Senator Wyche Fowler of Georgia, also a
Democrat, read part of Thucydides' account of the debates that preceded a famous
Greek defeat in Sicily.  "The lesson," Senator Fowler said, "is first and
foremost the uncertainties of war, as true when the European powers plotted a
brief, decisive war in 1914, as in 1964 when we sought no wider war in Vietnam,
or in 415 B.C. when Athenians dreamed of glory on a far-off battlefield. In none
of these cases did those who planned the conflict foresee the ultimate costs, in
blood and treasure, of the long-range consequences of their actions."

Sometimes the problem is myopic politicians and astigmatic experts. Lyndon B.
Johnson could not believe that peasants wearing pajamas and sandals cut from old
tires could defeat his magnificently equipped armies in Vietnam.  They did.
Advisers such as William P. Bundy warned that if the United States lost, all of
Southeast Asia would fall to the Communists. It didn't. Von Schlieffen's plan
for a German breakthrough in Belgium failed in World War I.  Maginot's plan for
a French defensive line failed in World War II.

Sometimes not even celebrated generals can see through what Clausewitz, the
great Prussian military theoretician, described as "the fog of war." Eisenhower
and Montgomery grossly underestimated how long it would take to break out of the
Normandy beachheads. The British, their cannon facing impotently to sea, bungled
the defense of Singapore. Ignoring the advice of his deputy, Longstreet, Robert
E. Lee ordered Pickett's charge at Gettysburg in the conviction that it would
bring the South close to final victory. It turned instead into a debacle that
doomed the Confederacy.

Perhaps all these reflections will turn out to have been beside the point,
despite the failure of the heralded meeting between Secretary of State James A.
Baker 3d and Tariq Aziz, the Iraqi foreign minister, a failure that cast a pall
of depression over a half-dozen world capitals.  Perhaps one of the last-ditch
diplomatic efforts will bear fruit -- the European Community's or the Algerians'
or the one by Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations.
Perhaps Mr. Hussein will find it easier to climb down to someone other than big,
bad America.

Even if war does come, victory may indeed lie within easy reach. Much will
depend on how sound Washington's projections and calculations prove to be.

Is the Iraqi army "10 percent first rate, 20 percent second rate and 70 percent
third rate," as a senior Pentagon official said the other day, or is it the
battle-hardened organization that others have portrayed? Will American firepower
tell, or will it be nullified, at least for a time, by the 40-foot high
fortifications, complete with moats to be filled with flaming oil, that the
Iraqis have built outside of Kuwait City? How long will night-vision and other
complex American equipment hold up in the desert?

Then there are the political imponderables.  Will the coalition hold together
when the crunch comes? Will Egyptian and Saudi troops actually invade Kuwait, to
say nothing of crossing the frontier into Iraq if ordered to?

In Congressional testimony, both Zbigniew Brzezinski, the hawkish national
security adviser to Jimmy Carter, and Cyrus R. Vance, Mr. Carter's more dovish
Secretary of State, warned that what followed a war might be worse than the
status quo, worse than the war itself. Mr. Vance said: "The aftermath of the
conflict would likely confront the United States with rampant Arab nationalism,
corrosive anti-Americanism and widespread instability and turmoil throughout the
Middle East."

One thing already sets this war, if war it is to be, apart from other recent
American conflicts.  There was no time for debate after Pearl Harbor; there was
little time for Presidential reflection when North Korea invaded South Korea;
there was no inclination toward caution when the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution
reached Capitol Hill.

This time, Americans have had a debate of unusual length, seriousness and
intensity. No one can claim to have been taken by surprise if the guns open up
and the bombs start falling in the Persian Gulf this week or next month, and the
optimists are proven wrong.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Cambodia's Uneasy Truce With the Future

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 2; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


DESPITE considerable uncertainty over their own future in a draft peace
settlement, Cambodian leaders last week organized lavish celebrations of their
Government and its accomplishments, celebrations that included a relaxation of
Phnom Penh's curfew and even produced a sort of traffic jam.

The festivities were to mark the 12th anniversary of Cambodia's "liberation"
from the Khmer Rouge. The date chosen, Jan. 7, does not mark Vietnam's invasion,
however, but the setting up by the Vietnamese of the current Cambodian
Government, now led by Prime Minister Hun Sen.

In speeches for the occasion, Cambodian notables, including the titular
President and party leader, Heng Samrin, and the party's increasingly powerful
No. 2, Chea Sim, complained passionately about the scope of a comprehensive
settlement to the long conflict drafted by the United Nations.

They would not allow their army to be disarmed and their Government to be
dismantled or placed under United Nations control, Mr. Heng Samrin typically
said. Such a move would allow the Khmer Rouge to return to power, he said, and
such a large role for the United Nations would violate the organization's
charter.

To Western and Asian diplomats who have been working on a Cambodian peace
settlement, which seems to them not so far out of reach, this repetition of old
concerns was puzzling and discordant -- "another example," one said, "of the
almost regular disconnect between the international effort and the Cambodians."

But some misunderstanding should hardly be surprising, given that the
international effort was designed primarily to circumvent the warring Cambodian
factions, who regularly are unable to agree among themselves on anything. And
mistrust is especially strong in the one faction -- the Phnom Penh Government --
that not only has been isolated by the world community, but that also has the
most to lose.

Its opposition is a loose alliance of the Communist Khmer Rouge, under whose
regime more than a million Cambodians died, and two non-Communist factions: the
followers of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the Khmer People's National Liberation
Front of Son Sann.

But Phnom Penh's worries are also rooted in the draft peace settlement itself,
agreed upon in detail in late November by China, the Soviet Union, the United
States, Britain and France, the five permanent members of the United Nations
Security Council.

The draft settlement gives the United Nations sweeping powers of supervision
"and direct control" over the main departments of government, including the
right to hire and fire, while a cease-fire is put into place, external arms
shipments stop, the combatants are put into cantonments and disarmed, and new
elections are arranged.

Advice and Consensus

The Cambodian factions, gathered in an essentially symbolic Supreme National
Council, can advise the United Nations special representative. But according to
the draft text, that advice would only be compelling if there is a "consensus"
among council members and if the advice "is consistent with the objectives" of
the agreement, defined, of course, by the United Nations.

When confronted with this text in late December by the French and Indonesian
Foreign Ministers, as co-chairmen of the international conference on Cambodia,
Mr. Hun Sen balked. So he and his delegation were taken through the text and
were given an "explanatory note" by Under Secretary General Rafeeudin Ahmed of
the United Nations. The note was designed to reassure them that whatever the
text might say, "they're not going to be dismantled or closed down," as one
diplomat put it.

"They were assured that the United Nations would do no more than necessary to
insure a free and fair election, and was not going to go in hiring and firing
everybody," the diplomat said.

The French also warned the Vietnamese not to obstruct the settlement; if they
did, the French said, Hanoi could forget about any large aid package from Paris.

As for the military situation, Mr. Hun Sen was told not to worry about the Khmer
Rouge; like every faction, it would be first asked for a list of its manpower
and armaments. Its compliance with requirements for disarming would then be
checked against that self-same list.

Disarming and cantonment of all the factions would be done "step by step," Mr.
Ahmed is said to have explained, so that no one faction is disarmed
unilaterally. Is Phnom Penh reassured? "Not altogether," said an Asian diplomat.
"Nor would I be. But I don't think at this point there's very much choice."

In Paris in late December, the French and Indonesian Foreign Ministers at first
told the Cambodians to take the draft agreement or leave it. Then they agreed
that there might be "some room for maneuver around the edges."

But there is no clear forum for such discussions. A "coordinating committee" for
the international conference is supposed to meet at some point to "fine tune"
the text and insure it is ready to be signed. It is assumed that this committee
will consult the Cambodian factions, but no schedule or procedure has been
announced. And no one, diplomats say, wants to gather the disputatious
Cambodians again in the Supreme National Council until after a peace treaty is
signed.

Most representatives of the Permanent Five consider that a Cambodian peace is
within reach. But Phnom Penh's mistrust remains, founded not only on selfish
political concerns, but also on a not altogether paranoid appreciation of the
capabilities and longer-term goals of the Khmer Rouge. Peace, like war, can be a
leap into the dark.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cambodians last week in Phnom Penh celebrating the 12th
anniversary of Cambodia's "liberation" from the Khmer Rouge by Vietnamese
troops. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
Creating a Theater of Different American Voices

BYLINE: By HILARY DE VRIES; Hilary de Vries writes about the arts for The Los
Angeles Times and other publications.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1295 words


"I hate the word sexism," says Emily Mann, stubbing out a cigarette in a
Manhattan cafe. "But as a director you produce what you need to produce, and in
this country there is a feeling that people don't want to hear stories about
women. But I'm an optimist. Things can change. And with more and more women
running arts institutions -- yes, they are -- I think you can stage all kinds of
stories."

A director as well as the author of the plays "Annulla: A Survivor," "Still
Life" and "Execution of Justice," Ms. Mann has earned a reputation as a
chronicler of women, war veterans and the gay community.

Now, she is bringing her populist vision to a new role as artistic director of
the McCarter Theater Center for the Performing Arts in Princeton, N.J., one of
the state's oldest and largest not-for-profit stages. Not only is Ms. Mann one
of the few dramatists heading an American regional theater, but her appointment
adds to the small but growing ranks of influential women artistic directors -- a
list that includes Sharon Ott at the Berkeley Repertory Theater and JoAnne
Akalaitis at the Public Theater, Lynne Meadow at the Manhattan Theater Club and
Carey Perloff at the CSC -- all in New York.

Originally the home of Princeton University's amateur dramatics club, the
62-year-old McCarter had become a $5 million performing-arts center known as
much for presenting dance and musical events as for producing plays. Under the
previous artistic director, Nagle Jackson, the theater was a respected but
low-profile company mostly staging revivals of British and European comedies and
dramas.

Ms. Mann, who cites Brecht and Beckett as her theatrical influences, sees her
three-year appointment as an opportunity to create a higher-profile, more
issue-oriented theater that will be the center's flagship operation.

"The question is 'Do you want to be just a booking house or do you want to be a
great theater, which means producing?' " she said during a recent interview in
Manhattan. "There are invisible racial and economic barriers that I want to
break down with this theater. I want to create a theater of different American
voices."

Her first season at the McCarter, which opens Friday after completion of an $8
million renovation, has been culled from "old and new masters and emerging
American writers," the director said. The first production, starring Shirley
Knight, is a revival of Tennessee Williams's classic, "The Glass Menagerie," a
play Ms. Mann has done successfully before. It will be followed next month by
"Those the River Keeps," the world premiere of a new David Rabe play, and by
"Betsy Brown," a rhythm-and-blues musical by Ntozake Shange and Ms. Mann opening
in April. The season is to conclude in May with "Film Society," a drama about
South Africa by the young American playwright John Baitz.

"I'm interested in American musicals, global writing and new work as well as the
classics," Ms. Mann said. "I want this theater's focus to be on great writers
and great actors and to be truly an American experience."

After graduating from Harvard University in the early 1970's, Ms. Mann, who is
in her late 30's, began her professional career as a resident director for the
Brooklyn Academy of Music in New York and, later, at the Guthrie Theater in
Minneapolis, where she directed an acclaimed revival of "The Glass Menagerie."
She subsequently directed at several regional theaters, including the Mark Taper
Forum in Los Angeles, the Goodman Theater in Chicago and the Hartford Stage
Company.

She has had one Broadway production, the 1986 "Execution of Justice," her
dramatization of the events surrounding the slayings in 1978 of Mayor George
Moscone of San Francisco and Harvey Milk, a city supervisor and the first avowed
homosexual to hold high public office in that city.

The play had several successful regional productions before it went to Broadway,
where it ran for 8 previews and 12 regular performances in 1986. In his review,
Mel Gussow wrote in The New York Times that the play, which Ms. Mann also
directed, was a "bold attempt to explore not just one crime but contemporary
moral values and the criminal justice system."

Despite its failure in New York, "Execution of Justice" has contributed to Ms.
Mann's reputation as a theater artist concerned with moral and social issues as
well as one who tends to write non-naturalistic political works based on
documentary material. "Execution of Justice" used courtroom transcripts, while
"Still Life," about the Vietnam War, and "Annulla," a dramatic monologue about
the Holocaust, were written from a series of interviews she conducted with war
survivors.

That such potentially static scenarios can be a drawback was a point raised by
Frank Rich in his review in The Times of the 1981 "Still Life." "The setting is
a conference table, complete with water pitchers and ashtrays, at which three
characters sit to address the audience for 90 minutes," Mr. Rich wrote. "Though
Miss Mann, who also directed, occasionally allows her capable actors to stretch
their legs, her play's title all too literally describes its method."

Central to her interests, the director says, is staging more women's plays, such
as Ms. Shange's "Betsy Brown." Ms. Mann describes the musical as "the
coming-of-age story of a young black girl that is very different from a male
coming-of-age story. I just feel it is rare for a white male producer to
understand the work of a black woman. But once it is on stage, people respond to
it as something that is simply human."

"Emily has a real sense of political fervor," said Mark Lamos, artistic director
of the Hartford Stage Company. And according to Mark Bly, the former literary
manager of the Guthrie Theater and the current dramaturg at the Seattle
Repertory Theater, "As a writer, Emily has a gift for focusing on those
political events that polarize a community. She hears the voices that are crying
out to be heard about social issues."

Ms. Mann's selection by the McCarter's board of directors can be seen as an
adventerous choice for a regional theater that is respected but low key. "We
were looking for a higher profile for our theater," said Ruth Wilson, the board
president. "In music, dance and other special events we were getting Lincoln
Center-quality artists, but we knew there were other, better-known regional
theaters out there, and we wanted the theater to be as strong."

To that end, Ms. Mann has implemented several changes offstage. She has
eliminated the McCarter's resident company of actors in the hope of attracting
bigger-name performers, installed the theater's first literary manager and
expanded the community outreach program in local schools.

But significant challenges remain. Despite the McCarter's $5 million operating
budget, only $1.2 million is allotted for theater productions. In addition, the
McCarter, which for several years had received annual state arts grants of
nearly $1 million, is now experiencing cutbacks, specifically a $240,000
decrease in state arts council support this season. Theater subscriptions, which
had been as high as 12,000, have fallen to less than half that number -- a
significant drop for a 1,000-seat house.

"This is a disastrous time for theater," Ms. Mann said. "We're in a recession.
There is the furor over the National Endowment for the Arts. Tax laws are not in
our favor. This a combat situation for the arts."

But, she added, "I think women are uniquely suited to work this way. Theater is
about collaboration, about people working together, and that involves real
nurturance. What you're doing in a resident theater is making artistic homes for
people and enhancing the quality of life in a community. And that's long been a
female job."


NAME: Emily Mann

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: At a rehearsal for "Glass Menagerie," Ms. Mann is flanked by
Shirley Knight, left, and Judy Kuhn--seeking a higher profile (Jim Wilson/The
New York Times) (pg. 5); John Spencer and Jon Devries rehearsing for the
Broadway production of "Execution of Justice" in 1986 (Jim Wilson/The New York
Times) (pg. 26)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Quayle's Family Connections Didn't Get Him Into the Guard

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 444 words


To the Editor:

Of false allegations in the national news media about Senator Dan Quayle after
his Vice Presidential nomination in 1988, the charge that family influence
gained him a position in the Indiana National Guard has been the most pervasive.
In a Jan. 1 article on the Vice President's visit to Saudi Arabia, you state
without attribution: "Mr. Quayle was able to avoid service in Vietnam by using
family connections to enter the Indiana National Guard." The statement is
incorrect.

In the hours following the Aug. 16, 1988, nomination announcement, official
Guard records on Mr. Quayle's enlistment 19 years earlier were not immediately
available. A retired Guard major general, Wendell Phillippi, who knew Mr. Quayle
because he worked for his family's newspapers, acknowledged furnishing a
personal recommendation. Reporters found other sources, many with Democratic
backgrounds, who "recalled" a lengthy waiting list for the Guard at the time.
Presto: the press decided family influence was instrumental in Mr. Quayle's
acceptance.

After 10 days, all records on the subject became publicly available, and a
vastly different picture emerged. The Los Angeles Times began its Aug. 27, 1988,
report this way: "With the release of a batch of new documents by the Indiana
National Guard, the question of whether family influence allowed Indiana Senator
Dan Quayle to enter the Guard while others waited has been answered. The
influence did not matter."

The article documented that the state Guard (with at least 52 openings) and Mr.
Quayle's unit (11 openings) were under strength when he applied, had no waiting
list and were under orders to recruit up to full authorized manpower levels. Any
qualified applicant could get in.

Whereas the early tales of family influence received extensive coverage, this
clarification was ignored in many news outlets. Your Jan. 1 article proves that
press corrections and clarifications often fail to undo damage caused by
erroneous reporting.

Also, you imply that service in the Guard eliminates exposure to combat dangers.
When Mr. Quayle enlisted in June 1969, an Indiana National Guard unit was
compiling a distinguished combat record in Vietnam -- which was widely
publicized in Indiana at the time. The 207 men of Company D (Rangers), 151st
Infantry, Indiana National Guard, out of Muncie, received 510 awards for valor
and service during their year in Vietnam starting November 1968. That unit in
fact became the most decorated company of any branch of the United States
military for the entire Vietnam period.

DAVID C. BECKWITH
Press Secretary
to the Vice President
Washington, Jan. 4, 1991

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
As Deadline Nears, America Speaks of Fear and Resolve

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 623 words


On what many Americans see as the eve of war in the Persian Gulf, the mood of
the nation yesterday was somber, divided, apprehensive: a people caught between
a desire for peace and the burden of what Woodrow Wilson called the right more
precious than peace.

The months of futile diplomacy had apparently come down to a final day. The
President had issued his strongest warning. The troops and aircraft carriers
were in place. Congress had given its speeches and its assent. Time was running
out -- but still the haunting uncertainties lingered.

An Odd, Unreal Quality

In New York and Chicago and San Francisco, in cities and small towns across the
nation, the January weekend had an odd, unreal quality, as visits with scores of
Americans showed. Weddings were held, football games were played, families sat
down to dinner and ordinary people went about their customary lives.

But in houses of worship, prayers and sermons were offered against war. In Los
Angeles, 4,000 people went to an antiwar protest out of the Vietnam War era. In
Atlanta and Houston and St. Louis and Detroit, people spoke with profound
emotion of their fears for loved ones and for the future of the country.

And everywhere lurked undercurrents that were not easy to define -- a sense that
the crisis was moving inexorably out of control, that one's own voice had been
lost in the rush of events, that America was poised for better or worse on the
threshold of a historic day, one that might prove proud or tragic in the months
or years to come.

Dramatic Evidence of Division

With tomorrow's United Nations deadline looming and no sign that Saddam Hussein
will withdraw his forces from Kuwait, Americans were still grappling with their
feelings. A New York Times/CBS News Poll conducted Jan. 5-7 reflected the
ambivalence, showing almost the same support for attacking Iraq as for giving
economic sanctions more time.

And interviews with scores of people across the country provided dramatic
evidence that the United States was a nation divided.

"The price of democracy is high," Ellis Casden, of Stamford, Conn., said outside
Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J., before the playoff game yesterday
between the Giants and the Chicago Bears. "We have been the guardians of peace.
We can't let this go without doing something about it. The Middle East is a
powder keg, and it's not going to go away."

But Mr. Casden's son, Greg, a 20-year-old student at Green Mountain College in
Vermont, said the war, if it came, would be a fight over oil rather than
democratic principles. "I think it's pretty obscene," he declared.

At St. Patrick's Cathedral in Manhattan, John Cardinal O'Connor, the Archbishop
of New York, said he believed in the sincerity of the Bush Administration and
Congress, but he declared: "Our Government can err in its deliberations and its
decisions."

The Cardinal urged Americans not to accept that war is unavoidable, and said
everyone had a moral obligation to raise questions up to and beyond tomorrow's
deadline. "It is the highest form of loyalty to ask whether what we are doing is
right," he said.

On a sunlit afternoon in St. Louis, Debbie Swallow, 39 years old, took her
infant daughter, Danielle, to watch Big Bird cavort on stage in "Sesame Street
Live." Waiting in line for tickets, she said: "I'd hate to see another Vietnam."

In a nation that has not experienced real war in well over a decade, the Persian
Gulf crisis seemed surreal to Gale Orem, 47, a legal secretary in Houston. "I
don't think our society knows much of war," she said. "It's like a horror movie
we can turn off if we want to. In America, we live on a yellow brick road of
sorts -- and that may be our undoing."

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: David Fisher, left, a camp counselor, and Steve Herz, a law
student in Chicago, both watched Congressional hearings on TV. "At least in
Vietnam we were trying to stop the spread of Communism; here, there is no such
high or noble cause," Mr. Herz said. (Jonathan Kirn for The New York Times);
"It's not a democracy we're trying to defend. And it's nothing but poor people
who have to fight it," said Claude Walton, a deacon at Chicago's First Baptist
Congregational Church. (Jonathan Kirn for The New York Times); "I pray about it,
mostly for the troops there, the young people, and I've been praying more as it
gets closer," said Mia Hawkins of Atlanta. (Alan S. Weiner for The New York
Times) (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: Chicago;
Who Will Pay Raises Concern

BYLINE: By ISABEL WILKERSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 665 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Jan. 13


There were 24 parishioners and a minister missing this morning from the wooden
pews at Chicago's First Baptist Congregational Church. They have been absent
since August, preparing to fight for a cause that many church members say they
neither understand nor believe in.

And on this bleak, bitterly cold Sunday morning, a day after Congress authorized
the President to wage war against Iraq, the sadness and confusion that has swept
the West Side church in the last few months appeared to be turning to anger and
despair.

"I want to know exactly what we're fighting for," said Diane Sergeant as she
prepared to tape the morning service to send to the minister and the 24 church
members in Saudi Arabia. "Somebody needs to sit down and tell us what's going
on. What are we getting out of this? I never even heard of Kuwait. Bush has not
told us enough."

Tears welled in Barbara Charley's eyes at the mention of the Persian Gulf. Her
only son, Andy, is a lance corporal with the Marines there. "I can't say my real
opinion about this thing in church," Mrs. Charley said bitterly. "I'm mad at
Bush. I'm mad at Hussein. I'm mad at the whole world."

'Pray a Mighty Prayer'

This is the crisis hour, said the church's assistant pastor, the Rev. George W.
Daniels, urging members to "pray a mighty prayer" in hope that divine
intervention might be able to do what negotiation has not.

Across this snowbound city, the final days before the United Nations deadline
appear to be heightening anxieties that have risen with each Congressional
debate and Presidential statement. This morning, some people ate their
breakfasts and did their laundry with war on their minds. In interviews, they
expressed resignation that fighting was imminent but fear about what that meant.

At the Lincoln Park Launderette on Chicago's North Side customers turned from
their detergent and rinse cycles when a television news program mentioned Iraq.

Jim Larson, a lawyer who was folding his clothes, questioned the urgency of
military action. "I can't understand what the hurry is," Mr. Larson said.
"What's going to be different six months from now from what the situation is
today?"

Several blocks away, four young men debated the crisis over breakfast with a
sense that after Tuesday their lives and the world might not be the same. "It's
scary," said David Fisher, a 25-year-old camp counselor, eating crepes at a
pancake house on Chicago's North Side. "This is the first time in our lives that
we've had to deal with the prospect of war."

The men said they watched the Congressional debates on the gulf crisis, saw the
Senate vote on the issue and even turned off the National Football League
playoff games on Saturday to watch the proceedings. "We don't know how this will
affect our lives," Mr. Fisher said. "But as a country, we can't become isolated.
Like it or not, this has become a problem for us. How can you not support the
President at a time like this?"

His friend, Steve Herz, a 24-year-old law student, said he feared that President
Bush was underestimating the resolve of the Iraqi people and that a gulf war
would be baseless. "At least in Vietnam we were trying to stop the spread of
Communism," he said. "Here, there is no such high or noble cause."

Back at First Baptist, a predominantly black, working class church, members were
not only unconvinced but angry that their fellow parishioners might have to pay
to stop aggression with their lives.

"We don't have no business being over there," said Claude Walton, a deacon.
"It's not a democracy we're trying to defend. And it's nothing but poor people
who have to fight it. If we're putting up with all the stuff in South Africa,
why are we fighting for Kuwait?"

Linder Hoskins, another church member, blamed the gulf crisis on President Bush
and on Saddam Hussein. "We're in this mess because Bush is stubborn and Hussein
is stubborn," she said. "I'm just praying one of them will come to their
senses."

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: David Fisher, left, a camp counselor, and Steve Herz, a law
student in Chicago, both watched Congressional hearings on TV. "At least in
Vietnam we were trying to stop the spread of Communism; here, there is no such
high or noble cause," Mr. Herz said. (Jonathan Kirn for The New York Times);
"It's not a democracy we're trying to defend. And it's nothing but poor people
who have to fight it," said Claude Walton, a deacon at Chicago's First Baptist
Congregational Church. (Jonathan Kirn for The New York Times); "I pray about it,
mostly for the troops there, the young people, and I've been praying more as it
gets closer," said Mia Hawkins of Atlanta. (Alan S. Weiner for The New York
Times) (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: Berkeley;
Coffee Is Strong, Opinion Is Split

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 470 words

DATELINE: BERKELEY, Calif., Jan. 13


Strong coffee, thick newspapers and good conversation are the hallmarks of
Sunday mornings at Vine and Walnut Streets in this iconoclastic city where
everyone has an opinion on just about everything.

Today was no exception on the benches outside Peet's Coffee, the equivalent of a
village green, where neighbors gathered to jump-start the day, dissect the
latest news and share their apprehension as the United Nations deadline
approached.

"It's like everything is going to change on Tuesday, and afterward life will be
different," said Mary O'Neill, a 38-year-old therapist, who was sipping coffee
with two of her brothers.

The men and women here this morning, most of them college-educated
professionals, fell into two categories when asked to explain the specific
source of their anxiety as the deadline drew near.

Words Political or Personal

Some spoke in purely political terms, always consistent with Berkeley's
prevailing ideology that America had a predilection for becoming involved in
other countries' conflicts. Others spoke personally, grieving in advance for the
young men and women who would surely die.

"We have a false sense of our own might," said Kevin O'Neill. Ms. O'Neill's
31-year-old brother took the first view. "It's like taking over the Indians.
Horrendous things are waiting for us there, just like in Vietnam."

"I don't think people are hip to what's about to happen," continued Mr. O'Neill,
a lawyer and sometime actor.

Another brother, John O'Neill, a 40-year-old New York City builder here on a
family visit, said he thought America's stand was "righteous." But he said he
was less interested in "who's right and who's wrong" than in the imminence of
bloodshed.

Divisions in Families

"It comes down to the individuals," said Mr. O'Neill. "The young men and women
who will lose their lives for something they don't even understand. I feel a
sense of impending loss and empathy for the mothers and fathers of those
children and the children themselves. There's got to be another way."

The McMullen family was similarly divided. David McMullen, a 32-year-old
industrial waste inspector, said he could never remember "being this worked up
over any United States militarism," though he said it fit a pattern.

"This country was founded by conquest and bloodshed," Mr. McMullen said,
mentioning the American Indians and "the rape of the wilderness."

His wife, Diane, said her fear was "more personal," because she has a
23-year-old son from a previous marriage. While she has vague feelings that the
United States ought not to be so quick to use force, her primary concern is
Aaron, her only child.

"I would do anything to protect him," Ms. McMullen said. "Break the law, deport
him. This is not worth it to me. I am not willing to lose my son."

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: David Fisher, left, a camp counselor, and Steve Herz, a law
student in Chicago, both watched Congressional hearings on TV. "At least in
Vietnam we were trying to stop the spread of Communism; here, there is no such
high or noble cause," Mr. Herz said. (Jonathan Kirn for The New York Times);
"It's not a democracy we're trying to defend. And it's nothing but poor people
who have to fight it," said Claude Walton, a deacon at Chicago's First Baptist
Congregational Church. (Jonathan Kirn for The New York Times); "I pray about it,
mostly for the troops there, the young people, and I've been praying more as it
gets closer," said Mia Hawkins of Atlanta. (Alan S. Weiner for The New York
Times) (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: Atlanta;
Vague Possibility Now a Step Away

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 640 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Jan. 13


For Liz Doyle, as for so many others, what even a week ago seemed a vague,
unlikely possibility now seems only a horrifying step away.

"I went to a friend's birthday party today, and the very first thing we talked
about was how it did not seem real until Secretary Baker said, 'regrettably,'
and then you start seeing pictures of men and women on TV and you realize they
might not come back," said Ms. Doyle, a 34-year-old who works in tourism
marketing.

"Nothing seems to be more important now than the fact we're going to war, the
economy, everything. It's a very helpless feeling."

The certitude that conflict is impending may not have been unanimous, but it was
close.

In Atlanta, which likes to think of itself as a place on a winning streak
exemplified by its successful bid for the 1996 summer Olympics, there is a
widespread sense that the nation is poised at the edge of a fateful precipice
with no clear idea of what lurks below.

"I pray about it, mostly for the troops there, the young people, and I've been
praying more as it gets closer," said Mia Hawkins, a 25-year-old accountant, who
was interviewed Saturday at Lenox Square, a huge mall in the affluent Buckhead
section that comes as close as anything to being Atlanta's Main Street.

Talk of Biblical Prophecies

On the surface the area's shop-till-you-drop ethic seems intact, but it is not
hard to find the anxious undercurrents.

Shane Quarels, a 33-year-old director of advertising for an Atlanta firm, said
she was planning to get two kittens from the humane society. That led a friend
from Savannah to tell her that so many soldiers from Fort Stewart there had to
give up their pets, residents had organized a campaign to adopt the pets until
the soldiers return.

"Being in the Bible Belt, there's so much talk about the biblical prophecies
that there will be a war in the Middle East that will be so horrendous it will
be the end of the world," she said.

Most people raise fears that are less apocalyptic, but still worrisome.

Bob Hayslip, a 40-year-old office equipment salesman, is worried enough about
the possibility of terrorism that he has advised his 18-year-old daughter to
drive on her class trip to Miami in May rather than fly.

Learning From the Crisis

Ms. Quarels's friend, 31-year-old Nichola Coe of Savannah, fears that the war
will make the current recession more severe. And living in a military community,
what she fears most is the toll a war would bring.

"I find myself thinking about it about 70 percent of the time," she said. "So
many families have people over there. I think about what it's like now and can't
help thinking what it will be like if some of them come back in body bags."

Along with the anxiety many people find a sense of clarity: the Gulf crisis is
telling Americans things about themselves that they did not know.

A mental health counselor, who declined to give his name, said that along with
its sobering aspects, the crisis had revealed something rather appealing about
Americans.

"I'm struck by how reluctant the American people are to go to war," he said. "In
that sense it's something of a blessing. It shows we're not as sadistic or
malevolent a people as we sometimes think."

Concern About the Draft

A group of young men discussing the war at the Five Paces Inn, a small hangout
about a mile down Peachtree Street from Lenox Square, have their own reasons for
worry.

"If it's a long war, more than six months, I figure they'll reinstate the
draft," said 24-year-old Matt Jarinda.

But for him the crisis is also a reminder how quickly and frighteningly the
world situation can change. "You have all those R.O.T.C. students who thought
they were getting a free ride through college," he said. "No one in their
wildest dreams ever thought they'd be over in Saudi Arabia."

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: David Fisher, left, a camp counselor, and Steve Herz, a law
student in Chicago, both watched Congressional hearings on TV. "At least in
Vietnam we were trying to stop the spread of Communism; here, there is no such
high or noble cause," Mr. Herz said. (Jonathan Kirn for The New York Times);
"It's not a democracy we're trying to defend. And it's nothing but poor people
who have to fight it," said Claude Walton, a deacon at Chicago's First Baptist
Congregational Church. (Jonathan Kirn for The New York Times); "I pray about it,
mostly for the troops there, the young people, and I've been praying more as it
gets closer," said Mia Hawkins of Atlanta. (Alan S. Weiner for The New York
Times) (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
From a Dove To a Hawk: 25-Year Trip

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 568 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 13


Twenty-five years ago, Stephen J. Solarz was managing one of the first anti-war
Congressional campaigns in the country.

Last week, the Brooklyn Democrat was a principal architect of the resolution
authorizing President Bush to go to war in the Persian Gulf.

His political odyssey was premised, in part, on a judgment that World War II --
not Vietnam -- was the appropriate historical analogy for the crisis in the
Persian Gulf, he said.

"The fact that we made serious mistakes in Vietnam doesn't mean we're making
them now," Mr. Solarz said in a telephone interview today. "It would be the
ultimate tragedy of Vietnam if the mistakes we made then paralyzed us and
prevented us from taking actions necessary today."

A Pervasive Memory

The average age in Congress is 53.6, so the memory of Vietnam hung heavily over
last week's debate. Mr. Solarz, who is 50 years old, began a lengthy essay on
his position in The New Republic by declaring that, "I cannot accept, or be
dissuaded by, the analogy with Vietnam."

Mr. Solarz, a senior member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee and chairman
of the subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs, argues that the United States
has far more critical interests at stake in the gulf than it did in Vietnam. He
adds, "If we do have to use force, and I still hope it can be resolved wihtout
the use of force, we're likely to win a decisive victory in a matter of months,
if not weeks."

In contrast, Mr. Solarz said, "I felt very strongly at the time that our
involvement in Vietnam was a serious mistake and that the cost to the country in
blood and treasure was out of all proportion to the excpected benefits of a
successful defense of South Vietnam."

Mr. Solarz had a very direct involvement in the national debate over Vietnam. In
1966, not long out of Brandeis University, Mr. Solarz managed the anti-war
campaign of Mel Dubin, who was challenging the incumbent Democrat,
Representative Abraham Multer of Brooklyn. Mr. Dubin lost by fewer than 1,000
votes. Mr. Solarz was elected to Congress himself in 1974.

Foreign Policy Specialist

He has made his mark in Congress on foreign policy and in recent years many
political observers have seen him as positioning for the position of Secretary
of State in some future Democratic Administration. But he broke with the
majority of his Democratic colleagues on the Persian Gulf resolution; 179
Democrats voted against it in the House, 86 for it.

"It was not easy to part company with many people for whom I have great
respect," Mr. Solarz said. "But I deeply appreciate what the Speaker said over
and over again -- that this was a matter of conscience."

Mr. Solarz, whose district is heavily Jewish, also said, "If Israel did not
exist, I would feel exactly the same way I do. I think Saddam Hussein poses a
serious threat to one of the most strategically important regions in the world
where we have vital interests."

Still, the Brooklyn Democrat did acknowledge some pangs.

"I have two very conflicting emotions," he said. "On the one hand, I am deeply
convinced in the very essence of my being, based on everything I know of
history, that what we did yeserday was right and in the best interests of our
country. At the same time, I know there were other poeple at other times who
also believed that what they were doing was right for their country -- but
turned out to be wrong."

NAME: Stephen J. Solarz

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: WASHINGTON TALK;
The Vote That Congress Can't Forget

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 721 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 14


For more than two decades, the Congressional vote that lawmakers most often cite
as the one they would like to take back is their 1964 vote for the Gulf of
Tonkin Resolution, the resolution that was used as authority for the war in
Vietnam. Only two Senators and no Representatives voted no.

Twenty-seven of those lawmakers are still in Congress. And as they prepared for
Saturday's vote on what was even more clearly the equivalent of a declaration of
war, the resolution to authorize the use of military force in the Persian Gulf,
the memories of that earlier vote weighed heavily on the minds of the seven
senators and 20 representatives who served then and still serve now.

Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, was in the House in 1964. He
recalled the earlier resolution as one President Johnson had "distorted," and
one whose repeal he accomplished as a freshman Senator in 1970.

Representative Sam M. Gibbons, Democrat of Florida, said caustically, "It was a
declaration of war despite the fact that those who stood in the well and who
supported it said it was not." He added, "The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution was used
as a declaration of war and plunged this country n eight or nine years of really
disastrous war in Vietnam."

Not everyone remembered it quite the same way. Representative Charles E.
Bennett, Democrat of Florida, said: "I am 80 years of age. I have been in this
chamber 43 years. Out of the 17,000 votes I have cast, the only one I really
regret is the one I cast for the Bay of Tonkin Resolution. I particularly regret
it, because I knew it was a declaration of war."


Representative Dan Rostenkowski, Democrat of Illinois, did not offer second
thoughts about his old vote, but said the Persian Gulf decision was even more
difficult for him. "Today's situation is clearer," he said in a statement in the
Congressional Record. "The possibility of armed conflict, casualties and even
death is much more apparent."

In that group of 27, some were silent last week. Among those who spoke, several
did not hark back to the 1964 vote. But few avoided comparisons with Vietnam
more generally. For example, Representative Frank Horton, Republican of
Rochester, recalled his years in Congress during the Vietnam War.

"From that experience I learned the lesson of what can result from the
commitment of troops to a conflict where our interests are not so clear, where
objectives are not defined," Mr. Horton said. In the Persian Gulf, he said,
those interests were as clear as they had been when he fought as an infantry
companmy commander in World War II.

When it came time to vote, 12 of the Tonkin veterans voted to authorize force
and 14 voted against it. Representative Morris K. Udall, Democrat of Arizona, is
hospitalized because of a fall and did not vote.


Among the Republicans, Mr. Dole, Mr. Horton, Senator Strom Thurmond of South
Carolina and Representatives William S. Broomfield of Michigan, Robert H. Michel
of Illinois, Joseph M. McDade of Pennsylvania and James H. Quillen of Tennessee
voted to authorize President Bush to make war on Iraq.

Representative Silvio O. Conte of Massachusetts voted no. One of just three
House Republicans who deserted President Bush on the issue, he made no speech,
but issued a statement recalling his Tonkin vote, and saying the consequence
then was "tragedy and needless loss of lives," a result he prayed would not
recur.

The Tonkin Democrats sided against authorizing force. Mr. Gibbons, Mr. Bennett,
and Representatives William H. Natcher of Kentucky, Neal Smith of Iowa, Henry B.
Gonzalez and J. J. Pickle of Texas, and Don Edwards and Edward R. Roybal of
California voted no. So did Senators Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, Quentin N.
Burdick of North Dakota, Claiborne Pell of Rhode Island, Edward M. Kennedy of
Massachusetts (who did not vote in 1964 but announced support of the resolution)
and Daniel K. Inouye of Hawaii.

But five of them -- all powerful committee chairmen -- voted for force. Mr.
Rostenkowski did. So did Representatives Jack Brooks of Texas, John D. Dingell
of Michigan, Dante B. Fascell of Florida, and Jamie L. Whitten of Mississippi,
the only current member of Congress who was also on hand in December 1941, to
vote the last formal declarations of war, against Japan, Germany and Italy.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Group in Hong Kong Taken To Task on Advice to Boat People

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 697 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Jan. 14


Responding to complaints from the United Nations refugee agency, the Hong Kong
Government has curtailed the activities of a legal assistance group that has
been advising Vietnamese boat people held in detention camps here.

The action has prompted charges that the United Nations agency is more concerned
with sending refugees back to Vietnam than in looking after their best
interests, the organization's official mission.

The top local official with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Robert Van Leeuwen, confirmed last week that his office had complained to the
Government that lawyers from the group, Legal Aid, were raising "false hopes"
among the thousands of boat people held here.

After the refugee agency's complaints, which were filed in November, a senior
Legal Aid lawyer involved in a successful court challenge that freed 111
Vietnamese from detention was barred from the camps.

Harassment Charged

Relief workers inside the camps said the Government also had barred Legal Aid
from distributing leaflets detailing the legal rights of the boat people and
offering aid, and banned notices signed by two other refugee groups.

In addition, several groups of Vietnamese have complained that after they spoke
with lawyers, they were harassed by camp guards.

"We are outraged at the role the refugee agency has played in having people of
integrity barred from counseling the Vietnamese," said Suzy Comerford, spokesman
for Refugee Concern Hong Kong, an umbrella organization of relief groups here.

She added that the refugee agency, which is officially charged wtih looking
after the thousands of refugees here, "has made numerous complaints and
accusations about groups and individuals disrupting the camps.

They are no longer an advocate," she said. "They have taken on the role of judge
and jury."

Arthur C. Helton, director of the Refugee Project of the Lawyers Committee for
Human Rights in New York, who also condemned the refugee agency's action, said
during a recent visit here that "it is a terribly cynical argument to suggest
that people should not be given information or access to redress, in order to
keep their expectations low."

No Lawyers Pinpointed

Mr. Van Leeuwen told reporters that he had never pinpointed any lawyers
specifically, but he acknowledged that the refugee agency had filed complaints
about Legal Aid and asked that action be taken. He added that it had also
"requested that action be taken to address a number of problems of this kind in
the camps."

He said what his agency objected to was raising "false hopes" of resettlement
because it prevented the Vietnamese "from exercising the real decisions of what
to do with their lives."

He added that all Vietnamese inside the camps "are entitled to unhindered access
to legal assistance," noting that his agency had 10 legal consultants at
present.

Recently, Mr. Van Leeuwen said that the refugee agency's repatriation programs,
which encourage boat people to voluntarily return home, were being ignored by
many who were pinning new hopes on legal challenges to the screening process.

John Torgrimson, director of Community and Family Services International Hong
Kong, a relief group that works in the camps, said the goal of Mr. Van Leeuwen's
agency "is clearly to send people back to Vietnam." That, he added, raises the
question of whom it "is accountable to, who it is really working for."

52,000 in Hong Kong

There are 52,000 Vietnamese boat people in Hong Kong camps and only 8,000 of
them are classified as refugees awaiting resettlement. About 30,000 Vietnamese
are awaiting screening to determine their status, while the remaining 14,000
have already been told they are not eligible for resettlement.

The refugee agency oversees the controversial screening process carried out by
immigration officials, who interview boat peopleand determine which Vietnamese
deserve resettlement as refugees and which will ultimately be forced to return
home.

Currently, nine Vietnamese are challenging the process in court, in a case
mounted by legal rights groups in Britain, the United States and Legal Aid in
Hong Kong.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Our Towns;
War Edges Near, And the Young Talk and Worry

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINERIP

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 798 words

DATELINE: RYE NECK, N.Y.


Even the third graders were talking war yesterday. "Well, I don't think Saddam
Hussein's troops are going to leave," said Alexis Faraci, age 8. "I mean, we
only have one more day. No, I'm not too happy about it."

"My Dad and I went to dinner last night," said Jeffrey Akseizer, a ninth grader.
"We just totally discussed this." Students here have been following events
closely since fall, when they mailed off letters to "Any Service
Member/Operation Desert Shield." "I wrote, 'I hope you guys kick some butt,' "
said Eric Andreoli. "Dad fought in Vietnam but he doesn't like to talk about
Vietnam so I don't know what it was like." Eric was predicting Iraq would fall
in 10 days. "We're very powerful," he said.

"I sit in my A.P. history class and these guys in the back yell, 'Kick butt!
This is war!' " said Kinda Serafi, a junior. Those with strong opinions often
have no stake, or a large stake. Kinda is Syrian-American, with family there.
She's against war. Lani McCann, whose Dad is in the reserves, is against it. "It
may be selfish, but I don't want Dad to go."

The young are as split as their elders. Mike Loscuito supports the President,
but personally would not want to fight. An uncle died in Vietnam. Mike, a
senior, was born in 1974. "I never met my uncle," he said. "His name? What was
his first name? I don't remember."

Mike's letter to Saudi Arabia was "a lot of light stuff like what I like to eat.
I didn't want to depress them more than they are."

You might think that being in a desert and getting letters about some suburban
students' eating habits would devastate troop mo rale. Yet school offi cials
were surprised by the warm re sponses. "Your let ters arrived along with a
couple hun dred pounds of letter mail and packages addressed to Any Service
Member," wrote Navy Lieut.  Stuart Craig, sta tioned aboard a ship.  "Some were
sitting quietly by themselves reading letters; others were searching piles of
mail for their hometowns. I went through letters others had read and set down.
Each was different, but all sent a similar message: We know you're there and we
support you."

Americans, regardless of their opinions on war, seem intent on showing that they
will not blame the soldiers this time. And soldiers sound almost desperate to
hold that good will. Dave Pederson, a third class petty officer who plays in his
ship's heavy metal band, Voodoo Meat Bucket, wrote: "You would really be
surprised to see the effect a letter has over here. I just hope the American
people don't get tired of us being in the Gulf and decide to just back down.
That's the problem my Dad had in Vietnam. As it is now, the letters from home
are literaly flooding Saudi Arabia post offices."

The letters are full of boredom. "Nothing is really happening," wrote Ron
Chinevere, a Marine private. "We sleep from 9 P.M. til 6 A.M. then train for a
few hours or do nothing. Mostly the day is spent playing cards." They are
written by soldiers, not philosophers. Private Chinevere wrote that if Iraq is
not stopped, "Communism would spread and the prices would go up and we'd be
hurting even more." The letters are a reminder that the Army is still the Army.
"Hi. My name is Arlen Herbst. I'm a sergeant in the Army. I'm a Czech linguist.
My job is to locate their units and maybe destroy them. As a Czech linguist
against Czechs it's easier. Against Arabs, well, it's a little harder." The
letters remind how young soldiers are. "I'm not much older than you."

Sergeant Herbst wrote to a girl named Tiffany he had never met. "I'm 5'10, 165
pounds, blond hair, blue eyes, (soft blue not deep blue). Since I'm a runner I'm
not very fat or big. No incredible hunk. Average height and weight. I'm not as
small and skinny as other runners. I'm you might say well built but not overly
built. I do a lot of reading. Nickname is Doc. I'm not a nerd. Have you seen a
nerd surf before? I'm considered a nice friendly guy."

The letters helped Rye Neck children see the desert. Kevin Horrigan, an enlisted
man, wrote: "There is nothing but sand as far as you can see. Today I saw four
or five camels off in the distance. I never thought that I would ever see a
camel. The one nice thing about this place is the stars at night. It's so dark
here that the stars show up real good. I see shooting stars every night. I have
to get some sleep now. My day begins very early."

Each generation is molded by its war. The children of Rye Neck will think of war
this way: A date gets set, you go to bed, wake up the next day and there's a
war. The children are sure America will never lose but even third graders seem
to understand the problem. "I don't think you can win and say, I won! I won! I
won! I won!" Alexis said. "It's sadder. Friends and relatives die."

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
More on the Gulf Crisis

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 159 words



VIETNAM AND KUWAIT Many Americans who lived through the Vietnam era are finding
as they face a new war that answers are no longer so simple. Page A14.

EMIGRES' EMOTIONS Iraqi-Americans, many with relatives in their homeland,
struggle with conflicting emotions. Page A14.

PRAYERS AND PROTESTS Americans expressed their anxiety about war with prayer
vigils, panel discussions and protests. Page A15.

STUDENTS DIVIDED Students in Rye Neck, N.Y., who have been writing to soldiers,
are dividedabout the prospect of war. Our Towns, page B1.

NETWORKS PREPARE United States television news networks prepare for war. Word
and Image, page C16.

COMPANIES' PLANS Companies are poised to put into effect plans to safeguard or
evacuate employees in the Middle East and deal with possible terrorism at home.
Business Day, page D1.

OIL PRICE JUMPS The price of oil jumped $3.49 a barrel, to $30.78, its highest
level since early December. Page D1.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: PUBLIC OPINION;
Americans Don't Expect Short War

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 839 words


A majority of Americans say they are satisfied that President Bush has done
everything he should to prevent war in the Persian Gulf. But the country remains
deeply divided over whether fighting Iraq is the right policy, and most people
do not expect the short war with relatively low casualties that Mr. Bush and his
officials have talked about, the latest New York Times/CBS News poll shows.

While the poll suggests that Mr. Bush has been able to maintain public approval
for his handling of the crisis, with 58 percent saying they approve and 33
percent saying they disapprove, it also shows where his political
vulnerabilities may lie. And it provides the most detailed view to date of
Americans' gloomy expectations about what a war in the gulf would be like.

Most of the 1,512 people who were questioned from Friday through Sunday said
they expected the war to last several months to more than a year, to require
heavy combat on the ground, produce thousands of American deaths and make a
major attack by Iraqi agents within the United States likely.

Fear of Another Vietnam

In the end, the greatest political threat to Mr. Bush could come from precisely
what he has tried to counter in his public statements: the fear of many
Americans, as expressed in follow-up interviews conducted after the survey was
completed, that war in the gulf could bring about a repetition of the United
States' bitter experience in Vietnam.

"Basically, I guess we're hoping that it's not a Vietnam, not going in nudging
and pushing, but going full force and getting it over with minimal loss of
lives," said Drew A. Collins, an Ohio banker.

Even among those who say Mr. Bush should give economic sanction more time, four
out of ten said they would consider a short war with low casualties worth
fighting. But at the same time, the poll showed that nearly half of those who
said Mr. Bush should act now expressed the view that the price for getting Iraq
out of Kuwait would not be worth paying if a war dragged on with heavy
casualties.

The nationwide telephone survey, which carried a possible sampling error of
three percentage points one way or the other, was conducted after the failure of
the Iraqi-American talks in Geneva last Wednesday and while Congress debated and
then voted for a resolution authorizing Mr. Bush to use force in the gulf.

Fight Now or Wait?

A solid majority, 66 percent, said they expected that the country would end up
in a war, an increase of nine percentage points from a poll conducted a week
earlier. But they were evenly split on whether Mr. Bush should immediately begin
hostilities or wait to give economic sanctions more time.

The follow-up interviews suggested that some of those who called for action soon
were expressing a desire to get it over with rather than registering
enthusiastic support for Mr. Bush's position.

"We should be real sure we're going to get this thing done or not do it at all,"
said Robert T. Grindle, a 58-year-old Korean War veteran from Blue Hill, Me.
"Bush opened his mouth and we have to back him up. We appointed him President
and have to back him but Bush -- he said too much, got himself in trouble."

Majorities for Conflicting Views

Fifty-five percent of Americans said Mr. Bush had done "everything he should to
avoid war." But 59 percent continued to say that Mr. Bush should seek a meeting
with President Saddam Hussein before midnight tonight, the United Nations
deadline for Iraq to leave Kuwait or face the use of force.

Although Mr. Bush has said he rules out any negotiation or compromise with Iraq,
a majority of Americans -- 56 percent -- said it would be acceptable for the
United States to first agree to an international conference on Arab-Israeli
problems if Iraq would then withdraw from Kuwait. Forty-seven percent said it
would be acceptable to them if the ousted leadership of Kuwait offered to trade
a piece of the country's territory in return for Iraq's withdrawal from most of
Kuwait.

Although the Bush Administration has devoted much attention in recent weeks to
its attempts to explain the reasons for sending troops to Saudi Arabia,
Americans remained divided on why those forces are there.

Oil or Morality?

Forty-two percent said it was mainly to stop Iraq from attacking its neighbors,
29 percent said it was mainly to protect oil supplies, and 11 percent said it
was mainly to restore the leadership of Kuwait.

But when it came to deciding whether those reasons were "good enough to go to
war," the poll showed an even split overall. Only among those who said American
troops were sent to stop attacks by Iraq did a majority say that was a good
enough reason for a war.

The groups most polarized by the gulf crisis were blacks and whites and men and
women. By margins of 15 percentage points or more, blacks and women were more
opposed to early action, more disapproving of Mr. Bush and his handling of the
gulf crisis, and more inclined to say that a war of any duration was not worth
fighting.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: 'Expecting War' show how many Americans surveyed expect to go
to war with Iraq; 'The Split on Iraq: Sanctions vs. War' shows poll results on
questions about the situation in the Gulf.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Killing of 5 in Boston's Chinatown Raises Fears of Asian Gang Wars

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 615 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Jan. 14


The killing of five men in a Chinatown social club on Saturday has raised fears
that new and more violent Asian gangs are struggling for control in Boston and
underscores how a recent wave of immigrants from Asia has transformed this
city's small Chinatown, the police and community leaders say.

The five men, who were playing cards when they were killed, were shot numerous
times, each at least once in the head, Police Superintendent Joseph V. Saia Jr.,
said. A sixth victim was critically wounded and is being kept under police
protection at a hospital whose name the police have refused to disclose for his
protection.

Neighborhood residents said the social club was frequented by ethnic Chinese
from Myanmar, many of whom worked as waiters in nearby restaurants and stopped
off to play cards after work. Today the police released the names of the first
two victims: Kwang Luu, 26 years old, and Man Cheung, 56 years old. Their
occupations and ethnic backgrounds were not disclosed.

The killings came after the shooting death last Tuesday of Steve Huy Tan, 30, a
part-time waiter who was shot in the lobby of his apartment a few blocks from
the site of Saturday's slayings.

Breakup of Traditional Gang

Mr. Saia said that "there has been no real organization of the criminal element
in the Chinatown section of Boston" since the mid- to late-1980's, when the
leader of the Ping On, the once-dominant gang here, fled to Hong Kong and his
second in command was slain in his suburban restaurant.

With the breakup of the Ping On, which had a base in the traditional Chinese
underworld of the triads and tongs, or secret societies and mutual aid groups, a
new generation of smaller, less formally organized but more violent gangs have
emerged, a law-enforcement officer familiar with Asian gangs here said.

Mr. Saia acknowledged that there were "a lot of gangs and criminal elements that
are vying for power" in Chinatown, and he said the police "will investigate all
aspects of that."

The change in criminal activity in Boston's Chinatown is similar to changes that
have taken place in Chinatowns in New York, San Francisco, Toronto and
Vancouver, said Ko-Lin Chin, a senior research analyst for the New York City
Criminal Justice Agency. "This new group of Chinese criminals has nothing to do
with the traditional Chinese criminal organization in Chinatown of triads, tongs
and street gangs," he said.

No Loyalties and No Pity

The new groups are involved in heroin smuggling, prostitution and the smuggling
of Chinese aliens into the United States, he added. Because they lack ties to
the traditional organizations, "they have no loyalties and are much more
ruthless," said Mr. Chin, the author of "Chinese Subculture and Criminality:
Nontraditional Crime Groups in America," a book published recently by the
Greenwood Press.

These new groups also present a difficult problem for the police, Mr. Chin said,
"because they don't have a headquarters or permanent organization and are
constantly changing their composition."

The changes in Chinatowns across the country began with the change in the
immigration law of 1965, which removed barriers to Asian immigrants. In the last
decade the number of Asians in the Boston metropolitan area has doubled, to
100,000 people, said Michael Liu, director of the Asian American Resource
Workshop. But only about 8,000 live in Boston's Chinatown, an area of only a few
square blocks.

Some of the most violent new gang members are believed to be Vietnamese or
ethnic Chinese from Vietnam, similar to those blamed for some recent shootings
in New York's Chinatown, a law-enforcement specialist here said.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Concern over a violent struggle among Asian gangs in Boston was
heightened when five men were killed in Chinatown on Saturday. The body of one
of the victims is shown being carried from the club. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1220 words



INTERNATIONAL A2-13

The United States girded for war, perhaps as early as this week, as hopes for a
peaceful settlement in the Persian Gulf crisis faded. The Iraqi Ambassador to
Washington was recalled by Baghdad. Page A1

The Iraqi Parliament voted for war, unanimously vowing to follow President
Hussein into a final "showdown" over the invasion of Kuwait. The meeting was
interrupted by calls for a holy war against the U.S. A1

January 15: A diplomatic deal becomes an imminent threat A10

Iraq tightened its defenses in Kuwait and stepped up aircraft training. The
preparations have persuaded many that Iraq is determined to go to war. American
ground forces continued to pour into Saudi Arabia. A1

American troops' nerve-racking wait may be near an end. As their hopes for
last-minute diplomacy were virtually dashed, many soldiers agreed that a war was
inevitable and began final preparations. A1

American fighter pilots expect a difficult fight in Iraq A11

Kuwait threatens to retaliate against civilian targets in Iraq A13

Eleventh-hour appeals were issued by France and three Arab countries, urging
Iraq to announce its withdrawal. In return, they would ask the Security Council
to promise Iraq it would not be attacked. A12

European Community plans no last-minute peace initiative A12

Demonstrators in Jordan burn American flags, hail Hussein A13

Foreigners flee Israel; airlines suspend flights A13

Americans remain divided over war, though most say they are satisfied that
President Bush has done all he could to prevent it, a new poll shows. Many have
gloomy expectations about what a war would be like. A11

Prayer vigils and antiwar protests were held across the country. In New York
City, demonstrators marched down Broadway and clashed with police officers at
Union Square. More rallies are scheduled today. A15

The Vietnam generation is torn. Where once it was certain about so many things,
it is finding the decision to support or protest war, this time in the Middle
East, more complicated than it was two decades ago. A14

Washington Talk: The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution's legacy A10

El Cajon Journal: For Iraqis in California, a "civil war" A14

Two top P.L.O. leaders were killed by a gunman in Tunis. The leaders were among
the closest and most influential aides of the chairman of the organization,
Yasir Arafat. A bodyguard was also killed. A1

Lithuania brought on the crackdown, President Gorbachev said, blaming leaders of
the republic's separatist Parliament. He did not disavow the attack, but said
that he had found out about it after it happened. A1

The violence in Lithuania continued as the pro-Soviet National Salvation
Committee captured the independence government's last radio outlet and
threatened more bloodshed if the government did not capitulate. A1

News analysis: Has Gorbachev lost control?  A6

In Moscow, glasnost's credibility is a victim of the crackdown A7

Bush is reluctant to respond with stringent measures A7

Warsaw Journal: Democratic Poland is a test for the church A4

Greek Albanians will be allowed to cross the Greek border A5

China executed 1,000 people in 1990, perhaps doubling or tripling the total for
the previous year. Not since 1983, when a power struggle led to 5,000 to 10,000
executions, have so many people been sentenced to death. A2

A growing, diverse India begins national census A3

U.N. group in Hong Kong rebuked for advice to refugees A8

Nicaragua's economy is worsening amid large deficits and continued high military
spending. The inauguration of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro had raised
expectations of a quick economic turnaround. A3

NATIONAL A14-17, A20, B6

The libel suit against Janet Malcolm went before the Supreme Court. Dr. Jeffrey
Masson, a well-known critic of Freudian analysis, charges that she deliberately
misquoted him in an 1983 article in The New Yorker. A16

A political party's right to endorse candidates for offices that a state has
designated as nonpartisan will be decided by the Supreme Court. At issue is a
provision of California's Constitution that bars such activity. A16

Suspect in Evers slaying to be returned to Mississippi A17

Californian faces charges forkeeping AIDS infection secret A20

The priorities of the 102d Congress were laid out by Republican and Democratic
leaders. They include campaigns financing, education, child welfare, energy
conservation, and an overhaul of banking systems. A20

Killing of five in Boston raises fear of Asian gang wars B6

United Church of Christ urges a fight against rising racism B6

After Hammer, Occidental Petroleum shifts direction D1

New frequent-flier deals attract few new passengers D1

REGIONAL B1-5

A plan to close 41 fire companies in New York City has been abandoned by the
Dinkins administration. But officials are going ahead with plans to cut $430
million in spending at the city's schools next year. A1

The taxable value of real estate in New York City fell by 7 percent last year,
city officials estimated. The decline -- the first in a decade -- confirms that
the city's real-estate market has tumbled sharply. B1

Elevated freight line in Manhattan being razed amid protests B3

Family Court has been inundated by families torn apart by homelessness, drugs
and poverty. For one woman trying to get her children back, the path through the
overburdened court is littered with obstacles. B1 The trial of a Westchester
teacher accused of killing her lover's wife began with opening statements. The
prosecution said she was driven by a "consuming desire," but the defense said
the case was a frame-up. B1

Murder trial in the Bronx focuses on battered-wife issue B3

The Gotti case: How prosecutors's feuds hinder inquires B4

Suffolk County is in turmoil. The County Executive, Patrick G. Halpin, has sued
the County Legislature over whose budget will take effect, leaving services and
more than 160 workers hanging in the balance. B1

Gift to Barnard College honors Iphigene Sulzberger B5

Neediest Cases B5

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

Science Times

New surveys of the universe confound scientists C1

Mississippi's march to the sea versus engineers C1

Studies suggest the brain can 'see' what the eye cannot C1

Arts/Entertainment

Woody Allen and Mia Farrow as collaborators C11

Mark Morris's "Nutcracker" C11

Music: Yo-Yo Ma plays Bach C11

Word and Image:"Frontline" on Iraq C11

Fashion Page B7

For summer, cheery colors seem statement enough

Obituaries D19

Sir Robert Jackson, a former major official at U.N.

Roger Tubby, journalist

Sports

Baseball: Strawberry's new dawn with Dodgers B9

Basketball: Knicks lose to Hawks B9

Villanova beats Georgetown B10

Football: Gambles pay off for Giants B9

Hockey: Sixth loss in a row for Devils B10

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A18

The stakes in the gulf

No aid for repressive Moscow

A "guarantee" for graduates

Letters A18

Russell Baker: Some wimp stuff A19

A. M. Rosenthal: The New World Order dies A19

Daniel Patrick Moynihan: Bush should show restraint A19

Bob Dole: Your move, Mr. Hussein A19

Czeslaw Milosz: Moscow's poisoned tomato A19

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

As War Looms: Marches and Vigils, Talk and Fear

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1114 words


For some Americans, those few who know exactly what they think about it, the
prospect of war in the Persian Gulf was a call for action.

All over the country yesterday, there were prayer vigils, discussion panels and
antiwar protests. Those who felt strongly could make their sentiments known.

In San Francisco hundreds of antiwar protesters walked across the Golden Gate
Bridge wearing gas masks and skeleton costumes and carrying placards that read
"Food Not Bombs" and "Talks Not Tanks."

The flashback to the antiwar protests of the Vietnam era was even more vivid in
New York, where about 1,000 demonstrators, many of them high school students,
marched down Broadway and clashed briefly with police officers around Union
Square. Nineteen protesters were arrested, and seven police officers were
slightly hurt.

In Pittsburgh, the Roman Catholic Bishop, Donald W. Wuerl, led 100 people in a
quiet prayer for peace.

In Minnesota, 1,000 demonstrators crowded the steps of the State Capitol in St.
Paul last night chanting: "What do we want? Peace. When do we want it? Now."
Earlier, 1,000 demonstrators in Minneapolis blocked entrances to the old Federal
courthouse, site of a military recruiting office, for three hours, and 18 were
arrested. One protester burned a flag in a trash can.

And in Boston, 500 people packed a basement room at Northeastern University last
night for a protest with a strong racial theme. "We have nothing to fight for,"
said Minister Don Muhammed of the Nation of Islam, speaking of black Americans.
"They don't give a damn about our boys and girls."

Hundreds more rallies, protests and prayer vigils are scheduled for today to
coincide with the Jan. 15 deadline set by the United Nations for Iraqi
withdrawal from Kuwait.

Four hundred Yeshiva University students from New York City formed Operation
Torah Shield to await the deadline in Israel. The students are paying $50 each
for a seat on a charter flight from Kennedy International Airport -- at a
fraction of the cost by commercial airline -- so that they could be in Tel Aviv
by this morning.

Waiting by the TV

There were no organized marches or planned activities to mark private
uncertainty. Those who were not in the mood to march or protest sought their own
ways of dealing with the deadline and their dread.

For many people, there was little but prayer, television and keeping an eye on
the clock.

"I'm going to stay up and wait past the deadline," said Mirella Wong, a student
at St. Francis College in Brooklyn. "It's kind of like New Year's, only that is
for a happy occasion, and this one is for an occasion that could lead to a war
or a sigh of relief."

Many said they would seek solace in company as they followed the late news.

Ms. Wong said that after midnight, she would play Joan Baez records and call
friends on the phone.

Preparations were under way for ecumenical prayer services, discussion
breakfasts, midnight prayer vigils, teach-ins in colleges and special attention
to impressionable children: classrooms across the nation planned moments of
silence and group discussions.

Jill Otis, principal of the Audubon Montessori School in New Orleans, planned a
presentation this morning over the public address system "allowing students to
express their feelings to each other" about the deadline.

Ms. Otis said she planned to stay home tonight as the midnight deadline
approached. "I'll probably be glued to the TV set," she said. "I have the same
feeling I had as a teen-ager when the Russians were sailing down to Cuba. I
remember being terrified that the world was going to come to an end."

Observances for Strangers

In restaurants, bars and other public places where strangers come together,
there was division over how to deal with the midnight deadline.

At Napoleon House, a bar in the French Quarter of New Orleans, the bartender,
Ralph Groskoph, predicted "business as usual."

But Roy Kinsley, general manager of Chelsea Billiards in New York City, said he
felt he could not let the deadline pass unnoticed. "It's a historic evening," he
said. Two large-screen televisions in his pool hall will be tuned to the news at
midnight.

"I think people are going to have half an eye on the TV," he said. "But in a
pool hall, you know what people are really interested in: their money."

Gil Weist, owner of Michael's Pub, a jazz club on East 55th Street, planned to
keep the music going and the war at bay. "I hate to watch the clock running on
anything except the New Year," he said. "I don't want to count down to war. This
is a place for entertainment and festivity, not the reality of life."

John Levy, a co-owner of Mickey Mantle's Restaurant Sports Bar, said he felt
compelled to tune his nine large-screen sets to news of the war shortly before
midnight. "This is the first time in my life I've heard of an actual deadline
for war," he said. "It's fascinating, like football or basketball. The
anticipation of what could happen in the last seconds -- the flurry of
last-chance diplomatic activity."

Some Will Do Nothing

Some people said they would tie yellow ribbons on trees or put American flags in
front of their houses after midnight. Then there were those who said they
planned to do nothing at all.

Ilaisa Barbar, who turns 32 today, canceled plans to hire a baby sitter and have
a birthday dinner at a restaurant, as she usually does.

"Celebrate? Are you kidding?" asked Ms. Barbar, an insurance company
receptionist in San Francisco. "I'll probably cry."

Her husband, she added, is "too upset about this" to make a fuss over her
birthday.

James E. Cain, a 48-year-old news dealer outside a subway station in Boston,
said he did not want to wait up for the news. "I'm not interested either way,"
he said. "I've been homeless for so darn long that I've lost faith in a lot of
things."

Even a few with a personal stake said they didn't have the stomach to pay close
attention.

Gen R. Moffatt, a 20-year-old insurance rate technician in Boston whose
stepfather is in the Navy in the gulf region, said she had made no plans for
tonight and had misgivings even about watching the late news. "I don't know,"
she said. "It makes me sad because my stepfather's over there. I just ignore
it."

Though hundreds of churches and synagogues plann special services today, the
Rev. Suzanne Meyer, pastor of the First Unitarian Church in New Orleans, said
she would hold a prayer vigil Sunday.

"I don't think there's any magic in the number Jan. 15," she said. "If shots are
fired, then do we say, 'The peace effort's failed; let's pack it up'? We
shouldn't pin our hopes or our fears on a single day."

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

American TV News Networks Prepare for War

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1202 words


As American troops get ready for a possible Mideast war, their endgame
preparations are being paralleled by the nation's television networks, who say
they think getting the story on air might prove as daunting as reporting it.

The four major news networks have spent the weekend putting the finishing
touches on their own war plans, positioning their last complements of
correspondents and crews, including a few who are hunkered down in Baghdad,
Iraq. Back home, sets, taped background stories and an array of military and
political commentators and analysts await their own deployment.

The big question remains how much of the conflict will be beamed into American
living rooms. Network news executives said in recent interviews that they stood
ready to pre-empt regular programming with non-stop coverage, but acknowledged
that they expected scant videotape of an American offensive on Iraqi strongholds
if the conflict begins with an air assault.

Little Chance of Live Action

Despite advances in video technology, like compact cameras and transportable
satellite earth stations, viewers probably will not be able to watch live scenes
of front-line action. Unlike Vietnam, where journalists ventured freely within
war zones, combat reporting from Saudi Arabia will be done only by pools who
will be escorted by the military and whose reports will be screened for security
breaches.

"In effect, the story will be controlled by the military," said Joseph
Peyronnin, a vice president of CBS News, which last week joined the other
networks in lodging a complaint against the Pentagon's rules. "We will be under
constraints and under great difficulty."

The brinksmanship of President Bush and President Saddam Hussein of Iraq
complicated planning, nonetheless, with no one certain if war would actually
break out. "It makes your decision making open ended and without real
conclusions until you see where the story is going,' said Bob Murphy, vice
president for news coverage at ABC .

In most cases, equipment had been in storage since autumn, and cost-conscious
executives waited to the last minute before sending staff members into the
region.

The People in Place

Representatives of CBS, NBC and ABC said that by last weekend they had anywhere
from 50 to 80 reporters, producers and technical people in Saudi Arabia and
neighboring countries. Ed Turner, CNN 's executive vice president for news
gathering, said his 24-hour news network had 150 staff members in place.

The networks have plans to broadcast around the clock but for how long depends
on the intensity and length of the conflict. That question is already settled at
CNN, where Mr. Turner said the network planned "wall-to-wall coverage for the
duration." Even if there was no conflict, Mr. Turner said his plans would not be
wasted. "There's plenty to talk about," he said, "and that's going to take
several weeks."

While combat scenes would be hard to come by in the initial stages, broadcast
executives said there were plenty of other avenues they would pursue.

For instance all the networks have signed on retired high-ranking military
officers as consultants.

Battlefield Home Video

"The guys fighting it are only a part of it," said David Miller, NBC's director
of foreign news. "It's a war, America wants us to tell them, pictures or not,"
added John Terenzio, NBC's executive producer of news specials.

Although network executives said they had not given compact video cameras to any
soldiers, several admitted they might obtain tape from soldiers who owned
home-video cameras.

"If we get home video we are not going to turn it down without looking at it,"
said Mr. Murphy of ABC. "But it's not an area we are actively looking to
diversify in."

The Pentagon's press rules and the military's spotty record on giving news crews
access to action in Panama have led news executives to fear they will not be
able to fully report on the conflict. They said they would abide by the
restrictions, but also vowed to do independent reporting away from the front
lines and without an escort.

Vietnam's Vivid Images

The press rules seem most onerous to journalists like CBS's Bob Simon, a
correspondent who is among the few in Saudi Arabia who also covered the Vietnam
War. He said that if war broke out, the American people would see few images
like that of a naked child running down a road, her flesh seared by napalm, or
that of a soldier casually flicking his cigarette lighter alongside a thatched
hut.

"With this system you won't get those pictures," he said in a recent telephone
interview. "There's no way the horror of war will escape us, but it will be
sanitized considerably."

Mr. Simon, who has been joined in Saudi Arabia by the crew who worked with him
in Vietnam, said he had encountered officers who still blamed the media for
losing that war. Public-affairs officers in the field, who can wield
considerable power on the spot, have already lectured him on how to cover events
and have delayed his transmissions back to New York as they reviewed them.

"They have decided that everything went wrong in Vietnam, so whatever we did in
Vietnam, we'll do the opposite here," he said.

Phone Calls by Satellite

The television reporter's job can be made easier by the new technology, which
also includes the so-called satellite phones, portable units that beam signals
to a satellite transponder, bypassing telephone operators. They are a popular
item among the networks: CNN has purchased six of them at about $50,000 each,
said Mr. Turner. But executives at the networks declined to say if they would
use the phones in Saudi Arabia, since Government officials there have not
authorized their use.

"The technology to get the story back is so easy, I don't understand how
censorship would work," said Fred W. Friendly, a former president of CBS News
and a professor of journalism at Columbia University. "I'm not sure that by
correspondent's honor that you can enforce it. If it is possible to get a signal
back, somebody is going to."

One of the odder problems facing network executives is what kind of programming
they will use once coverage goes from non-stop to intermittent bulletins. Robert
A. Iger, the president of ABC Entertainment, said that in the initial stages of
war, the network would very likely not broadcast any comedies.

"What do you put in the middle of two hours of coverage on the bombing of
Baghdad?" he asked. "Can you go to a 'Roseanne' show after that?" He said
whatever they decided to show, it would be "sensitively chosen."

Guessing About Advertisers

He said that he expected advertisers to abide by the network's decisions, and
that those who had purchased air time on entertainment shows would be able to
get refunds or adjusted rates.

Despite those potential losses and the costs of coverage -- which was estimated
at half a million dollars daily, even without war, by Michael G. Gartner, the
president of NBC News -- network executives said they had not been reined in by
the network money men.

"Will they broadcast gavel-to-gavel football games if war came?" Mr. Friendly
asked. "When they say it's not the money, it's the money."

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
PBS's 'Frontline' Traces the Path To the Brink of War

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 794 words


Tonight, three hours before the midnight deadline for the possible use of force
in the Persian Gulf, "Frontline" offers a cogent review of the planning or
misplanning in Washington that has sent 400,000 American troops to Saudi Arabia.
Relying mainly on interviews with White House and State Department reporters
from The New York Times, The Washington Post, The Los Angeles Times and
Newsweek, the hourlong report covers the Administration's treatment of Saddam
Hussein in the weeks leading up to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August; the
announced reliance on sanctions in September and October; the doubling of
American forces that began after Election Day, and the threat of attack. "To the
Brink of War" is being carried at 9 P.M. by Channels 13 and 49.


Not surprisingly for "Frontline," the Bush Administration does not receive high
marks for foresight or patience. The only official interviewed in the
uncompleted program that was available for preview is Senator Sam Nunn, the
Georgia Democrat who is the chairman of the Armed Services Committee and a
leader of those in Congress who have been urging the White House to give
sanctions more of a chance. Hodding Carter, tonight's host, promises that the
final version will cover the Congressional debate that ended on Saturday with
majority support for the President's policy.

The debate was not made for television. Under Senate rules, for example, the
camera may be pointed only toward the front of the chamber, lest it reveal empty
seats or dozing Senators. So when demonstrators up in the gallery interrupted
Senator Nunn's talk on Friday, you could hear the cry "No blood for oil!" but
could not see what was going on. And despite some well-formulated statements,
flights of language were not the order of those days; many of the legislators
repeated in almost the same worn phrases the arguments of those who had preceded
them.


Nevertheless, for Americans who watched some of the debate on a PBS station or
on C-Span, it must have seemed remarkable: the nation's representatives, often
criticized for their affinity for private deals and their reluctance to take
public stands on hard issues, were standing up on the hardest issue of all.

In particular, for anyone who had been tuned into the Senate Ethics Committee
hearings, that dispiriting exposure of the way a rich operator summoned up
Senatorial courtesies behind the scenes, the sight of senators and congressmen
addressing the nation's business out in the open was especially attractive, and
instructive. Could the Donald W. Riegle Jr., Democrat from Michigan, who spoke
out feelingly on the men and women who would die in war, be the same Senator
Riegle who only a few days earlier in testimony to the Ethics Committee gave a
display to C-Span viewers of weak memory and circumlocution? It was evidence
that politicians have many sides.

Tonight's program emphasizes the hawkish side of George Bush and questions his
judgment. Until the August invasion, one reporter observes, Saddam Hussein was
"our thug and our bully." Another says that Mr. Bush did not understand the
egomaniacal ambitions of the Iraqi ruler, and that Washington ignored signals of
his intentions. When the Administration finally did react with the biggest
deployment of troops since Vietnam, a reporter comments, none of his advisers
stood up to the President to say: "What are we getting into? Is Kuwait worth
it?" Senator Nunn says he was not told of the doubling of American forces until
one hour before it was announced.


The program indulges in some simplistic psychology that traces Mr. Bush's
attitudes toward war to his experiences in World War II. It is on surer ground
when it goes back to America's drawn-out defeat in Vietnam to explain why
military men like Gen. Colin Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
are committed to what has come to be known as "the doctrine of overwhelming
force."

The reporters also note how domestic politics have shaped the President's
shifting explanations of shifting policy. At one moment, in his efforts to rouse
support in Congress and the country, he tried to exploit sympathy for the
hostages, at another, fears of an Iraqi nuclear weapon. For all his efforts, as
the Congressional debate showed, the nation remains divided and somewhat
confused, and "To the Brink of War" provides ammunition for the opposition.

Senator Riegle warned that if war starts there will be more protests like those
in the Senate gallery; he could have added that television cameras will be
turned in their direction.

To the Brink of War

A "Frontline" special report; produced by Michael Kirk; senior producer, Michael
Sullivan; Hodding Carter, correspondent. At 9 tonight on Channels 13 and 49.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

OBSERVER;
Some Wimp Stuff

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 754 words


Here are some columns I'd write if the deadline weren't already here:

BLITZKRIEG -- If it comes to war, says President Bush, American triumph will be
swift. None of that Vietnam dilly-dallying, he says, fearing no doubt that
Americans will abandon him fast unless he delivers instant triumph. American
insistence on instant everything is worrisome, but the President offers it one
more time. After lightning war cometh the new world order. Never again will big,
powerful countries invade small, weak countries. The Soviet Union will have to
get out of Lithuania, the United States out of Panama.


WIMP FACTOR -- Fear of wimp ishness, which turns grown men into blustering
schoolboys, is not peculiar to the United States. Why does Saddam Hussein, for
instance, constantly reply like Attila the Iraqi when President Bush talks like
Attila the Yale Man? Because he fears losing face. What is lost face but
wimphood? I suspect Attila never intended to behave like Attila the Hun, but
decided there was no alternative after somebody called him Attila the Wimp.

PATIENCE, HAH! -- Politicians get into pickles because of lessons they've
learned. They make war in Vietnam because they've learned the lesson of Munich.
(Can't appease Hitlers.) They go for instant victory in Iraq because they've
learned the lesson of Vietnam. (Dawdle and you lose the home front.) It's
obvious President Bush has learned the lesson of Jimmy Carter, who ruined his
Presidency by using patience to free the kidnapped Embassy Americans from the
Iranians. Patience took a year and a half at a time Americans were in love with
"Rambo" movies. Those urging President Bush to get Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait
by patiently applying sanctions are shouting down a rain barrel. The next
election is only 20 months away. President Bush has learned the lesson of Jimmy
Carter.

SAMPLER SAMPLES -- Here are sensible thoughts worth framing over White House
fireplace mantles:

"The reluctant obedience of distant provinces generally costs more than it is
worth." -- Thomas Babington Macaulay, historian.

"To be engaged in opposing wrong affords but a slender guarantee of being
right." -- William Ewart Gladstone, Prime Minister of Great Britain.

"A decent provision for the poor is the true test of a civilization." -- Dr.
Samuel Johnson, lexicographer and commercial writer.

TUNNEL VISION -- Lack of American interest in providing decently for the poor is
just one of many lacks. There's a lack of government money. It all seems
earmarked to pay for the expeditionary force in Araby and to shelter victims of
the thieves, speculators and insouciant bankers who gave us the savings and loan
catastrophe and the wild party in real estate. There's a lack of interest in the
rising power of the K.G.B., Red Army and old Communist apparatchiks in Moscow.
This reflects television's tendency to set the public agenda by concentrating
news coverage on the White House as melodrama and soap opera. ("One Man's
Family, and Their Little Dog Millie.") When the President is totally absorbed
with a Saddam Hussein, the rest of the world's problems must do without us.

NORIEGA -- President Bush seems as irritated by Saddam Hussein as he was by
Manuel Noriega. And look what happened to Noriega: eternal jail without trial in
Miami. It's like being condemned to the Chateau d'If, except there are Federal
wiretappers in the next dungeon.  First, however, he was blasted out of
religious sanctuary by heavy rock 'n' roll. Why do Presidents take such intense
dislike to certain tinpots while finding others (like Hafez al-Assad of Syria
this week) perfectly agreeable? Remember the Sandinista President of Nicaragua
who drove Ronald Reagan up the wall? George Bush speaking of Saddam Hussein
sounds prepared to be merciless with acid rock and heavy metal.

TRIALS OF FEMINISM -- Women have it tough. Having struggled to win the right to
go off to wars with men, they reach Saudi Arabia as their first big-time war
zone, which insists that woman's place is in hiding. In jail if they're caught
driving a car.

VENGEANCE ETERNAL -- The American and Middle Eastern worlds have different kinds
of memory. Americans, too lazy perhaps to nurse grudges, are constantly letting
bygones be bygones. In the Middle East there are no bygones, only ancient
offenses to be avenged. The latest retaliatory vengeance in blood is the routine
news of relationships between Arabs and Israelis. A good place for Americans to
avoid, you'd think. So in we plunge.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

The Vietnam Generation Surrenders Its Certainty

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1767 words


Where once they were certain about so many things, people of the Vietnam
generation, approaching middle age, have discovered that life is more ambiguous,
a palette of many shades of gray.

Confronting the possibility of war in the Persian Gulf, they find these days
that their thoughts are hedged and qualified. Where once they easily said "Yes"
or "No," now they lean toward "Perhaps" and "Maybe."

This is the experience that Cheryl Gore Follette is having as she tries to make
up her mind about the Middle East crisis. Now a lawyer in Traverse City, Mich.,
she remembers cutting high school classes to sing protest songs in "a sort of
gang therapy that made us feel better." She remembers going home at night and
"watching the bodies brought in on TV while my family ate dinner."

She wonders if she will soon hear similar protest songs and watch similar
television footage, and how she will feel. "What is most stressing about this
situation," she said, "is that when I was a teen-ager, war seemed such a simple
issue. War was bad, so I was against it. Now that I'm older, the world is a more
complicated place."

Through a Shared Prism

People in the Vietnam generation, those who fought, those who protested and
those who came of age on the sidelines, view events in the Persian Gulf through
a shared prism.

They are finding that the decision to support or protest war is more complicated
than it was two decades ago. But in more than three dozen interviews around the
nation with men and women who became adults while the war raged in Vietnam, it
was clear that they are united in their determination, if fighting starts, not
to again confuse the war and its warriors.

Also common is a conviction that war should come only if there are clear and
convincing justifications and should be waged with all America's might rather
than with the constraints that crippled the military in Vietnam.

"This generation shares an extraordinary honesty about the issue of going to
war," said Senator John F. Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat who was a gunboat
commander on the Mekong River and helped organize Vietnam Veterans Against the
War. "We have a deep-rooted commitment that if we go to war it be for real
reasons and then that we try to get it over with as supportively and as quickly
as possible."

When to Start Shooting

Like the rest of the nation, Americans who grew up in the Vietnam era are
divided over the use of force if Iraq does not withdraw by today, according to
the most recent New York Times/ CBS News Poll, conducted Friday through Sunday.

Fifty-three percent of those 35 to 45 years old favored force after the Jan. 15
deadline, and 41 percent said the United States should give sanctions more time
to work. The poll included 387 men and women and had a margin of sampling error
of plus or minus 5 percentage points.

In separate interviews, veterans were just as likely to urge restraint as
onetime war protesters.

Michael Norman is a former Marine Corps officer who wrote a book about the
members of his platoon, "These Good Men," published last year by Crown. He spoke
for the warriors-turned-pacifists when he said he would feel "betrayed by George
Bush" if this nation went to war again after the bloodshed of Vietnam.

Conversely, Sam Brown, the volunteer coordinator for Eugene McCarthy's 1968
Presidential campaign and the organizer of the 1969 Vietnam moratorium, said
force may be necessary to restore stability in the Middle East and keep nuclear
weapons from the hands of Saddam Hussein.

Different Kinds of Wars

"It's a real odd thing for an old anti-war person to be thinking, but there are
wars and there are wars," said Mr. Brown, a real estate developer in Berkeley,
Calif. "Every time I hear a parallel to Vietnam, I blanch. I see the movement
people gearing up, the same familiar faces, and I want to say, 'Hold on, hold
on.' It's a wholly different situation that needs to be analyzed on its own
merits."

But most did not fall so neatly into one camp or the other.

"I've probably never been more confused," said Terry Bean, who owns a real
estate investment concern in Portland, Ore. On the one hand, Mr. Bean said,
Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait "cannot be tolerated." On the other hand, he
said, "if Kuwait's chief crop was artichokes, we'd never have noticed."

Mr. Bean did not serve in Vietnam because of a student deferment and later a
high draft-lottery number. He said he did his "antiwar stuff" at the University
of Oregon at Eugene.

Now, he intends to carry no placards. "I'm not going to be one of the protesters
this time," he said, "because my emotions are too mixed."

Legacy of Sensitivity

For Bill Marsh, a real estate broker in Montclair, N.J., and a Vietnam veteran,
the issue is even more tangled. Mr. Marsh said he opposed military action in the
gulf as another "effort in futility." But the other night he told his wife,
"I'll raise my hand and go" if war breaks out.

The primary legacy of the last war seems to be a sensitivity to the troops in
the gulf and a concern that any protest at home could leave them feeling
scorned, as so many Vietnam-era veterans did. Virtually all the veterans
interviewed recalled, as Senator Kerry put it, "the miserable memory of the way
people confused the warrior and the war."

And virtually all the Vietnam protesters spoke with a tone of contrition about
the unintended wounds they inflicted on the young men who served. "The movement
was slow to appreciate the need to be very positive and outspoken in
demonstration of fellow-feeling with the soldiers," said Todd Gitlin, a former
president of Students for a Democratic Society and now a professor of sociology
at the University of California at Berkeley.

Trying 'to Do It Right'

Mr. Gitlin, who has moved from ambivalence to active opposition to war in the
gulf, said people of his ilk "are trying very hard to do it right this time" and
not "be dismissive of the troops."

Most of those interviewed seemed persuaded that this lesson of Vietnam has been
well learned. "That's been pretty drummed into the consciousness of the public,"
said Representative David E. Bonior, a Michigan Democrat, who served in the Air
Force in California during the Vietnam War. "We won't make that mistake again."

But some are less certain. "The tide may change," said Sandra Lowe, a lawyer in
New York City who was active in the antiwar movement. Ms. Lowe said the
divisiveness of the earlier era was the fault of politicians and commentators
who "tried to differentiate between the people who served their country and the
crazy hippie leftists."

She continued, "If we begin to see big demonstrations around this war, we'll
begin to see that rhetoric escalate again."

Thomas Varney, a furniture salesman in Columbus, Ohio, and a Vietnam veteran,
shared her worry that the troops would not remain as lionized as they are now.
"If this war turns sour, I have no doubt a lot of people will turn on them," Mr.
Varney said.

Wounds on Home Front?

Even if protesters do not vent their anger at the troops, there are some who
argue that any demonstrations will cause psychic wounds.

"The problem with public protests is that the guys in the field will take them
all wrong, no matter what you do," said T. J. Amick, a cabinetmaker in Houston
and a Vietnam veteran. "The best protests, instead of marching, are letters to
Congressmen that say, 'If you continue, you will be voted out of office.' "

Mental health professionals are struggling with the issue of protest and its
effect on soldiers.

"The antiwar movement had a terrible negative impact on the people who served,
and some people are still paying a high price for that," said Joan Furey, a
nurse in Vietnam and now the associate director of the National Center for Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder at the Veterans' Affairs Medical Center in Menlo Park,
Calif.

"The question I keep asking myself," she continued, "and I don't have an answer,
is whether there is any kind of protest that wouldn't hurt them."

Another sentiment among the Vietnam generation is an abiding wariness of
government, which grew more intense after Watergate and the Iran-contra scandal.
This widespread cynicism, these men and women said, has led to more aggressive
scrutiny of Bush Administration policy.

Again, Kovic Protests

"These are times of great questioning," said Ron Kovic, the author of "Born on
the Fourth of July," who served two tours as a marine and came home a paraplegic
to became a leader in the antiwar movement two decades ago. "More and more
Americans are seriously challenging American foreign policy." Mr. Kovic is in
the forefront of protests now.

Steven Weld, an insurance executive in Kansas City, Mo., said he hopes the
"Government is telling us enough to make informed opinions," but he said he is
not sure. "There have been too many events that have tainted our attitude," he
said. "People want to believe in their Government but their attitude now is,
'We're from Missouri -- show us.' "

Twenty members of Congress who served in the military in Southeast Asia in the
Vietnam era cast votes on whether to authorize use of force in the gulf. The 14
who voted in favor were Senators Hank Brown of Colorado, Larry Pressler of South
Dakota, John McCain of Arizona and Robert Smith of New Hampshire, all
Republicans; Charles Robb of Virginia and Albert Gore of Tennessee, both
Democrats; Representatives Duncan Hunter of California, David O'B. Martin of New
York, John J. Rhodes of Arizona, Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, Denny Smith of
Oregon, Randy (Duke) Cunningham of California, all Republicans; and John M.
Murtha of Pennsylvania and Thomas E. Carper of Delaware, both Democrats.

The six who voted against were Senators Tom Harkin of Iowa, Bob Kerrey of
Nebraska and Kerry of Massachusetts and Representatives Glenn Poshard of
Illinois, David E. Skaggs of Colorado and Pete Peterson of Florida, all
Democrats.

Still another legacy of Vietnam is the conviction that a war must be fought
swiftly and surely. "If we go in, we have to win," said Steven Schmidt of Salt
Lake City, the owner of several camera and bicycle stores, who served in the Air
Force in Vietnam. "We have to reduce the nation to ashes, because as we saw in
Vietnam, dragging it out just leads to more pain."

That view is not limited to those who saw combat. "I still don't feel we've been
given an adequate explanation of why we're there," said Ms. Follette, the
Michigan lawyer. But if war comes, she said, "let's go all out and do it."

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 16, 1991, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about the Vietnam generation's attitudes toward the Persian
Gulf conflict miscalculated the number of Congressmen who served in the military
in Southeast Asia in the Vietnam era and cast votes this month on the use of
force in the gulf. That group numbered 19; 13 of them voted to authorize the use
of force. Denny Smith of Oregon, defeated in the November election, should not
have been included.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Cheryl Gore Follette: Traverse City, Mich., "War seemed such a
simple issue. War was bad, so I was against it. Now that I'm older, the world is
a more complicated place." (John Robert Williams for The New York Times); Sam
Brown: Berkeley, Calif., "Every time I hear a parallel to Vietnam, I blanch.
It's a wholly different situation that needs to be analyzed on its own merits."
(Terrence McCarthy for The New York Times); Sandra Lowe: New York City,
Recalling divisions between troops and protesters of the Vietnam War era, she
said, "If we begin to see big demonstrations around this war, we'll begin to see
that rhetoric escalate again." (Ed Quinn for The New York Times); Terry Bean:
Portland, Ore., He says he plans no protests this time: "My emotions are too
mixed." (Don Ryan for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: Changes at Home;
Amid the Grief and Worry, Life Will Go On as Before

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 857 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 15


Beyond casualty lists and the concern and disquietude that war inevitably
brings, what would an outbreak of fighting in the Persian Gulf mean for the
day-to-day routine of Americans on the home front?

While Government and business officials do not minimize the impact of war on the
nation's psyche, they say that unless fighting in the gulf drags on for several
months, most Americans will encounter little or no disruption.

During the first hours of conflict, the officials say, there may be a brief
surge in demand for petroleum by concerned drivers and homeowners, some
telephone lines may be jammed beyond capacity by panicky callers, unease could
disrupt financial markets and delays could be long as airports step up
anti-terrorist efforts.

But barring a war that drags on for months, which many military experts consider
unlikely, there is little expectation that the home front will experience the
kind of massive disruptions that occurred during World War II, or for that
matter the considerably lesser disruptions of the Korean and Vietnam Wars.

Military Draft and Rationing

"Things have gone very smoothly so far and we expect them to continue that way
if all goes as planned," said Larry Wilson, a spokesman for the Defense
Logistics Agency, the supply procurement arm of the Defense Department and a
major player in the gulf buildup.

Government officials say they do not foresee a gulf conflict that would require
resumption of the draft to replace fallen troops or to expand the armed forces,
now made up entirely of volunteers. They also say no consideration is being
given to rationing or price controls because war stockpiles are plentiful and
there is enough flexibility in the country's industrial base to meet
replenishment demands.

Since World War I, rationing and price controls have been major factors on the
home front only in World War II. There were some economic restrictions during
the Korean and Vietnam wars, but they had far less impact on the home front,
especially during the Vietnam era, when the military buildup occurred gradually
over a long period.

The military buildup in the gulf is the most rapid dispatch of a massive armed
force this country, or any other country, has ever undertaken.

"And it's been done with almost no disruption anywhere on the civilian front,"
said Mr. Wilson. "We had a lot of stuff stockpiled that requires a long time to
acquire from manufacturers and the country's economy has easily absorbed the
demands we have otherwise been forced to make upon it. We don't foresee any
shortages down the road unless something happens we haven't anticipated."

Should military shortages begin to occur, the Defense Department has the
authority, under a Presidential order, to demand that manufacturers and other
businesses meet military needs first and forgo filling contracts in the civilian
sector. That power has not been exercised thus far in the Gulf crisis.

As for manpower, Federal officials say they could resume the draft, which ended
in 1973, on a few days' notice because all men 18 years old and older are
required by law to be registered with the Selective Service. But they say they
expect no such notice, because they do not foresee losses of a magnitude that
would create a need for involuntary inductions.

"We haven't even gotten an exploratory phone call from anybody at the Pentagon,"
said Lew Brodsky, an assistant director of the Selective Service. "More to the
point, we haven't heard from anybody in Congress, and that's where approval
would have to come from to resume any callups."

At the White House, officials say no thought has been given to imposing
rationing or price controls.

Seeing No Need for Concern

"Nobody around here thinks there is any need to think about such things at this
point," said one economic specialist in the Bush Administration. "The only
possible shortage might be oil, mainly if people panic and start stockpiling,
and, anyway, if a real crunch comes we can always fall back on the strategic
reserve we've stored away. Otherwise there's plenty of everything and enough
slack in the economy to quickly replace whatever we use up. If you don't have
shortages, you don't have rationing or price controls."

When the Pentagon decided to speed the flow of food to troops in the gulf by
purchasing some standard brand supermarket items, among them microwaveable
meals, manufacturers responded immediately by by stepping up production,
averting shortages among civilians.

"We just put on an extra shift of people to get the job done," said Allan
Krejci, an official for the Hormel Company, a major food processor. "If they
want more, we'll provide it. There's plenty of production capacity."

Similarly, the nation's major airlines have been able to supply the Pentagon
with all the wide-body planes it needs to ferry troops to the gulf. Officials
say a few domestic flights have been canceled or delayed as a result, but they
insist that enough planes have been available, and will be available in the
future, to answer passenger demands, not only on the home front but also on the
war front.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

MARKET PLACE;
Initial Days of a War May Not Hurt Stocks

BYLINE: By FLOYD NORRIS

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words


The initiation of wars has caused some of the most dramatic plunges in stock
market history. Unexpected events often shock markets, and wars have been among
the most surprising.

But a Middle East war, if it does occur soon, could provoke little reaction
initially, simply because it is so widely expected. However, if the war goes
badly, as happened in the early months of World War II, initial complacency
could be replaced by panic.

While many wars have begun with quick selloffs in stocks, the pattern has not
been uniform. For example, recent American invasions, of Grenada in 1983 and of
Panama in 1989, both ended quickly and had little market impact. There was some
surprise at the beginnings of the invasions, especially in Grenada, but neither
conflict seemed likely to be important in the long run.

But if it is the long-term impact of a war that is most important to investors,
figuring out what that will be can be very difficult. At the beginning of both
World War I and the 1973 Middle East conflict, investors badly misread the
market implications.

"When there is a reaction in the stock market, it is often wrong," Laszlo
Birinyi, a market analyst at Birinyi Associates, said after looking at past
market reactions to invasions. "It proves again what Mr. Keynes said, that there
is nothing more difficult than a rational investment policy in an irrational
world."

A classic case of investor confusion was seen at the start of World War I in
1914. After the Dow Jones industrial average fell 9.67 percent in two trading
days following the first declaration of war on July 28, the New York Stock
Exchange was closed from Aug. 1 until Dec. 12. But the initial part of the war
proved a boon to American business, and prices soared in 1915.

Prices plunged in 1917, however, after Germany began attacking American
shipping, presaging American involvement in the war. The actual American
declaration of war on April 6, 1917 was anticipated and had only a brief effect
on the market.

By the time World War II began with Germany's invasion of Poland on Sept. 1,
1939, American investors had sniffed profits, and within a week, the Dow was up
11.63 percent. By the next spring, however, the Dow fell 15.5 percent in a week
as German troops swept through France. Not until the stock market crash in 1987
were investors to suffer a larger percentage drop in one week.

There was another selloff after Japan bombed Pearl Harbor, when the Dow lost
5.03 percent in the week following the attack on Dec. 7, 1941.

The Korean War also served as a shock to investors, and Dow stocks lost 4.65
percent of their value in the week following the news of the invasion of South
Korea by North Korea on June 25, 1950. But the effect was short-lived, and by
September the Dow had recovered all its losses.

In Mideast confrontations, the market reactions have moved every way. There was
little reaction to the Suez crisis in 1956, when France and Britain tried to
keep Egypt from controlling the Suez Canal. After the start of the Arab-Israeli
war on June 5, 1967, the Dow dropped 1.81 percent on the first day of trading.
But almost all of that loss was made up the next day, and the war proved to be a
non-event for the stock market in the long term.

With that history in mind, investors reacted with equanimity to the next
Arab-Israeli war, which began on Oct. 6, 1973. The Dow actually rose the next
session. In that case, however, the confidence was misplaced: The war led to the
Arab oil embargo, to sharply higher oil prices, and to a severe recession that
sent stock prices plunging. Dow stocks lost 39.81 percent of their value in the
year after the conflict began.

It was that experience that colored the market's reaction to Iraq's invasion of
Kuwait, and the rise in oil prices that followed it. The Dow is down 14.1
percent since the invasion on Aug. 2, 1990, with a 5.3 percent drop so far this
month, as the United Nations deadline of Jan. 15 for President Saddam Hussein of
Iraq to order a withdrawal from Kuwait approached. Much of the recent decline
came on extraordinarily low volume, as investors reacted by taking positions and
then waiting

"There is a fair amount of defensive posturing among investors, assuming the
worst," Robert Farrell, Merrill Lynch's chief market analyst, said yesterday.
"It seems to me that if a shooting war starts, the market could rally, not
because it is good news, but because it is an uncertainty resolved. If there is
the unexpected, where Saddam Hussein agrees to pull out, then I think you also
get a rally, and maybe a bigger one."

But while a war may have been anticipated and discounted by investors, it is
likely that most investors expect any war to be short and end in a decisive
American victory. Signs of a prolonged war, or word of Iraqi battlefield
victories, could send prices reeling.


The Vietnam War was probably more important than the Korean War in terms of
long-term impact on the nation and on the stock market. President Lyndon B.
Johnson's unwillingness to pay for the war by cutting social programs helped set
off inflation and bring on the 1970 recession.

But Vietnam was a war that had little in the way of immediate market impact, as
it grew without any obvious beginning. Neither the Tonkin Gulf incident on Aug.
2, 1964, in which North Vietnam was said to have attacked American ships, nor
the Tet offensive the began on Jan. 30, 1968, in which Communist troops attacked
Saigon, had much impact on the market, although each event dominated the news at
the time.

The long-term impact of this war, if it comes, will be similarly hard to
evaluate. Already, it is exacerbating a budget deficit that was severe, and it
could lead to a significant change in America's role in the world. But it is
unlikely that the start of the war will lead to sharp changes in investor
perceptions.


"Back last fall, when war was a possibility but not deemed imminent, we hazarded
the guess that if war broke out in the gulf, there would be an immediate
200-point drop on the Dow," said William LeFevre, a market strategist at Advest
Inc. "It is now our view that 1991's Dow decline has discounted much of that
supposed 200-point shock to stocks, should war develop."

What may not have been discounted, of course, is how the war will develop, or
what effect it will have on the recession that has already begun. As investors
draw conclusions in these areas, a war could have a major effect on the stock
market.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: 'War and the Market: A History' shows percentage change in the
Dow Jones industrial average during wars.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: News Analysis;
Stake for Bush: Presidency and Politics

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 980 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Wednesday, Jan. 16


The decision President Bush is confronting could change the face of domestic
politics, the map of the Middle East, the realities of big-power relationships
and the world economy for years or decades to come.

Just as the New Deal and World War II solidified the Democrats' position as the
stronger party in the United States for nearly a quarter-century, reshaped the
continent of Europe and produced the Western alliance that has formed the
framework of American foreign policy for half a century, so a war in the Persian
Gulf would have many repercussions that can be foreseen and many that cannot.

Marine skirmishes have been commonplace in American history, forgotten
relatively quickly. But the nine American wars, from the Revolution through the
War of 1812 and the Mexican War to the Civil War, from the Spanish-American War
through two World Wars to Korea and Vietnam, have been great events that marked
the generations that fought them for their rest of their lives. So would a 10th,
toward which the nation has moved for five months.

Nothing a President does so affects his reputation as his conduct of war. Few
Presidents have had to face the decision to put the United States through "the
fiery trial' of warfare; the phrase is that of Abraham Lincoln, one of those who
did so.

By December 1941, Franklin D. Roosevelt convinced his countrymen that he had
acted wisely, and enhanced his reputation. Americans concluded that Woodrow
Wilson had taken up arms on behalf of woolly minded ideals and turned against
him. They soured on Harry S. Truman and the Korean War, and decided that Lyndon
B. Johnson had erred so badly that they drove him from seeking re-election in
1968.

The decision of Mr. Bush, who was a naval pilot in World War II, is likely to
make or break his Presidency as well.

"At times of crisis, the Commander in Chief represents the best or the worst in
us," said Edmund Morris, biographer of Theodore Roosevelt and biographer-to-be
of Ronald Reagan. "If the war goes badly, so does the President. On the other
hand, the Presidents we consider the greatest -- Washington, Lincoln, F.D.R. --
were all warrior Presidents."

"If the war is over in two or three weeks, he will be made, his re-election
insured," said Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., historian and biographer of Franklin
D. Roosevelt. "If the fighting lasts five or six months, casualties are high,
terrorists roam the world, he's finished, in my view."

In a sense, the President had decided before the deadline. The process started
when he pledged that the invasion of Kuwait "will not stand" soon after it took
place. That implied that he would push the Iraqis out if he had to, as did his
decision to send tens of thousands of ground troops instead of relying on air
and naval power alone.

When he doubled the size of the American force in and around Saudi Arabia,
converting it from a defensive to an offensive force, when he persuaded the
United Nations to set a date for President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to withdraw
from Kuwait, when he won the approval of Congress for military action, Mr. Bush
was trying to bring irresistible pressure on Baghdad -- but he also knew that if
that pressure failed, he would have little recourse but to take the country into
battle.

As diplomatic efforts proved fruitless, the President's room for maneuver
narrowed and then vanished. To do nothing would wreck his credibility and damage
that of his country.

"He thought he could overpower Saddam psychologically, but it hasn't worked,"
said James MacGregor Burns, a leading historian of the Presidency. "Now he may
have misgivings, like many Presidents on the eve of war, but he's left himself
no exit."

Shades of Wilsonian Idealism

Mr. Bush hopes that an allied victory over Iraq would solidify the "new world
order" that he hopes to build in the wake of the cold war. He hopes that a
defeat of Iraq would deter other would-be aggressors, especially in the third
world, and make the world a better, freer place -- an idea not so very different
from Wilson's campaign to make the world safe for democracy.

He hopes to secure the gulf's vast oil reserves for the industrial world, and
eventually to promote a general settlement of the outstanding problems in the
Middle East, including the intractable Palestinian question.

Few if any military analysts doubt that the United States would "win" a war
against Iraq, though many doubt that it will be as short and relatively painless
as some of the President's advisers have suggested it will be.

But many diplomats, many scholars and much of the foreign-policy establishment
(with the notable exception of Henry A. Kissinger) think that Washington has
failed to think the thing through adequately. They paint a much more baleful
picture. They foresee the destablization rather than the stabilization of the
Mideast, with anti-Americanism rampant, Mr. Hussein a hero or a martyr to
ordinary Arabs all across the region, and world oil supplies more tenuous than
ever.

The future of United States relations with the Soviet Union, clouded at the
moment by the crackdown in the Baltic states, may also be affected by the course
of events in the gulf.

With the passing of the Security Council deadline, the President had the backing
of the American people -- but not their passionate backing, not a deep-seated
commitment.

For all the attempted demonization of Mr. Hussein, through the constant
comparisons to Hitler and other ogres, Mr. Bush has not yet succeeded in making
most ordinary citizens of this country feel that they are embarking upon a
crusade, which is what Americans like their wars to be.

There is a sense that the electorate is telling Washington, "O.K., fight if you
must, but not with my son" -- or daughter, or husband, or wife.

And that is not a very firm underpinning for war or national unity.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush (The New York Times) (pg. A1); The aircraft
carrier America passing through the Suez Canal yesterday en route to the Persian
Gulf. Egyptians watched from the shore. (Associated Press) (pg. A12)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: War Supplies;
Somber Workers Press to Fill A Rush Order for Body Bags

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 395 words

DATELINE: PATERSON, N.J., Jan. 14


The crisis in the Persian Gulf has brought a flurry of business to the rows of
women bent over sewing machines at the Lite Industries factory here, feeding
through heavy, gray, rubberized fabric, rushing to meet a Pentagon order.

They make body bags here.

"In the beginning it was a little bit sad, but now we are used to it," said Elba
Ramos, a supervisor. "We accept it. There's no other choice. We have to do it."

Mrs. Ramos, who came from Puerto Rico and has worked for the company for 32
years, continued: "Most of us have family involved. My nephew is with the Army
over there; he's in the medical. My son, he's in Arkansas in the Air Force. He's
been in for 19 years."

Lite Industries has a rush order for 4,000 body bags, part of a contract for
16,099 that suppliers say was let by the Defense Department on Dec. 11. Other
companies, including C. R. Daniels of Ellicott City, Md., and Rubbercrafters of
Smithville, W.Va., are also filling orders.

The Pentagon, which now calls the product "human remains pouches," would like to
say as little as possible about this aspect of the deployment.

"I just don't have anything on that subject at all," said Glenn Flood, the
Department of Defense spokesman designated to answer questions about body bags,
as they were known in the Vietnam War.

The bags are 7 feet 10 inches long, 38 inches wide and about 6 inches deep, said
Norbert Efros, the president of Lite Industries. Each has six handles sewn onto
metal rings, and a long arc-shaped zipper on the top. Each cost the Pentagon
about $110.

"This is a much more emotional item," Mr. Efros said. "It brings it home that
conflict does result in casualties. But we realize it has to be made, just like
the other items we produce."

Where did the 16,099 figure come from? The chief Pentagon spokesman, Pete
Williams, insisted that it was "fundamentally not a casualty-derived number."

He said, "It's a formula derived from the presence of troops."

In the third-floor, loftlike quarters of Lite Industries, Mr. Efros said he had
just received the first shipments of material and begun work on the body bags
last week, but added that he soon expected to have about 25 workers on overtime
to get the shipment out.

"We do government work; this is what we have to do," said Geneva Watson, who was
sewing the body bags' seams. "I feel bad about the war."

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 70 words


An article yesterday about the Vietnam generation's attitudes toward the Persian
Gulf conflict miscalculated the number of Congressmen who served in the military
in Southeast Asia in the Vietnam era and cast votes this month on the use of
force in the gulf. That group numbered 19; 13 of them voted to authorize the use
of force. Denny Smith of Oregon, defeated in the November election, should not
have been included.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Mr. Bush's War Strategy

BYLINE: By Leslie H. Gelb; Tom Wicker is ill.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 737 words


With the irrevocable default of diplomacy to the will of Saddam Hussein and
George Bush, the brave and frightened now begin to settle accounts. There is a
hush, a reverence, an emptiness as leaders bow to the inevitability of their
decisions.

For the moment, the wisdom or folly of those decisions is beyond useful analysis
and argument.

Possibly still within reach are matters of how the war will be fought. War
strategy is of overriding importance because its conduct will profoundly affect
the balance of power in the Mideast and U.S. relations with the Arab world.

There are always grounds for concern here as political leaders and generals
inescapably refight their last war, and often draw the wrong lessons.

Almost from the day President Bush committed U.S. forces to the Persian Gulf, he
pledged to avoid the mistakes of Vietnam. To him and his military advisers, the
central strategic mistake of that war was gradualism. The theory there was to
apply force incrementally in order to avoid a larger war with China or the
Soviet Union and to give North Vietnam an incentive to negotiate.

Military experts have good reasons to quarrel with that strategy. But the
question at hand is whether the virtually opposite approach makes sense for
warfare in the gulf.

From the outset, Mr. Bush has promised massive force for a quick and decisive
victory. As fighting begins, he can still look hard at exactly what that goal
might mean.

Does massive mean, for example, that U.S. bombers can attack any target in Iraq?
If so, the repercussions would be grave. It is one thing to launch precision
missiles against command centers in Baghdad. It is another to strike at chemical
factories where the debris could be lethal to thousands of civilians. America's
long-run interests are to spare the Iraqi people and economy, even if some
military targets are left standing.

What exactly does "quick" mean? Does it mean that if Iraqi forces in Kuwait do
not surrender after one or two weeks, or three months for that matter, the U.S.
will launch land attacks? It is difficult to see the need in that course. If
supply lines between Iraq and Kuwait are as vulnerable as the Pentagon says,
they can be sliced day and night, leaving Iraqi troops in Kuwait stranded and
waiting to run out of water and ammunition.

The U.S. has no strategic interest in quick victory in Kuwait if quick means
high American casualties. If others like Egypt and Saudi Arabia want to make a
bloody land attack to free Kuwait, the U.S. should offer all available air and
artillery support, and nothing else.

The meaning of "decisive" is not self-evident either. Clearly the U.S. needs to
destroy Iraq's nuclear and chemical weapons and ability to strike from the air.
But America has no strategic interest in devastating Iraqi ground forces.
Without air power, Iraq cannot easily threaten any of its neighbors except
Kuwait. But without sizable ground forces, Iraq would become easy prey later for
Syria or Iran.

It is also of vital political importance that our key allies participate visibly
and officially in air attacks against Iraq itself. Thus Riyadh's decision to
join in the bombing of Iraq was critical to not leaving the U.S. and the British
alone to bear subsequent Arab hostility.

Even with the war under way, we can still have a strategy with the following
objectives:

* Rapid destruction of Iraq's will to fight and launch attacks. The key to
victory lies in Baghdad, not Kuwait.

* Concentration on quickly demolishing Iraq's offensive military power --
aircraft, missiles, headquarters and stockpiles -- while avoiding targets that
would entail high loss of civilian life. The present threat comes from the Iraqi
regime and its striking power; future threat, from Arabs enraged by needless
violence.

* Liberation of Kuwait, consistent with our fundamental interests in minimizing
American casualties and maintaining credible Iraqi ground forces after the war.
The aim is to destroy Iraq's ability to attack its neighbors, not its capacity
for self-defense.

President Bush, not the Pentagon bureaucracy, is Commander in Chief. With war
under way, it is his responsibility to insure attention to strategic and
political interests as well as pure military requirements. But however fought,
there should be no doubt that Saddam Hussein -- first and last -- bears the core
moral responsibility for the war.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 17, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

A Short War Will Test Recession Assumptions

BYLINE: By LOUIS UCHITELLE

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1312 words


A brief Persian Gulf war would test one of the great assumptions about the
national recession: that Iraq's invasion of Kuwait precipitated the recession
and an American military victory will make the economy rebound. But evidence is
accumulating that the recession has taken on a life of its own and will probably
endure.

The phenomenon that links the gulf crisis and the economy, in the minds of many
economists, is public confidence, which deteriorated sharply after the invasion
on Aug. 2. Those who measure public confidence -- the Conference Board and the
University of Michigan's Survey Research Center -- at first said the gulf crisis
had precipitated the deterioration, in part because of rising oil prices. Now
they argue that other factors are unnerving Americans, inhibiting the spending
that invigorates the economy.

"When the crisis in the gulf is over, we might have a moment or two of euphoria
-- a somewhat more positive consumer," said Fabian Linden, who directs the
Conference Board's monthly consumer surveys. "But the euphoria will soon wear
off if we don't resolve the basic issues confronting Americans."

Large Military Stockpiles

Unlike past American wars, a prolonged war would not stimulate the economy
through stepped-up production of war materiel. Equipment stockpiled in the last
decade is reportedly sufficient to carry the United States forces for an
extended period.

But the Bush Administration is hoping that the war will be short. It has argued
that after a brief conflict the economy will rebound -- a contention that the
consumer-confidence surveys do not seem to support. Mr. Linden and Richard T.
Curtin, the University of Michigan's director of consumer research, list rising
unemployment in recent months as the chief public concern dampening confidence,
war or no war. Other blows to confidence, they said, have come from the collapse
in real estate prices; the growing number of bank failures, particularly in New
England in recent weeks, and a sharp decline in industrial production since
October.

The Bush Administration has attributed the recession mainly to the Persian Gulf
crisis, arguing in effect that if the war ends in a quick military victory, then
a strengthening economy will stimulate hiring and resolve the unemployment
problem. Mr. Bush's top economic advisers restated this message at a meeting
with the President on Tuesday.

Similarly, the Federal Reserve has invoked the gulf crisis as a justification
for its reluctance to cut interest rates more quickly than it has. While lower
rates might help to stimulate the economy, Fed officials say, they might also
encourage too much spending and investment once the Persian Gulf conflict ends
and public confidence returns. Such exuberant outlays could cause shortages that
drive up prices.

But if a resolution of the gulf crisis may not rescue the economy from
recession, several weeks or months of fighting in the Persian Gulf can prolong
it. Aside from the fresh blow to public confidence, economists say, oil prices
will probably rise well above their present level of about $30 a barrel. That
would greatly discourage spending as both consumers and businesses diverted
funds and reduced profits to cover energy costs.

Cost of Oilfield Damage

"If the war is prolonged and there is damage to oilfields, that adds to the
economic problems that already existed before August," said Joseph Minarik,
senior economist on Congress's Joint Economic Committee.

In addition to this danger, military spending will fail to give the economy a
boost because of the large military stockpiles. During the first four months of
the Persian Gulf deployment, for example, the Defense Personnel Support Center
disbursed $1.4 billion in equipment and food, or only $230 million more than in
an average four-month period before the crisis.

"Whether they're eating in Saudi Arabia or they're eating in Houston, Tex.,
they're still eating the same amount of food," said William H. Ernst Jr., a
Support Center spokesman.

Similarly, American troops in the Saudi Arabian desert are using tents from
storage. "They never wear out; you roll them up, put them in preservative
containers and store them," said Jack L. Allen, a spokesman for the Defense
Construction Supply Center in Columbus, Ohio. "Some of this stuff dates back to
Korea and Vietnam."

Spending on Fuel

Perhaps the biggest materiel cost has been for fuel, to transport troops to the
gulf and for operations there. Some $410 million in extra fuel contracts were
awarded during the first four months, the Defense Department reports. In
addition, numerous contracts have been awarded to ferry troops to Saudi Arabia
and provide other services.

But these expenditures do not provide the boost to the economy that comes
through war production. World War II is the classic example of a conflict that
helped pull the nation out of a slump through such production. But even
smaller-scale conflicts also lifted the American economy. The Korean War
required a big increase in the production of weapons and other materiel, and
this new industrial output in the early 1950's helped to end a recession.
Production during the Vietnam War also made the economy boom in the late 1960's.


Decline Since the Spring

The departure from precedent makes the nation's economic predicament hard to
anticipate. The economy has been in decline since last spring, because of too
much home and office construction, huge corporate debts built up in the 1980's,
the weakness among the nation's banks resulting from unpaid real estate loans,
and a reluctance among the banks to make new loans that also might fail. Cuts in
lending dampen economic activity.

The upshot was that the Persian Gulf crisis accelerated a downturn already in
progress, producing what Robert Gordon, a Northwestern University economist,
calls "a long decline exacerbated by a sharp drop in August."

"The unwinding of the 80's got entangled with Kuwait and they are now so mixed
up that even a positive, short-term resolution in the Persian Gulf would not
solve the recession," Mr. Gordon said. "The damage to confidence and to business
activity has been done."

Wall St. Optimism

Mr. Gordon and some other economists, among them Paul Samuelson, the Nobel
laureate in economic science, argue that even without the gulf crisis, the
economy would have tipped into recession in late summer. But among economic
forecasters, particularly those employed on Wall Street and in the banking
industry, a more optimistic view reigns, according to the Blue Chip Economic
Indicators, which is a monthly survey of 50 well-known forecasters.

"Three out of four of them believe that the trigger for the recession was the
gulf crisis, and if it ends soon, the economy will begin to recover in the third
quarter," said Robert J. Eggert, Blue Chip's president. "They don't think it
would be a spectacular recovery, but the economy would begin to come back."

Stephen S. Roach, a senior economist at Morgan Stanley & Company, makes a case
for an economic revival after a brief gulf war. The key to his argument is real
disposable personal income -- the money available for spending, adjusted for
inflation. This income growth slowed last year, but was still positive in the
third quarter and only went into sharp decline after the gulf crisis had driven
up oil prices and the inflation rate.

By driving down oil prices, a quick victory will bolster purchasing power
despite the numerous layoffs, bankruptcies and plant closings in recent months,
Mr. Roach says.

"Initially, consumer confidence would improve," Mr. Roach said. "Businesses that
had cut back in preparation for the worst would relax. Production would grow
again and there would be some rehiring, and out of that process would come
renewed income growth."

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "Sinking Confidence in the Economy" shows the Conference Board's
consumer expectation index, which gauges the public's sense of the U.S. economy
for the next six months. (Source: The Conference Board)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 17, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: THE MEDICS;
Civilian Agencies Sending Blood to Augment Military's Gulf Supply

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 644 words


Anticipating a brief, intense war in the Persian Gulf, the American military is
gathering blood supplies from civilian agencies for the first time since the
Korean War.

Col. Anthony Polk of the Army, head of the armed services blood program office,
said civilian blood was needed for "a high intensity, short scenario," adding,
"We have not been faced with this at any time in our history."

In Vietnam, for example, the military supplied all of its own blood, over a
million units during a 10-year period, Colonel Polk said in a telephone
interview. But the Vietnam War "was a low-intensity, long scenario," he
explained. "We had time to build up our supplies."

Since 1982, the Defense Department has had contracts with the American Red Cross
and the American Association of Blood Banks to provide blood if needed. The
Pentagon activated the contracts on Dec. 17, Colonel Polk said.

The two blood-collecting agencies were asked to start providing 350 units of
blood a piece each week. Two weeks ago, each group was asked to start providing
1,000 units a week. And they were told that if fighting begins, they should be
prepared to each supply 800 units a day. The blood, which is to be no more than
five days old, can be stored for 42 days.

Colonel Polk said the armed services needed four units of blood for each
casualty. But he said the military was supplying most of the blood for the
troops in the Persian Gulf. "Since August of this year, when Operation Desert
Shield started, we have shipped thousands of units of blood," he said.

Colonel Polk declined to say how much blood has been shipped, since that would
reveal the expected number of casualties. He said, however, that more than 85
percent of the blood the Defense Department collected from its own employees and
military families was going to the troops in the Persian Gulf and said that, in
peacetime, the Defense Department collected more than 300,000 units a year from
more than 70 military centers to be used by its 165 hospitals.

Testing the System

The Red Cross and the blood bank association have shipped a total of 7,500 units
so far. If the military shipped 85 percent of its peacetime collection of about
820 units a day for the last 42 days, it would have sent 29,400 units. So at
least 36,900 units could be stockpiled in Saudi Arabia, or enough for about
9,200 casualties.

When Colonel Polk asked the Red Cross and the blood bank association to start
providing blood in December, he was testing the system, he said. "We had never
ever activated our contracts with the American Red Cross and the American
Association of Blood Banks and we wanted to activate them before we really
needed them big time," he said. By initially asking for 375 units a week from
each group, Colonel Polk said he had a chance to "get the logistics worked out,
get the paperwork worked out."

All the blood going to the gulf is sent from McGuire Air Force Base in
Wrightstown, N.J. It is routinely screened for the AIDS virus, syphilis and
hepatitis by the organizations.

Liz Hall, a spokeswoman at the Red Cross, said the organization was supplying
blood from areas of the country that have surpluses. Marcia Lane, a spokeswoman
for the American Assocation of Blood Banks, said that group was getting blood
from 40 of its 2,400 member blood banks that volunteered to fill the need. She
said that over 100 other centers were on a waiting list to provide blood if
necessary.

The Red Cross and the American Association of Blood Banks say that the blood
they are providing to the Defense Department is only a small fraction of the
blood they collect. For example, Ms. Lane of the American Association of Blood
Banks said that group collected 20,000 units of blood a day. If it had to supply
800 units a day to the military, that would be 4 percent of the amount normally
collected.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Crewmen of the 336th Fighter Squadron working on an F-15 fighter
yesterday at a base in Saudi Arabia. Planes from this base were involved in the
air attacks yesterday against Iraq and Kuwait. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 17, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: THE PRESIDENT;
Transcript of the Comments by Bush on the Air Strikes Against the Iraqis

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1505 words


Following is a transcript of President Bush's remarks in the Oval Office last
night about the Persian Gulf action, as recorded by The New York Times:

Just two hours ago, allied air forces began an attack on military targets in
Iraq and Kuwait. These attacks continue as I speak. Ground forces are not
engaged.

This conflict started Aug. 2, when the dictator of Iraq invaded a small and
helpless neighbor. Kuwait, a member of the Arab League and a member of the
United Nations, was crushed, its people brutalized. Five months ago, Saddam
Hussein started this cruel war against Kuwait; tonight, the battle has been
joined.

This military action, taken in accord with United Nations resolutions and with
the consent of the United States Congress, follows months of constant and
virtually endless diplomatic activity on the part of the United Nations, the
United States and many, many other countries.

Arab leaders sought what became known as an Arab solution, only to conclude that
Saddam Hussein was unwilling to leave Kuwait. Others traveled to Baghdad in a
variety of efforts to restore peace and justice. Our Secretary of State, James
Baker, held an historic meeting in Geneva, only to be totally rebuffed.

This past weekend, in a last-ditch effort, the Secretary General of the United
Nations went to the Middle East with peace in his heart -- his second such
mission. And he came back from Baghdad with no progress at all in getting Saddam
Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait.

No Choice but to Attack

Now, the 28 countries with forces in the gulf area have exhausted all reasonable
efforts to reach a peaceful resolution, and have no choice but to drive Saddam
from Kuwait by force. We will not fail.

As I report to you, air attacks are under way against military targets in Iraq.
We are determined to knock out Saddam Hussein's nuclear bomb potential. We will
also destroy his chemical weapons facilities. Much of Saddam's artillery and
tanks will be destroyed. Our operations are designed to best protect the lives
of all the coalition forces by targeting Saddam's vast military arsenal.

Initial reports from General Schwartzkopf are that our operations are proceeding
according to plan. Our objectives are clear: Saddam Hussein's forces will leave
Kuwait. The legitimate government of Kuwait will be restored to its rightful
place, and Kuwait will once again be free.

Iraq will eventually comply with all relevant United Nations resolutions, and
then, when peace is restored, it is our hope that Iraq will live as a peaceful
and cooperative member of the family of nations, thus enhancing the security and
stability of the gulf.

'Why Not Wait?'

Some may ask, why act now? Why not wait? The answer is clear. The world could
wait no longer. Sanctions, though having some effect, showed no signs of
accomplishing their objective. Sanctions were tried for well over five months,
and we and our allies concluded that sanctions alone would not force Saddam from
Kuwait.

While the world waited, Saddam Hussein systematically raped, pillaged and
plundered a tiny nation no threat to his own. He subjected the people of Kuwait
to unspeakable atrocities, and among those maimed and murdered, innocent
children.

While the world waited, Saddam sought to add to the chemical weapons arsenal he
now possesses, an infinitely more dangerous weapon of mass destruction -- a
nuclear weapon. And while the world waited, while the world talked peace and
withdrawal, Saddam Hussein dug in and moved massive forces into Kuwait.

While the world waited, while Saddam stalled, more damage was being done to the
fragile economies of the Third World, emerging democracies of Eastern Europe, to
the entire world, including to our own economy.

The United States, together with the United Nations, exhausted every means at
our disposal to bring this crisis to a peaceful end. However, Saddam clearly
felt that by stalling and threatening and defying the United Nations, he could
weaken the forces arrayed against him.

While the world waited, Saddam Hussein met every overture of peace with open
contempt. While the world prayed for peace, Saddam prepared for war.

I had hoped that when the United States Congress, in historic debate, took its
resolute action, Saddam would realize he could not prevail, and would move out
of Kuwait in accord with the United Nations resolutions. He did not do that.
Instead, he remained intransigent, certain that time was on his side.

Saddam was warned over and over again to comply with the will of the United
Nations, leave Kuwait or be driven out. Saddam has arrogantly rejected all
warnings. Instead he tried to make this a dispute between Iraq and the United
States of America.

Well he failed. Tonight 28 nations -- countries from five continents, Europe and
Asia, Africa and the Arab League -- have forces in the Gulf area standing
shoulder to shoulder against Saddam Hussein. These countries had hoped the use
of force could be avoided. Regrettably, we now believe that only force will make
him leave.

Prior to ordering our forces into battle, I instructed our military commanders
to take every necessary step to prevail as quickly as possible, and with the
greatest degree of protection possible for American and Allied servicemen and
women. I've told the American people before that this will not be another
Vietnam, and I repeat this here tonight. Our troops will have the best possible
support in the entire world, and they will not be asked to fight with one hand
tied behind their back. I'm hopeful that this fighting will not go on for long
and that casualties will be held to an absolute minimum.

'An Historic Moment'

This is an historic moment. We have in this past year made great progress in
ending the long era of conflict and cold war. We have before us the opportunity
to forge for ourselves and for future generations a new world order, a world
where the rule of law, not the law of the jungle, governs the conduct of
nations.

When we are successful, and we will be, we have a real chance at this new world
order, an order in which a credible United Nations can use its peacekeeping role
to fulfill the promise and vision of the U.N.'s founders. We have no argument
with the people of Iraq. Indeed, for the innocents caught in this conflict, I
pray for their safety.

Our goal is not the conquest of Iraq. It is the liberation of Kuwait. It is my
hope that somehow the Iraqi people can, even now, convince their dictator that
he must lay down his arms, leave Kuwait and let Iraq itself rejoin the family of
peace loving nations.

Thomas Paine wrote many years ago: "These are the times that try men's souls."
Those well-known words are so very true today. But even as planes of the
multi-national forces attack Iraq, I prefer to think of peace, not war. I am
convinced not only that we will prevail, but that out of the horror of combat
will come the recognition that no nation can stand against a world united. No
nation will be permitted to brutally assault its neighbor.

No President can easily commit our sons and daughters to war. They are the
nation's finest. Ours is an all-volunteer force, magnificently trained, highly
motivated. The troops know why they're there. And listen to what they say,
because they've said it better than any President or Prime Minister ever could.
Listen to Hollywood Huddleston, Marine lance corporal. He says: "Let's free
these people so we can go home and be free again." And he's right. The terrible
crimes and tortures committed by Saddam's henchmen against the innocent people
of Kuwait are an affront to mankind and a challenge to the freedom of all.

'Worth Fighting For'

Listen to one of our great officers out there, Marine Lieut. Gen. Walter Boomer.
He said: "There are things worth fighting for. A world in which brutality and
lawlessness are allowed to go unchecked isn't the kind of world we're going to
want to live in."

Listen to Master Sgt. J. P. Kendall of the 82d Airborne: "We're here for more
than just the price of a gallon of gas. What we're doing is going to chart the
future of the world for the next hundred years. It's better to deal with this
guy now than five years from now."

And finally, we should all sit up and listen to Jackie Jones, an Army
lieutenant, when she says, "If we let him get away with this, who knows what's
going to be next."

I've called upon Hollywood and Walter and J. P. and Jackie and all their
courageous comrades-in-arms to do what must be done. Tonight, America and the
world are deeply grateful to them and to their families.

And let me say to everyone listening or watching tonight: When the troops we've
sent in finish their work, I'm determined to bring them home as soon as
possible. Tonight, as our forces fight, they and their families are in our
prayers.

May God bless each and every one of them and the coalition forces at our side in
the Gulf, and may He continue to bless our nation, the United States of America.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 17, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Businesses Brace for Temporary Sales Slump

BYLINE: By ALLEN R. MYERSON

SECTION: Section D; Page 6; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 814 words


As the nation went to war against Iraq, many business executives braced
themselves last night for a possible sales slump. Retailers and others who
depend on confident consumers or low gasoline prices said they expect their
businesses to suffer, at least in the short term.

But a few industries, like long-distance telephone companies, said the public's
apprehensiveness might actually help their business.

Retailers said they expect shoppers to stay home initially as they absorb the
news. Whether sales rebound, they said, depends on the war's success.

"People won't be interested in going out shopping frivolously, for a little
while at least," said Russell Solomon, the president of Tower Records, a chain
based in Sacramento, Calif. The longer-term effect is uncertain, he said.

Effect on Markets

Financial services executives have said in recent days that a war might compound
the damage their firms suffered from the recession and the dearth of active
individual investors. But bond and equity traders said yesterday that they
expected volatility to multiply their opportunities.

James F. Higgins, president of the Dean Witter Financial Group, said his company
had told its brokers to guard against panic. "In these times, we can have very
volatile markets," he said. "It is very important not to fall into the pitfall
of short-term emotionally driven decisions."

George L. Ball, the chairman and chief executive of Prudential-Bache Securities
Inc., urged investors to avoid quick reactions. "To the extent that investors
base decisions on the commencement of a war, which has long been anticipated,
they would be making a mistake," he said.

Other companies expressed fear that higher gasoline prices would reduce travel.
"A great deal of our business comes by car from Southern California," said Phil
Cooper, a spokesman for the Caesars Palace casino in Las Vegas, Nev. A long war
or higher fuel prices could well reduce this traffic, he said, adding, "I don't
think people are fleeing the casinos, but there is a tone of great concern."

Domestic Travel May Rise

But in Los Angeles, a Hilton Hotels Corporation executive said domestic travel
might improve as Americans shun travel abroad. "Since our company is principally
within the United States, I would think that people might give further
consideration to traveling here," said William C. Lebo Jr., Hilton's senior vice
president and general counsel. "That would benefit us."

Within the military industry, executives at the Hughes Aircraft Company, a
subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, assumed Hughes's missiles were
being deployed in the Persian Gulf. The company manufactures TOW anti-tank
missiles and other missiles used by Navy and Air Force jets.

Richard Dore, a spokesman for Hughes, said the company expected no quick
reorders of missiles to replace used supplies. "I'm sure the military has more
than a one- or two-day supply," he said.

In fact, Mr. Dore said Hughes executives were worried that the expense of the
Middle East war would require cuts by the Pentagon in the future.

Harm to Military Industry

"A lot of this action is being paid for out of current defense budgets," he
said. "They have to be taking that money from somewhere. Unless that money is
somehow replaced this could actually be very damaging to the defense industry."

William T. Esrey, the chairman and chief executive of United Telecommunications
Inc. and its major subsidiary, U S Sprint, said he expects the long-distance
industry to benefit as Americans make calls to discuss the Persian Gulf crisis.

"I think you'll see a substantial effect," he said. When he heard about the
American strike against Baghdad, he reached for the phone. "I talked to my
family," he said. "It's human instinct."

Bert C. Roberts Jr., the president of the MCI Communications Corporation, said
the long-distance carriers would benefit from the extra calling in proportion to
their market shares.

MCI will give special priority to Government communications during the crisis,
he said.

Worries About Morale

Some executives said they worried about the war's effect on employee morale.

"I think like a lot of us, I'm still in shock," said Sandra L. Kurtzig,
president and chief executive of ASK Computer Systems, a software company in
Mountain View, Calif.

Ms. Kurtzig said she heard the news while in a meeting with employees, some of
whom are only 21 or 22 years old and could be called to fight if a draft were
reinstated. "These employees were 3, 4, 5 years old when the Vietnam War ended,"
she said. "It's amazing to me how little understanding they have about what war
is."

She said company travel would be reduced and might be eliminated because of the
fear of terrorism. "If any employees felt concerned about traveling, they
certainly would not have to do it," she said.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 17, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: THE DECISION - DEFINING THE ISSUE;
The White House Works to Evoke World War II Memory, Not Vietnam

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE JR., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1068 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 16


In telling Americans that war with Iraq had started, President Bush harked back
to one of the great days in American military history -- June 6, 1944.

On that day, as United States, British and Canadian troops stormed ashore in
Normandy, Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Allied commander in chief, said in his D-day
broadcast that "the liberation of Europe" was under way. Tonight, Marlin
Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, told the journalists gathered in the
briefing room in a stark initial communique, "The liberation of Kuwait has
begun."

The choice of words may have been coincidental, but it was surely apt.

Since the beginning of the crisis in the Persian Gulf more than five months ago,
Mr. Bush has sought to liken his struggle against Saddam Hussein and Iraq to
that against Hitler and Germany, a struggle that united the American people and
much of the world and ended gloriously for the coalition arrayed against
fascism.

Indeed, the President has repeatedly called Saddam Hussein a Hitler, said that
he would not repeat Chamberlain's appeasement of Germany at Munich, and compared
Iraqi use of poison gas in earlier wars to Nazi atrocities.

Tonight, in a broadcast to the American people on which he was said to have
worked for three or four days, the President again used language evocative of
Europe in the 1930's and 1940's. He said "the dictator of Iraq invaded a small
and helpless nation" and then "raped, pillaged and plundered" it.

Avoiding Vietnam's Memory

What Mr. Bush wants to avoid, of course, is any comparison to Vietnam, the war
most vivid in current national memory, which opened grievous wounds in the
American body politic, ended in humiliating defeat and made many in this country
reluctant ever to back foreign wars again.

The President had repeatedly promised that if war came, it would not be "another
Vietnam," by which he meant there would be no half-hearted effort and that the
conflict would be brought to an end as soon as possible.

Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, is a Vietnam
veteran, and he drew from his service in Southeast Asia the lesson that gradual
escalation does not work. That was one element behind the gigantic buildup of
American and allied forces in and around Saudi Arabia. Overwhelming force,
relentlessly applied, is likely to be the hallmark of this war.

As American, British, Saudi and Kuwaiti warplanes carried out their raids in the
darkness over Baghdad, other Iraqi cities and Kuwait, Mr. Bush set in motion a
plan that he hopes will make the operation a rapidly successful and relatively
uncostly enterprise. The goal is to maintain domestic political support and keep
the somewhat shaky international coalition together.

No Constraints on Troops

"They will not be asked to fight with one hand behind them," the President said
of American troops in his television address. "I'm hoping this fighting will not
go on for long."

First reports from the Persian Gulf suggested that even though Mr. Bush had
decided to attack during the first night when he had United Nations
authorization to do so, at a moment when the Iraqis might have been expected to
at maximum alert, the strike had achieved tactical surprise.

Television reporters broadcasting from hotels in downtown Baghdad said that
streetlights in the capital were on when the first and second wave of planes
came in, not blacked out as they should have been with war imminent.

Electronic War Success

Although he warned that early reports are often misleading, Representative Les
Aspin, the Wisconsin Democrat who heads the House Armed Services Committee,
suggested that electronic countermeasures might have been more successful than
expected in disrupting Iraqi communications.

In addition, the pattern of bombing suggested that in the Baghdad area, at
least, most of it was concentrated in the suburbs, well away from the most
populous area. There was no early sign of any retaliation from Iraq against
either Israel or Saudi Arabia, and there were no reports that Iraqi warplanes
had challenged the American planes.

Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney said that no Iraqi missile launchings had been
confirmed, that resistance had in general been light and that reports of allied
casualties were "encouraging."

Targets of First Strikes

That suggested two things, military analysts commented tonight.

First, that the early raids had almost certainly been directed at Iraqi Scud-B
missile launching sites, which had been thought to threaten Tel Aviv and other
cities in Israel and Saudi Arabia. Other targets probably included radar
installations, airport control towers and air force command centers.

Second, it indicated that a major effort was being made to avoid heavy civilian
casualties by employing, to the degree possible, pin-point rather than
carpet-bombing techniques.

Although some civilians will inevitably be killed, there is a political motive
for keeping the numbers as low as possible. Many experts on the Middle East,
inside and outside the Bush Administration, have been warning for weeks that the
war could be won and lost at the same time, if Kuwait was liberated at the cost
of inflaming anti-Americanism among Arabs.

Arab Allies Join In

Two other worries had been on the minds of planners. Experts on the region said
that the participation of Saudi and Kuwaiti aircraft was a hopeful sign that
Arab allies would be willing to play a full part at least in the aerial
campaign, including flying missions not only over Kuwait but over Iraq.

And they said that Iraq's failure in the first hours of battle to launch an
attack against Israel greatly reduced the possibility that that country would be
drawn into the war early.

All the initial fighting, however, was at night, when sophisticated electronics
gave the American-led coalition the advantage. Part of Mr. Cheney's reluctance
to make any sweeping claims, officials said, stemmed from his desire to see
whether Iraqi opposition would be stiffer during daylight operations.

Washington's initial reaction was extraordinarily subdued.

During the day, the impression had spread that Mr. Bush might wait for 48 hours
or so after the deadline had passed, perhaps to give Mr. Hussein a chance to
change his mind.

But the President did not wait. His mind, said one close aide, seemed to have
been made up weeks ago.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush walking yesterday with Secretary of State James A
Baker 3d outside the Oval Office. Hours later the President informed the country
that war with Iraq had begun (Associated Press)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 17, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

MORE ON THE GULF

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 110 words


Bush Evokes Glory Of Past, Not Vietnam

To tell Americans that war with Iraq had started, President Bush harked back to
one of the great days in American military history -- D-Day, June 6, 1944. News
analysis, page A16.

In Cairo, Jubilation Among Kuwaiti Exiles

Hundreds of Kuwaitis drove their cars through the Egyptian capital, honking and
waving flags after hearing news of the American-led attack. "Thank God! Thank
God!" was a cry heard over and over again. Page A18.

Israel on Alert

Israel declared a state of emergency minutes after word of the attack. There was
no immediate indication an Iraqi attack on Israel. Page A18.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 17, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: BAGHDAD;
From TV Reporters in Iraq, News an Attack Has Begun

BYLINE: By JAMES F. CLARITY

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 722 words


Three Cable News Network correspondents gave the world terse and vivid
descriptions of the American air attack as they looked out the window of their
Baghdad hotel, reporting the sky ablaze with antiaircraft fire and bomb blasts
as explosions thundered in the background.

"The war has begun in Baghdad," John Holliman said in a flat voice at 7 P.M.
Eastern standard time. For 15 or 20 minutes, Mr. Holliman, Bernard Shaw, the CNN
anchorman, and Peter Arnett took turns looking out their windows in the Rashid
Hotel. The network had no picture of them, but their voices were clear and firm
throughout. Several times, they made nervous jokes.

At 6:50 P.M., Mr. Holliman reported that antiaircraft tracers were lighting up
the sky but that on the ground, "there are no signs of bombing, no signs of
fire." Peter Arnett, who covered both the Vietnam War and the Israeli invasion
of Lebanon in 1982, came on the line:

Taking Turns at the Window

"There has been an attack," he said. "The antiaircraft fire began 20 minutes
ago. There were loud explosions, obviously bombing. Perhaps near the airport,
and a military barracks. The attack started at 2:30 Baghdad time. Perhaps they
are seeking out Iraqi radar sites."

The reporters took turns looking out the window on two sides of the hotel, and
giving their accounts. "The sky is lighting up to the south with antiaircraft
fire," Mr. Holliman said. Then there was an explosion in the backround and the
reporters voices said, "Oooooh," then "Oooow." "An airburst," they continued,
"the telecommunications center. Bombs are now hitting the center of the city.
War has begun in Baghdad."

A cameraman reported that "there's building damage, two major explosions, the
telecommunications center and downtown."

"The bombing is intensifying," said an unidentified voice at 7:07 P.M.

The network switched to the White House for Marlin Fitzwater's announcement.
From Riyadh, another CNN correspondent, John Sweeney, said there was no sign of
incoming attack planes or missiles.

From the United Nations, Jeanne Moos said t Secretary General Javier Perez de
Cuellar was watching the reports on television in his office.

From Jerusalem, Richard Blystone reported that Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir
knew of the attack, that the Israeli Army had urged that everyone prepare to put
on their gas masks.

By 7:30 P.M., Mr. Holliman said the first waves of the attack had ended. "The
sky is pitch black. There is a pallor of smoke over the whole city" caused by
"big explosions" earlier. "This the time when the early morning fog comes. I
know they must be praying for fog."

"The fog won't help them," said Mr. Arnett.

Recapping the first wave of attacks, Mr. Holliman said, "It was like the
fireworks finale on the Fourth of July at the base of the Washington Monument."

Nervous Laughter

Someone laughed.

"You're chuckling," said Mr. Holliman, with a touch of pique in his voice.

"I'm chuckling with nervousness," said the voice.

"For now," Mr. Holliman continued, "we're hunkering down. There are vehicles on
the street with bright lights," he added, suggesting that it might be a damage
control crew assessing the raid.

Mr. Holliman said he was putting his head out of the window to see better.

Mr. Shaw said, "Keep your head down."

"I'm trying to see," Mr. Holliman said. "I'm not real happy to be at this
hotel."

Mr. Arnett summed up: "There were four or five waves of bombing. I think they
were F-15 E's. It has been deathly quiet for the last 15 or 20 minutes. It seems
the first wave is over."

"I'm lying on the floor," said Mr. Shaw. "The sky over Baghdad is black. It is
eerily quiet. There is a cool breeze blowing through the window. It occurs to me
that I didn't get dinner tonight."

"There's tuna fish, Bernie, plenty of tuna fish," a voice said.

Mr. Arnett resumed. "This was a surprise attack." He said reporters who stayed
in Baghdad today had not expected an attack so soon and that many of them,
including Mr. Shaw, had planned to take charter flights out of the city
Thursday.

"This is meant to be a sample," Mr. Shaw said of the bombing. Then attacks in
the distance seemed to flare up. He said the reporters could "see the sky light
up, red, yellow, orange. It's possible that planes are pounding targets 15 or 20
miles from here."

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 17, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: AMERICA'S REACTION - U.S. AND ALLIES OPEN AIR WAR ON IRAQ; BOMB
BAGHDAD AND KUWAITI TARGETS; 'NO CHOICE' BUT FORCE, BUSH DECLARES;
A TENSE WAIT ENDS

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1671 words


In one long moment yesterday, word that the United States had attacked Baghdad
swept the country.

In split-level suburban homes on the East Coast where dinner was in the oven, in
big-city restaurants in the Midwest where bars were jammed with the happy-hour
crowd and in skyscraper offices on the West Coast where people were still at
work, there was an odd mixture of apprehension, sadness and relief.

In malls, shoppers emptied out of stores and cried. In supermarkets, cashiers
rushed to call relatives and share the news that after five months of waiting
and wondering America was at war. In department stores, people crowded in front
of television sets, with some saying they were stunned that President Bush had
decided to act so soon after the United Nations deadline for Iraq to withdraw
from Kuwait.

A Scene Out of World War II

Suddenly, in public places where cacophony is the norm, there was an unusual
silence, eerie rather than giddy. Grand Central Terminal in Manhattan -- where
even whispers can take on an echoing, high-decibel intensity -- was quiet. On
trains to Connecticut, passengers gathered around people who had radios with
headsets. "The people with the radios would listen to the news and then relay it
to the other passengers," said Dan Brucker, a spokesman for the Metro-North
Commuter Railroad, "kind of like World War II radio dispatchers delivering the
news."

The word that waves of air attacks were striking Iraq silenced black-tie galas
in Manhattan. And in a Houston hotel, the chatter around the bar stopped when
the President began his speech from the Oval Office. Only the machine making
frozen margaritas kept whirring.

Some people applauded Mr. Bush's decision to order the attack. "It was direct
and to the point," Lester Alexander, a New Orleans real-estate investor, said of
Mr. Bush's speech. "He did not try to sell me on his reasons, but he explained
to me why he took the action. For a politician, that's good. I had a feeling I
was hearing truth."

For other people, it was a long night of ambivalence and complicated,
conflicting emotions. "I support what Bush is doing," said Scott Mosenson, the
manager of a Los Angeles restaurant. "But there's definitely dissonance inside
of me. The taking of lives, any lives, is hard to deal with.

"But I'm not a moral absolutist, and I try to envision the highest good
possible, so I pray the highest good comes out of the this. I believe Bush is
acting in good conscience."

Taking to the Streets

But others questioned Mr. Bush's motivation. And some took their objections to
the streets.

Protesters chanting "no blood for oil" assembled in Times Square about an hour
after the announcement of the attack. Their target was the military recriting
office at 43rd Street and Broadway, some sitting in the street and delaying
traffic.

Later the demonstrators walked east toward the United Nations, delaying traffic
on Second Avenue and setting police barricades on fire. Two demonstrators were
arrested, one for assaulting a police officer by kicking him in the throat.

Although the protesters, then about 2,500 strong, slowed traffic, some motorists
honked their horns in support.

Shortly after midnight, the protesters marched back to Times Square, where some
burned an American flag.

Two anti-war demonstrators fell from the Brooklyn Bridge early this morning when
a car struck a group of protesters marching across the bridge, the police said.

One demonstrator fell 40 feet to a parking lot beneath the western end of the
bridge, and the other apparently fell into the East River, said Sgt. Tina S.
Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.  The condition of the two demonstrators was not
immediately known, the police said.

Airport Security Tight

Airports around the country, where fears of terrorist attacks had been rising
all week, went on highest alert shortly before midnight. This means, among other
things, that passengers will not be able check luggage at the curbside and that
airport roadways will be monitored.

A Federal Aviation Administration official said many airports had taken these
steps on their own before the agency's order. Passengers were told to allow more
time than usual for checking in.

Telephone callers may not have it so easy. U S Sprint said its international
switching center had been swamped. The American Telephone and Telegraph Company
asked customers not to call the Middle East, saying its international lines had
also been overloaded with Americans phoning business associates, friends and
loved ones.

Other rhythms of daily life skipped a beat as soon as the allied fighter planes
began crisscrossing the Iraqi sky. The President's speech interrupted music
videos on the MTV cable-television network, which played peace songs from the
1960's afterwards. In Times Square, even the strippers at the all-nude Paris
Theater clustered inside the red-curtained lobby, watching television news. And
some Americans worried how close to home the conflict might come.

"You don't know what to expect and then you think, 'Am I really going to be
affected by this?' " said Carla Houston of Cupertino, Calif. "Physically, I
probably won't be. Mentally, I know I will be. I mean, I was only 6 years old
during Vietnam."

On college campuses, on sidewalks and in city parks, people who had not heard
the news said they realized something had happened just by the way friends said
hello on the telephone. "I called home and my boyfriend was in tears," said
Robin Cheevers, a 27-year-old legal secretary in San Francisco.

In bars and restaurants, managers made somber announcements. At Joe's Stone
Crab, a restaurant in Miami Beach, George Silas punched the button on the public
address system.

"Ladies and gentlemen," he said, "I've just received word that the United States
has started to bombard Iraq. The war is on." There was no cheering and no
clapping among the 50 or so customers.

The excitement level was higher in a crowded pub near Dupont Circle in
Washington. Robert Parkes Jr. motioned to a bartender and said: "The war's on.
Have a drink!"

But, with two televisions blaring the news at both ends of the bar, Mr. Parkes
said: "I have mixed emotions. I don't want lives wasted. That's why I'm kind of
happy to hear that the bombs are flying. I know I sound like I have veins in my
teeth, but if we do it, we should make it mean something. Let's not make this
into another Vietnam."

At the Mirage Hotel in Las Vegas, executives huddled around television sets. "We
seem now to really have crossed the line," said one, Alan Feldman. "It's no
longer hyperbole and politicians' statements."

It was a moment many had not expected, at least not so soon after the United
Nations deadline. "It's scary," said Cindy Winterhalter, a textile designer in
Manhattan. "I guess, like a lot of people, even though the deadline had passed,
I was hoping there would still be some negotiations or something. But when you
make a commitment and a statement like that, I guess you have to follow through
with it."

After all the failed diplomacy and conflicting expectations, Mr. Bush's decision
brought relief for some. At dusk in the Pike Place Market, Seattle's most
popular open-air market, a passer-by announced the start of war. "Finally," said
Gary Levy, a vendor there. "Finally."

Some who had been worrying about the outbreak of war talked about where they
were when they heard the news, wondering if the conflict would take on the
personal historical significance that older generations assign to crackly radio
broadcasts of Pearl Harbor or bulletins on black-and-white television about the
assassination of President John F. Kennedy.

Rosemary Scanlon, an economist for the Port Authority of New York and New
Jersey, had just arrived at her Brooklyn apartment. She turned on the television
in her living room, and while it was warming up, she walked to the bedroom to
turn on the radio. As she was walking back to the living room, she heard a
reporter in Baghdad saying the bombing had begun.

"I said, 'Oh, God, here we go,' " she said. "I'd worried about it for days. I've
had to give two speeches in the last three days about the economic outlook for
New York City and New Jersey and I've been thinking about what could be this
terrible blow to us all: war. I've been thinking, all of our economic problems
are manageable in the context of this war. Just let this pass by and I'll
happily solve the savings and loan crisis, the city's fiscal problems, just go
down the list of all the problems and I'll solve them."

Critical Words From Ellsberg

In Washington, Daniel J. Ellsberg, the Defense Department analyst in the 1960's
who became a prominent opponent of the Vietnam War, was critical of Mr. Bush's
decision. He said the President appeared to be ordering the type of massive air
strike that the Joint Chiefs of Staff and hawks like Barry Goldwater had
advocated, unsuccessfully, against North Vietnam in 1965.

"If the bombing fails in Iraq, I'm afraid the President will compound the error
by the worst possible gamble, a ground assault," Mr. Ellsberg said, "with the
net result that we will destroy Kuwait in order to liberate it."


That fear was echoed in Detroit , which has the largest concentration of
Arab-Americans in this country.  Clutching rosaries and lighting candles in
their living rooms, some Iraqi Christians voiced despair and resignation as they
watched Mr. Bush announce the attack on their homeland.

"I'm visualizing Baghdad at this moment," said Josie Sarafa, a teacher who lives
in the Detroit suburb of Birmingham. "The work of centuries will go down the
drain."

The concern at a Jewish Community Center in San Francisco, where parents picking
up their children from an after-school program stopped to watch Mr. Bush's
speech, was more immediate. "I think he tried to justify something nobody yet
understands," said Jackie Lewis, 36. "I don't see the reason for the war."

Then the parents prayed.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Antiwar demonstrators burning police barricades Wednesday night
outside the United Nations (G. Paul Burnett/The New York Times) (pg. A19)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 17, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SPORTS SCHEDULING;
Sporting Events Go On, but Outlook Is Unclear

SECTION: Section B; Page 11; Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1288 words


After the outbreak of war in the Middle East, virtually all sporting events went
on as scheduled last night. It was unclear what effect the conflict would have
on coming events.

But the basketball game between North Carolina and North Carolina State was
postponed.

Both CBS and NBC went ahead yesterday with plans to televise Sunday's National
Football League conference championship games. Each network has more than 100
people involved with the telecasts.

"I just don't know," Ed Markey, director of information for NBC Sports, said
yesterday evening about the possibility that changes could be made. "No
officials have been in touch with this office as of 8 o'clock tonight."

NBC is scheduled to televise the American Football Conference championship game
between the Los Angeles Raiders and Buffalo Bills at Orchard Park, N.Y.

The network has sent most of its crew up for the game with one exception. Its
pre-game show, "NFL Live," will be broadcast from New York rather than at the
stadium. But that is because of the studio size needed. CBS went ahead with its
midweek plans to televise the Giants-49ers game.

'No Pre-set Plan'

"Everyone has gone to San Francisco," said Brian Fielding, the programming
director for CBS Sports. "I spoke with Val Pinchbeck and Jay Rosenstein at 6:30
this evening and at that time we hadn't heard anything. But as far as I know
there is no pre-set plan of action."

Rosenstein is vice president of programming for the sports division of the
network.

Pinchbeck, the league's vice president of broadcasting, said he was on the
railroad going home when the attack began. He said that he had nothing to add
last night to the league's statement made Monday.

"We said then it was the N.F.L.'s intention to go forward with games over the
next three weeks as scheduled," he said, "and if events warrant, we will
re-evaluate the situation."

The Super Bowl is scheduled for Tampa, Fla., on Jan. 27, with the Pro Bowl to be
held a week later in Honolulu.

League sources have said privately they would be in touch with Government
officials as well as the networks to discuss the outlook for the post-season
games.

No Order From N.C.A.A.

"The decision of whether or not to conduct intercollegiate athletic contests is
up to each individual school and each individual conference," James A.
Marchiony, director of communications for the National Collegiate Athletic
Association, said by telephone from Mission, Kan.

The United States Naval Academy was considering the situation in determining
whether to continue the basketball program, the athletic director, Jack Lengyel,
said. There was no indication, however, that any cancellation was imminent. The
academy did not cancel its schedule during World War II, the Korean War or the
Vietnam War.

In Annapolis, an announcement that United States planes had attacked Iraq was
made at halftime of the Richmond-Navy basketball game. The players were not told
until after the game. About 40 percent of the fans went home after the
announcement.

The Navy coach, Peter Herrmann, learned of the attack 40 seconds before the game
started, but decided against telling his team.

"I thought the best thing at that point was to just go out and play the game and
go from there," he said after the game. "It's been a very sober, somber day for
us."

"The game matters to us, but the big thing for us now is what's going on over
there," said Eric Harris, a Navy player.

The North Carolina-North Carolina State basketball game in Chapel Hill was
postponed.

Approximately 40 minutes before the starting time of what was to be a nationally
televised game, North Carolina's chancellor, Paul Hardin, told the arriving
crowd at the Dean Smith Center that the game had been postponed.

"I don't think many of us will have our mind on the game," Hardin said to a
round of applause. "For the moment, I think most of us have our attention
focused on the gulf area."

Joined by North Carolina State's chancellor, Larry Monteith, Hardin then led the
assemblage in a moment of silence.

With President Bush's address to the nation due to coincide with the start of
the Atlantic Coast Conference game, the chancellors decided to postpone the
contest indefinitely. Neither the coaches, the conference, nor officials of
ESPN, which was prepared to televise the game, were consulted in the decision.

"This is just a moment of recognition that our lives are changing," Hardin said
at a news conference. "This is not a moment to play basketball."

North Carolina's athletic director, John Swofford, said: "I think people will
certainly understand that the importance of the basketball game pales
considerably in comparison to what's on the minds of a lot of Americans and a
lot of others in the world that we live in tonight."

Neither Hardin nor Monteith said they had considered their next course of
action. Both schools have games on Saturday.

"Ballgames and life go on during times of war," Hardin said. "Most of us
remember times of war when you conduct life as near normally as possible.
Therefore, there will be a resumption of, more or less, normal activities. When
that will seem appropriate, I can't tell at this moment."

The National Basketball Association went ahead with all eight of last night's
games. However, the league said, "We will be seeking additional guidance from
the White House and the State Department tomorrow."

San Antonio's star center, David Robinson, a member of the Navy reserves,
watched television news reports before the Spurs' game with Dallas and tuned in
immediately afterward.

Robinson said it was difficult to concentrate on the game, in which he led the
Spurs with 30 points in a 100-94 victory over the Mavericks.

Navy officials say it is doubtful he will be called to serve.

"Everybody was a little anxious to see what's going on," he said. "I just felt
like sitting around and watching TV and seeing what's going on."

Robinson, a Naval Academy graduate who served two years active duty, still has
three years' reserve commitment.

"If I have to serve, I'll serve and I'll go eagerly," the N.B.A. All-Star said
about his military status. "I don't consider myself any different than anybody
else, so if I go, I'll go eagerly."

Comdr. Dottie Schmidt of the Naval Reserve Force in New Orleans said Robinson
probably would not be called up. Robinson is an Individual Mobilization
Augmentee and does not participate in monthly reserve drills. His active duty is
restricted to two weeks of annual training.

A spokesman for the National Hockey League said there were no plans to postpone
games.

"With regard to any disruption of our business or schedule, we will look for
guidance to the President of the United States and the Prime Minister of
Canada," said the N.H.L. spokesman, Gary Meagher. "As of this moment or until we
receive that guidance, our schedule will proceed normally."

Wayne Gretzky, the Los Angeles Kings' star, said he thought next Saturday's
N.H.L. All-Star Game should be canceled to give people time to reflect on the
Persian Gulf war.

"The game is great for Chicago, great for hockey, but that's all secondary now,"
he said last night. "If it was me I'd cancel the game."

Robert Helmick, the president of the United States Olympic Committee, said last
night in Havana that the committee has been kept apprised of travel advisories
through the State Department and that the information has been passed along to
the national governing bodies for each sport.

Morning play was beginning at the Australian Open tennis tournament in Melbourne
as the attack on Iraq got under way. Television sets at refreshment stands in
the stadium showed American and Australian news reports.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 17, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
In a War, Sports Here Continue

BYLINE: By Dave Anderson

SECTION: Section B; Page 11; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 801 words


On Dec. 7, 1941, the New York Giants were playing the Brooklyn Dodgers, then a
National Football League rival, at the Polo Grounds when the public-address
announcer interrupted the game.

"Attention, please: here is an urgent message," he said. "Will Col. William J.
Donovan call operator 19 in Washington immediately."

Minutes later, the world knew why Wild Bill Donovan, an Army intelligence chief,
had been summoned. During the radio description of that game, as on radio
stations throughout America in that era before television, a studio announcer
broke in with a news bulletin.

"Japanese warplanes," the voice said, "have attacked the Pearl Harbor Naval Base
in Hawaii."

For the United States, World War II had begun. But the games went on. And now,
with the United States and Iraq poised for war, the N.F.L. intends to play the
Giants-49ers and Raiders-Bills games Sunday and Super Bowl XXV in Tampa, Fla.,
the following Sunday. As it should, it says here. Subdue the partying perhaps,
but play the games.

If a threat of terrorism jeopardizing public safety were to emerge, that's
different.

As the focus of the nation's favorite sports holiday, the Super Bowl might be a
target for Iraqi terrorists. Don't be surprised if ticket-holders at Tampa
Stadium are required to pass through airport-type metal detectors.

But along with any other business, sports in America should try to maintain
itself during a war. As it has during other wars in America's history.

After President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963, N.F.L. games were played that
Sunday, a decision that Pete Rozelle, then the commissioner, now regrets. But
that was a time of national mourning. Life in America stood still briefly. In a
war, life goes on. Especially when a war is elsewhere in the world.

Since the Civil War, no war has been fought on American soil. No trenches have
been dug. No bombs have fallen. No missiles have been fired. Aside from their
natural concern for loved ones in the military fighting elsewhere in the world,
Americans have gone about their business. One of those businesses is sports.

During both World War I and World War II, the World Series and the Stanley Cup
playoffs were held, as were regular-season schedules. Some golf and tennis
tournaments, however, were canceled because of travel restrictions necessary to
the war effort.

Not long after Pearl Harbor, President Roosevelt told Commissioner Kenesaw
Mountain Landis to "keep baseball going" for morale purposes although East Coast
night games were banned as part of the blackouts. The N.F.L., organized in 1920,
played its championship games throughout World War II, as did college
basketball. The National Basketball Association wasn't formed until after World
War II.

But in the past, a war has always changed the face of sports, if not some of the
faces.

The day after Pearl Harbor, Bob Feller enlisted in the Navy. Joe DiMaggio was
soon in the Army, Ted Williams a Marine pilot. Hundreds of other professional
athletes were in the military. The heavyweight champion, Joe Louis, an Army
sergeant, entertained troops with boxing exhibitions while waiting more than
four years to defend his world heavyweight title.

Four months before V-E Day, the Giants' All-Pro tackle, Al Blozis, an Army
lieutenant, was killed by a German machine gunner while searching for a missing
patrol during a blizzard in the Vosges Mountains in France. And a young
right-handed pitcher, Johnny Beazley, who won two games in the 1942 World Series
for the Cardinals, was never the same after suffering leg wounds.

In a way, World War I changed Babe Ruth's career. With Duffy Lewis in the
military in 1918, the Red Sox manager, Ed Barrow, used the Babe in the outfield
when he wasn't pitching. In a total of 95 games, he led the American League with
11 homers and batted .300 before pitching the Red Sox to their last World Series
triumph. After that, he was an outfielder.

During the Korean War, a few athletes, notably Willie Mays, were drafted into
the military. More surprisingly, Ted Williams was recalled to duty as a Marine
pilot. When Williams, at age 34. was on his third of 39 missions, his jet
fighter was hit near Pyongyang by antiaircraft fire. Instead of parachuting, he
survived a flaming landing at 200 miles per hour at a South Korean airstrip.

Wounded in the left leg by small-arms fire at Hiep Duc in the Vietnam War, Rocky
Bleier was told by doctors that he might never walk normally again, much less
play football, as he had at Notre Dame. But he returned to the Pittsburgh
Steelers as a reliable running back on their four-time Super Bowl champions. And
who knows how many other athletes didn't return?

In every war, sports' loss has been the athletes in the military who never have
the opportunity to compete again.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 17, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

WAR IN THE GULF: TV CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK;
On Television, the Theater of War

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1011 words


Television achieved the excitement of old-time radio reporting last night as war
began in the Persian Gulf. The first tentative word that something was happening
came a few minutes after the start of "World News Tonight" on ABC, when Gary
Shepherd, on the telephone from Baghdad, told of seeing an "incredible panorama
of flashes" from his room at the Rashid Hotel on what he called "a very black
and clear night." A minute or two later, he reported, "Obviously an air raid is
under way right now."

The other networks followed in short order, with similar descriptions, in words
without pictures, from their reporters in Baghdad.

"There's a very big explosion!" said Tom Aspell of NBC News. "Red tracers, white
tracers! It's going up all over the place!"

The Cable News Network stayed on the longest with the Baghdad coverage, offering
vivid descriptions from Bernard Shaw, Peter Arnett and John Holliman, who
provided the clearest sounds of anti-aircraft fire by sticking his telephone out
of his window.

The CNN connection held firm through the evening, even after the other networks'
telephone links had been cut off. Tom Brokaw interviewed Mr. Shaw, who declined
to reveal how CNN had managed it.

The networks had been assembling their forces for this moment, and excitement
built as the anchors shifted from Iraq to Saudi Arabia, from which pictures were
available. Bob Simon, the CBS correspondent, reported that a squadron of F-15
fighter planes had taken off, heading north. But even after the CBS Pentagon
correspondent, David Martin, indicated that cruise missiles were beginning a
major air campaign that would go on for days, Dan Rather cautioned, "Nobody
knows what those flashes were." The sometimes excitable Mr. Rather seemed to be
trying hard not to be swept away by the excitement; he emphasized more than once
that early reports can be confusing and unreliable.

Shortly after 7 P.M. Marlin Fitzwater, not generally a dramatic presence, had
the biggest if briefest moment of his career. "The liberation of Kuwait has
begun," he told the White House reporters. He informed them that it was called
Operation Desert Storm and then strode off. It seemed in keeping with the
evening's drama. The nation would be left in suspense until 9 P.M. for the
President himself.

The Thrill of the Night

Meanwhile coverage continued. From Baghdad, Peter Arnett of CNN said, "Every
bomb seems to be hitting something." Peter Jennings was talking to Bill Redeker,
ABC's man in Saudi Arabia, when air raid sirens were heard. Mr. Redeker said
that people were putting on gas masks. Mr. Jennings told him to go to a shelter
if he thought that was prudent; the correspondent glanced around and stayed
where he was; a little later, everybody was ordered back into the hotel, and the
power went down for a while. And then there was rumors of an attack on Saudi
Arabia by Iraqi Scud missiles, but those reports proved false. Threats, rumors,
power failures, sirens, lights; the evening had all the elements of a good old
thriller.

The networks' use of maps was helpful throughout, despite an occasional snag.
(While tuning in on the sirens in Riyadh, Mr. Rather spoke of a map that
indicated the city's location, but the city did not appear on the map that
showed up on screen.) Mr. Jennings was especially clear, with the assistance of
particularly colorful maps, in explaining what was going on and where.

As the minutes sped by, the pace of information picked up. There were reports
from the Pentagon, from Jerusalem, from Amman. The switches from place to place,
from correspondent to correspondent, each adding a bit of information or
speculation, generated high excitement. Perhaps to keep blood pressures down,
many of the same military and political experts who had been giving their views
for weeks were brought back. Even Walter Cronkite showed up.

The information that everybody wanted began coming in. About 90 minutes after
the first announcement, Martin Fletcher of NBC reported from Tel Aviv that most
of the military targets in Iraq had been hit, and Jim Miklashevski reported from
Washington that no American jets had been shot down. On CBS, David Martin, after
warning that first reports were always wrong, reported that Iraqi planes had not
managed to get off the ground.

There were pictures of big American planes taking off. You couldn't see much,
just a few lights and a blob in the dark, but coming after the news of their
succeses, those dim images took on formidable power.

Bush Takes the Stage

By the time President Bush appeared, at 9 P.M., he was almost able to declare
victory through air power. He promised the destruction of Iraq's nuclear and
chemical plants as well as tanks and artillery. He looked firm and spoke
directly. He promised again that "this will not be another Vietnam" and
expressed the hope that the battle would not go on for long and that casualties
would be light. And he painted a picture of a new world order.

In the post-speech analysis, Fred Francis of NBC reported from the Pentagon that
the air attacks would continue for at least 10 days before any American ground
troops were brought into action. He also explained that Iraqi radar had been
totally blacked out, which meant American air superiority from the start.

At 9:30, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney gave an official briefing, and he and
Gen. Colin L. Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, answered a few
questions. They spoke of the destruction of Saddam Hussein's military
capabilities and said that the operation had gone very well. (General Powell
gave a plug to CNN that implied that the Pentagon was relying on its television
set for military information.)

It was what an American audience wanted to hear. The officials were naturally
careful about their comments, but less than three hours after the beginning of
the attack and perhaps the most exciting television evening ever, this was
clearly the Administration's night. The directors of "Operation Desert Storm"
were taking a bow.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 18, 1991, Friday

CORRECTION:

A TV Critic's Notebook in some editions yesterday, about coverage of the war in
the Persian Gulf, misidentified the White House correspondent for NBC News. He
is Jim Miklaszewski.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 17, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: THE OVERVIEW - U.S. AND ALLIES OPEN AIR WAR ON IRAQ; BOMB
BAGHDAD AND KUWAITI TARGETS; 'NO CHOICE' BUT FORCE, BUSH DECLARES;
No Ground Fighting Yet; Call to Arms by Hussein

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2485 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Thursday, Jan. 17


The United States and allied forces Wednesday night opened the long-threatened
war to drive President Saddam Hussein's army from Kuwait, striking Baghdad and
other targets in Iraq and Kuwait with waves of bombers and cruise missiles
launched from naval vessels.

"The liberation of Kuwait has begun," President Bush said in a three-sentence
statement confirming the start of the attack that was read by his spokesman,
Marlin Fitzwater, shortly after the raids began.

Later, in a televised address to the nation from the Oval Office, a somber Mr.
Bush said that after months of continuous diplomatic overtures had failed to
produce movement by Iraq, the United States and its allies "have no choice but
to force Saddam from Kuwait by force. We will not fail." [Transcript, page A6.]

No Planes Reported Missing

United States officials said shortly after midnight Wednesday that none of the
planes that took part in the nighttime raids were reported missing.

In Baghdad, Mr. Hussein said in a speech broadcast by the Iraqi radio that "the
mother of all battles has begun," according to news service reports. He called
Mr. Bush a "hypocritical criminal" and vowed to crush "the satanic intentions of
the White House." It was unclear when Mr. Hussein had read his remarks, whether
they had been pre-recorded, or where he was at the time. [Page A18.]

Mr. Bush said his goal "is not the conquest of Iraq, it is the liberation of
Kuwait." But he also said, "We are determined to knock out Saddam Hussein's
nuclear bomb potential. We will also destroy his chemical-weapons facilities."

3 Other Nations Take Part

Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, told reporters at the Pentagon Wednesday night that those
targets had been among those assigned to the first wave of American F-117
Stealth fighter-bombers, F-15 fighter-bombers, British Tornado attack planes and
Saudi and Kuwaiti F-15's that raided Iraqi military targets about 3 A.M. local
time Thursday (7 P.M. Wednesday Eastern standard time.)

Administration officials also said United States Navy ships in the waters off
the Arabian Peninsula had fired ground-hugging cruise missiles at targets that
had been programmed into their guidance systems for months. The officials said
the ships fired a total of 50 Tomahawk missiles in an assault on Iraqi command
and communications centers.

Seeking to Avoid Civilians

Mr. Cheney said the initial targets were spread throughout Iraq and Kuwait and
were chosen to "do everything possible to avoid injury to civilians." Both
officials declined to say if there had been any American or allied losses, or to
describe in any detail how badly they thought they had damaged Baghdad or the
other Iraqi targets.

"The response of the Iraqi forces at this point has been limited," Mr. Cheney
said, leading analysts to conclude that the allies may have succeeded in their
goal of largely incapacitating Iraq's Air Force at the outset.

But Mr. Cheney said that the war was just beginning and that "it is likely to
run for a long period of time."

Reports of New Attack

Cable News Network reported that antiaircraft fire resumed in Baghdad about 9:30
A.M. Iraqi time and that its correspondents heard explosions that sounded like
bombs in the far distance from their central Baghdad hotel.

The network also reported the first sighting of President Hussein since the
start of the attacks, by a Western television technician at a Baghdad television
center this afternoon.

Mr. Cheney said the United States could not confirm reports that Iraq had fired
Soviet-made Scud missiles at allied positions after the attack began. Reuters
reported from Bahrain that the civil defense authorities there had detected
missile launches but that the weapons fell short of their targets.

Assuring Americans that ground forces were not yet engaged in the battle, the
President added: "Five months ago, Saddam Hussein started this cruel war against
Kuwait. Tonight, the battle has been joined."

He said initial reports indicated that "our operations are proceeding according
to plan."

"Our objectives are clear," he said. "Saddam Hussein's forces will leave Kuwait,
the legitimate Government of Kuwait will be restored to its righftul place and
Kuwait will once again be free."

"Some may ask, why act now? Why not wait?" the President said. "The answer is
clear. The world could wait no longer."

Repeating his promises that Saudi Arabia would not become "another Vietnam," Mr.
Bush said he would bring American troops home as soon as possible.

"I'm hopeful that this fighting will not go on for long and that casualties will
be held to an absolute minimum," he said. "Our troops will have the best
possible support in the entire world, and they will not be asked to fight with
one hand tied behind their back."

In the written statement issued earlier, Mr. Fitzwater said: "In conjunction
with the forces of our coalition partners, the United States has moved under the
code name Operation Desert Storm to enforce the mandates of the United Nations
Security Council. As of 7 o'clock P.M., Operation Desert Storm forces were
engaging targets in Iraq and Kuwait."

The current President of the United Nations Security Council, Bagbeni Adeito
Nzengeya of Zaire, convened the Council late Wednesday night to discuss the
outbreak of fighting.

Security Council Resolution 678, which authorized the use of force against Iraq
after Jan. 15, also requires "the states concerned" to keep the Council
regularly informed about any action they take under the resolution.

Skies Over Baghdad Alight

The nighttime attack was first revealed in television reports by American
correspondents in Baghdad that the skies over the Iraqi capital were alight with
anti-aircraft and tracer fire. Initial reports were that multiple waves of
warplanes bombed central Baghdad, hitting oil refineries and the airport.

Mr. Bush notified Congressional leaders of the planned attack between 6 and 7
P.M., telephoning House Speaker Thomas S. Foley and Robert C. Byrd, the
President pro temp of the Senate. In a letter and a report, he also sent the
formal notification, as required under the war resolution passed by the House
and Senate last week, that all efforts at diplomacy had failed and that he had
made his final decision to commit America to its first all-out war since
Vietnam.

"The Government of Iraq remains completely intransigent in rejecting the U.N.
Security Council's demands, despite the exhaustive use by the United States and
the United Nations of all appropriate diplomatic, political and economic
measures to persuade or compel Iraq to comply," the report said.

Foley Urges Unity

Mr. Foley said: "We must now pray for a conflict that ends quickly, decisively
and with a minimum loss of life. We must now stand united in support of our
armed forces in the gulf who have embraced the duty and burden of conducting the
war."

Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican Leader, said, "The cause of this war
is Iraqi aggression, not American determination."

In New York, the United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar,
said, "I think it is for me to express deep sorrow."

United States officials said that the decision to go to war had been developing
over several days, and that Mr. Bush had been working on at least four drafts of
his speech for two or three weeks.

But he put into motion the actual order for battle only at 8 A.M. Wednesday,
when Saudi officials said Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d called in the
Saudi Ambassador, Prince Bandar bin Sultan, and told him that American forces
would attack Iraq.

Code Word to King Fahd

The Ambassador telephoned King Fahd of Saudi Arabia, using a prearranged code
word, the informants said. The King then repeated back a code word that
constituted the final acknowledgement that the offensive would begin.

Mr. Bush monitored the offensive from the Oval Office, where he had watched the
evening news and waited for the first signs of attack with Vice President Dan
Quayle, Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser, and John H. Sununu, the
White House Chief of Staff. Mr. Scowcroft spent the night in the Situation Room
in the White House basement, connected electronically to the Central
Intelligence Agency, the State Department and the Pentagon, where Mr. Cheney and
General Powell worked through the night as well.

Making good on his repeated warnings to Mr. Hussein, who had defied 12 United
Nations resolutions and a naval blockade, Mr. Bush began the largest American
military offensive since the Vietnam War about 19 hours after the expiration of
the United Nations deadline for Iraq to leave Kuwait peacefully. The President
said he decided to order the attack because "the world could wait no longer." He
added, "Sanctions, though having some effect, showed no signs of accomplishing
their objective."

He said he had hoped that the Congressional vote authorizing the use of force
last weekend would prompt Mr. Hussein to agree to withdraw from Kuwait. "Instead
he remained intransigent, certain that time was on his side," Mr. Bush said.

"No President can easily commit our sons and daughters to war," he said.

Mr. Fitzwater's statement about the start of war was prepared Tuesday night, the
President's spokesman said, but Mr. Bush could have withheld the final order to
attack "if there was a massive pullout by Saddam Hussein."

"It could have been changed," Mr. Fitzwater said.

Late Wednesday night, the White House said that Mr. Bush had authorized the
Energy Secretary, James Watkins, to distribute 1.12 million barrels a day from
the Strategic Petroleum Reserve for the next 30 days in a measure "designed to
promote stability in world markets."

The United States had spent the day formalizing a command system under which
international forces are expected to fight under United Nations auspices but
under the actual leadership of the United States.

Bush Calls Other Leaders

Mr. Bush called Prime Minister John Major of Britain and other leaders of the
anti-Iraqi alliance Wednesday from his private study to inform them that the
attack was about to begin.

The White House also sought to reassure the American people that all prospects
for a peaceful solution had been exhausted, leaving Mr. Bush no choice but to
begin what he has said will be an overwhelming display of air, sea and land
power that will end Iraq's occupation of Kuwait swiftly and decisively.

"This military action, taken in accord with United Nations resolutions and with
the consent of the United States Congress, follows months of constant and
virtually endless diplomatic activity on the part of the United Nations, the
United States and many, many other countries," Mr. Bush said.

Some of those who had opposed the Congressional resolution on the use of force
issued statements rallying behind the President.

'Unite Behind Our Troops'

Senator David L. Boren, Democrat of Oklahoma and chairman of Senate Intelligence
Committee, said: "Now that the war has begun, all Americans should unite behind
our troops. We hope and pray that victory will come quickly and with minimum
loss of life."

The House majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt, said, "My prayers and thoughts
are with the soldiers and their families, and my hopes are for a swift and
successful conclusion to this war."

Although initial reports from Saudi Arabia and Iraq were very sketchy, the first
wave of attacks appeared, as expected, to exploit the alliance's overwhelming
air power, perhaps in an attempt to bomb strategic command targets in Baghdad.

Reports from members of the news pool stationed in Saudi Arabia with American
forces said two squadrons of F-15E fighter-bombers loaded with bombs and
air-to-air missiles took off at 12:50 A.M. local time today from the largest
American military base, in central Saudi Arabia.

They made the 600-mile-plus flight to Baghdad in about 90 minutes, flying into
the clear night sky in pairs. "We've been waiting here for five months now,"
said Col. Ray Davies, the base's chief maintenance officer. "Now we finally got
to do what we were sent here to do."

A steady stream of F-15E's were taking off from central and eastern Saudi
Arabia, part of an international air force that includes the deadliest, fastest
and most technologically advanced warplanes in the world.

The United States alone has about 1,800 warplanes in the Persian Gulf region,
based at military installations in Saudi Arabia and aboard six aircraft carriers
plying the gulf, the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea.

The Pentagon said Wednesday that there were now 425,000 American soldiers
stationed in the region after the swiftest and largest mobilization of arms in
American military history. There are an additional 265,000 troops from 27 other
countries, facing what the Pentagon estimates is an Iraqi Army of 545,000 in
southern Iraq and Kuwait.

From Baghdad, television broadcasts said the pounding of the city continued
intermittently through the night. The city had gone black, shaking from bomb
reports as the night sky was pierced by tracers from batteries of anti-aircraft
weapons massed around the city. At one point, reporters in Baghdad said volleys
of anti-aircraft fire, and the glow of distant explosions lit the entire night
sky.

A Cable News Network correspondent said he had seen a fire near a mosque, while
another reported that a refinery near the presidential palace was being fired
on. Loud explosions and machine-gun fire could be heard in the background as the
reporters spoke by telephone with their oprganizations in the United States.

In Saudi Arabia, news reports said that air raid sirens had been turned on at
air bases and that reporters had been ordered to go inside and advised to put on
their gas masks, but there were no reports of enemy attacks.

Congress had given Mr. Bush authority to use force against Iraq on Saturday
after a long and emotional debate. The President also acted with the
authorization of the United Nations. It had given Iraq until Tuesday to leave
Kuwait, which Baghdad occupied on Aug. 2 in a lightning raid that shattered what
the United States and Europe had hoped would be a time of peace following the
end of the cold war.

The American response had been orchestrated over the next five months, as Mr.
Bush moved virtually the entire might of the nation's non-nuclear forces to the
gulf while the United Nations sought to dislodge Iraq from Kuwait through a
constantly tightening chokehold of economic sanctions.

The United States had expressed growing impatience with the sanctions, however,
and the planning for war was stepped up sharply after Nov. 29, when the United
Nations approved the resolution authorizing the use of force if Iraq did not
withdraw by Jan 15.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush as he announced in a televised address last
night that an air attack had been launched against Iraq. (ABC News) (pg. A1);
Seaman Norm Beck listening yesterday as the captain of the battleship Wisconsin
announced that all ships in the gulf were put on high alert. (Associated Press);
President Saddam Hussein touring military installations in Kuwait on Tuesday.
(Iraq television via Reuters) (pg. A14)

Map of Iraq highlighting possible air strike targets (pg. A1)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 18, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
Vietnamese Hotel Deal With French

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section D; Page 3; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 127 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Jan. 17


A new French-Vietnamese company began a multimillion-dollar renovation of the
historic Metropole Hotel in Hanoi in Vietnam's first big tourism venture with a
Western partner. The company, Societe d' Economie Mixte Thong Nhat Metropole,
includes two Vietnamese state companies, Hanoi Tourism and Giang Vo Companie, as
well as the Pullman International Hotel and Feal International, both of France.
Construction will cost $9 million and is expected to be completed by January
1992.

The Metropole, a graceful but old four-story white building in the Art Deco
syle, was built in 1936 when Vietnam was ruled by France. The Vietnamese took
over management and changed the name of the hotel to Thong Nhat, or
Reunification, after they drove out the French in 1954.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 18, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The Press;
Government's Strict Orders Limit Reports

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 728 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 17


A strict information policy has been imposed by the Bush Administration on the
war against Iraq, with few specific details being made e available to reporters
and the public about the first day of the bombing against targets in Baghdad and
Kuwait.

The Defense Department has been reluctant to divulge details, officials contend,
both because it is too early to know some things with certainty and because they
fear the Iraqi military may learn something from such reports.

Today, for example, there was only one Pentagon briefing, a morning session that
covered the events of the previous day rather than the action taking place
today.

Questions Deflected

Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and General Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, turned away questions on a variety of subjects at the
morning briefing, arguing that it was too early to provide answers. Among the
issues they declined to address were any detailed assessment of the air attacks,
especially any effect they may have had on Iraqi ground forces and when the
United States and allied forces might begin a ground attack.

Michael Getler, the assistant managing editor for foreign news for The
Washington Post, said he was dismayed by the restricted flow of information.

"It seems to me that 24 hours after the first strike they should be able to
provide a more detailed assessment as to what's happened," he said.

Mr. Getler said that journalists and the public had as yet no real idea as to
what targets may have been hit, how hard and whether there wass any estimate of
civilian casualties.

'We Don't Have Words'

Timothy J. Russert, vice president and Washington bureau chief of NBC News, said
the restricted flow of information was making news reporting difficult. "Not
only do we not have pictures, but we don't have words," he said. Mr. Russert
expressed sympathy with Pentagon officials, who he said were sorting out the
information themselves, and said his correspondents were doing the best they
could under the circumstances.

Because the first stages of the war have been largely an air offensive, it
seemed early to judge the effectiveness of the arrangements made by the Defense
Department to have reporters cover the war.

Over the protests of news executives, the Pentagon adopted rules that limit
coverage of hostilities to reporters assembled in officially escorted groups,
known as pools. Moreover, the pool reporting would be subject to a "security
review" by military officers before the information could be disseminated.

Pete Williams, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, said the
arrangment was necessary to prevent any helpful information from reaching the
Iraqi armed forces.

In the first hours of the war, reporting pools were deployed to watch as fighter
planes took off from Saudi Arabian bases and were allowed to speak with
returning pilots. Both print and video reports were screened, and while there
did not appear to be significant censorship of the earliest dispatches,
reporters said some deletions were made by military officers.

Most Restrictive Since Korea

The reporting regulations are the most restrictive since the Korean War and in
some ways even more so, since reporters then were not confined to escorted
pools. American reporters generally accepted censorship in both world wars and
Korea, but there were few restrictions on reporting in Vietnam: reporters were
free to make their way around the battle front and their reports were not
screened.

There is widespread agreement that the distrust of the press inherent in the
Pentagon's rules for coverage of the gulf war is part of the legacy of Vietnam.

Winant Sidle, a retired Army general who was the last military spokesman in
Saigon, said distrust of the press was salted through the military in Vietnam.

"The guys who are general today were majors and colonels in Vietnam and they
were the ones who hated the press most," he said.

When the United States invaded Grenada in 1983, the military excluded
journalists from the early days of the invasion. President Reagan explained the
decision by saying the news media were not on "our side militarily" in Vietnam.

The few Western correspondents who have remained in Baghdad have been limited by
Iraqi Government officials and obvious safety considerations.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Employees of the Cable News Network's Jerusalem bureau putting
on gas masks yesterday after the first reports of Iraqi missile attacks against
Israel. No strikes were reported in the city. (CNN)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 18, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Boston Journal;
For Homeless Veterans, a Barracks

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 666 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Jan. 17


Outside a 10-story building in the heart of down town Boston, a weary-looking
man squints at a sign that says "New England Shelter for Homeless Veterans" and
leans his way through a revolving door. "Law and order," he sighs, moving
through a metal detector to the front desk.

Within minutes, the shelter's staff sergeant briefs him on "barracks rules,"
including regular showers, strict waking hours and an attitude of respect. No
drugs, no alcohol, no verbal abuse allowed.

Soon this homeless veteran will have a photo identification card, a platoon
assignment and an Army bunk with clean sheets.

A little more than a year ago, homeless veterans in Boston, as in most other
American cities, were left to compete with women and children for beds in local
shelters that are often crime-ridden. Government officials estimate that nearly
one-third of the nation's homeless, perhaps 150,000 people, are veterans, most
of them Vietnam War veterans.

Now, night after night, 125 of Boston's estimated 1,500 homeless veterans make
their way to the building on Court Street that houses the shelter. It is one of
only a handful of shelters in the nation run exclusively by veterans for
veterans.

"What we offer these guys is the kind of structure people who have been in the
military are familiar with," says Ken Smith, a 38-year-old former Army medic in
Vietnam who is a co-founder of the shelter. "That's what these guys need and
aren't getting anywhere else."


The shelter, founded in late 1989 by Mr. Smith and three other Vietnam veterans,
has been a local success story; it has been commended as a model shelter by
local officials and in newspaper editorials.

Besides being given a familiar military atmosphere, the homeless men are offered
counseling on drug and alcohol abuse and help in their search for housing and
jobs.

In exchange, the veterans, who stay an average of two months, perform four hours
of community work each week. The work ranges from sweeping floors to rocking
drug-addicted babies in local hospitals.

"In all my travels, this is the best place I've ever seen," George Everson, a
58-year-old Korean War veteran, said in an interview at the shelter.

But the New England Shelter for Homeless Veterans has earned more than just the
gratitude of its guests.

In 1988 the playwright David Mamet responded to calls for help from Mr. Smith by
staging a benefit performance to raise money for the shelter. The benefit,
"Sketches of War," was a series of vignettes that featured actors like Al
Pacino, Michael J. Fox and Donald Sutherland, and netted $250,000.

Last year President Bush, in keeping with his practice of honoring volunteer
efforts throughout the country under his daily "1,000 points of light" program,
singled out the New England shelter for commendation. "We are Point of Light No.
142," said Mr. Smith, a wiry, boyish-looking man. "That's right. I'm serious --
one-four-two."

There are other numbers, too. Of approximately 1,000 men who have come to the
shelter, 275 have found permanent jobs and housing, he said.

Some guests and other shelter workers have criticized Mr. Smith's military-like
rules as being too strict.

"They get too much into my personal life," said one veteran, who complained that
he was barred from the shelter for several days after Mr. Smith found he was
using drugs.

Mr. Smith said the veteran's concerns were warranted. "You have a drug problem
and you come for help, I'll help you," he said. "You bring drugs in here, you're
gone."

But others say the strictness of the shelter helps restore a sense of order to
their lives.

"This isn't really boot camp," said Otis Hilliard, a Vietnam veteran and former
marine from Memphis. "It is just a disciplined place that helps people get their
lives back together."

Peter, another Vietnam veteran, who declined to give his last name, agreed with
Mr. Hilliard. "I've been a lot of places, and this is the Cadillac of shelters
as far as I'm concerned," he said.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 18, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Americans' Reaction;
Anxious Nation, Drawn Together For Support, Exhibits a Quiet Pride

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1302 words


Sobered by the hail of missiles on Israel but proud in a subdued way about
America's early military success in the Persian Gulf, men and women around the
nation drew close yesterday on the first full day of war.

Waking from a short night of sleep that was interrupted by hours in front of the
television or by worried dreams, Americans did what they always do in crisis:
reached out for each other and marked in their mental calendars where they had
been and what they were doing at the moment history was made.

They awoke yesterday morning to what was to many of them surprising news: the
military that 11 years ago had embarrassed itself on the deserts of the Mideast
in a bungled mission to rescue hostages in Iran had this time carried off what
seemed for the moment to be a job well done, a huge air attack against Iraq that
Pentagon officials said destroyed important targets and cost only one American
life in the first 24 hours.

But by nightfall, with Israel under attack, Americans gasped at a volatile
situation that had turned so suddenly from promise to peril, at the reminder
that their country and its allies had begun a journey of unknown consequence and
duration.

"I'm real afraid that it's sort of a World War III scenario at this point," said
Robert G. Aberg, a psychologist in Dallas. "When all this is over, there aren't
going to be any winners. How is this going to settle out?"

Hours earlier, on a day that began with almost smug admiration for the
efficiency, precision and technological aplomb of the early bombing runs, Mr.
Aberg, like so many Americans, was "real proud and relieved that things seem to
be going so well militarily."

Positive Reactions

Andrew Dawson, the manager of a fine arts ticket service in Houston, said: "War
goes against the most traditional of my feelings. I've never been able to
support military action, but something else came over me as I watched this
unfold. I'm seeing that a fast and a direct action can save lives."

From the morning of optimism to the evening of fear, Americans came together in
a search for community, flocking to houses of worship to pray and to blood banks
to send solace to the troops in a most basic and symbolic way. Searching for
meaning, they vented a jumble of emotions to radio talk show hosts and lifelong
friends. And searching for information, they snatched newspapers off the stands
as fast as they were delivered and stayed close to their television sets.

All of this seemed a way to join hands with their fellow Americans now that the
war, so long awaited, had actually begun. "It's like in a family when some
trauma happens," Mr. Aberg said. "It brings into focus your common bonds."

President Bush quickly won high praise for directing the swift and sure attack,
starting just 17 hours after the United Nations deadline for Iraq to withdraw
from Kuwait or face the threat of military action. But final judgment was still
days, weeks, or even months away.

Before any of the reports of counterattacks, Randy Denton, an insurance
executive from Maryland, said of the President: "I respect him for making the
decision and taking the full brunt of it if it went badly. He will make his mark
in history because of this."

Support for Bush, but Cautiously

Early support for the President was evident in a Gallup Poll of 895 Americans,
conducted within minutes of Mr. Bush's address to the nation on Wednesday night.
Eighty-one percent of those polled said they approved of the way Mr. Bush was
handling the situtation in the gulf, with 12 percent disapproving.

But some Americans yesterday emphasized the uncertainity of war, the folly of
being too pleased too soon. "It's so premature to evaluate how this thing is
going," said Scott Edwards, a consumer electronics executive from Baltimore.
"I'm not sure yet we have legitimate information. I'm not ready to say we won."

Debbie Smith of Foster City, Calif., an administrator at a computer programming
company, noted after the attack on Israel that Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney
had been right yesterday morning in warning the public not to leap to optimistic
conclusions. "It's going to be a longer, more drawn-out course of events," Ms.
Smith said.

Dread that the military situation could suddenly sour was accompanied by fear
that terrorist attacks could bring the war to America, a concern that for now is
outpacing reality.

"I'm looking for them to start bombing bridges, railroad tracks, stuff like
that," said Adolph Thacker, an Amtrak employee who was dispensing coffee and
doughnuts in the club car of a Washington-to-New York Metroliner yesterday
morning.

'Feeling of Impending Peril'

Others making the trip said they were traveling warily, even on a train, and
planned to cancel unnecessary airplane trips. "There's an eerie feeling of
impending peril," said Phil Williams, a lawyer making the trip from Washington
to Baltimore.

In recognition of the threat of terrorism, military bases across the nation have
been put on high alert, as have airports, where concourses have been closed to
all but passengers carrying tickets and curbside check-in of luggage has been
canceled.

Precautions against terrorism were the tightest in Washington, a city
preoccupied with security even in ordinary times. Senate staff workers were
searched yesterday with uncommon scrutiny before entering the Russell Senate
Office Building. Police dogs prowled the Capitol, and Secret Service agents with
shotguns stood guard outside the Iraqi Embassy.

In the midst of the largely supportive mood, sporadic antiwar protests continued
in cities around the country, including Washington, New York, Chicago, Los
Angeles, Hartford and New Haven.

Some who protested on Wednesday night thought better of it yesterday. "When the
bombing started, I felt the electricity and nostalgia of opposing a war," said
Rabbi Michael Paley, the director of the Earl Hall Center for Religious Life at
Columbia Univerisity in New York. "But today it hit me: this is a real war out
there. People will die. I'm older than I was in the Vietnam War. There was a
momentary exhileration Wednesday, but nostalgia is short lived."

Opponents Reconsider

While protests continued, some Americans were reconsidering their opposition to
the war, in light of what seemed yesterday morning a singular moment of
international cooperation.

"As hokey as this may sound," said Mr. Dawson of Houston, "President Bush's
whole premise that there is a possibility for a stronger United Nations and a
genuine world peace must be valued," he said. "It surprises me so much to feel
this way."

A similar hope for a new world order was expressed by Mike Houghton of
Alexandria, Va., a manager of international corporate relations at Bell
Atlantic. "What is really good to see is all the countries banding together,"
Mr. Houghton said, before the attack on Israel. "Often the United States takes
the peacekeeping role and gets criticized for it. But we're all in this together
and that's a good sign. It's not an Arab-Western war, as Saddam Hussein likes to
paint it. It's an aggressor vesus a peacekeeping force."

The thoughts and feeling of this first day of war would likely stay with them
forever, the men and women interviewed said, since this was certain to be one of
those events that marks the end of an old era and the start of a new one.

Several people compared their feelings to those on the days of John F. Kennedy's
assassination or the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger, when they knew
instantly, watching the first television pictures, that nothing would be quite
the same again.

"The course of history has changed," said Mr. Houghton. "I don't know exactly
what that means, but I know things are going to be different."

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Americans lent support to the Persian Gulf effort with blood
donations. Angelo Licata and Annette Reid stacked cases of blood being readied
at the Red Cross center in Buffalo for shipment to the Middle East. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 18, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

In Rehearsal: Broadway At Cut Prices

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 21; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 418 words


A $24 top ticket price for a Broadway play? It's finally happening.

Rehearsals began yesterday on the first play to be presented under a plan
created last year to encourage the production of more plays on Broadway. The
plan reduces costs and, in an attempt to develop new audiences, cuts ticket
prices on its productions to a range of about $10 to $24.

The play, "The Speed of Darkness" by Steve Tesich, who wrote the screenplay for
"Breaking Away," is to begin preview performances on Feb. 14 at the Belasco
Theater. It stars Len Cariou and Stephen Lang as two Vietnam veterans who meet
again 20 years after the war. Opening night is set for Feb. 28.

"I think this plan is the hope of Broadway," Robert Whitehead, one of the play's
producers, said yesterday before a small ceremony on the Belasco stage to
celebrate the occasion. "There's an audience that wants some real Broadway
theater, but to a large degree they've been priced out of the market. This is
going to encourage them to come back. The plan is also designed to make a
genuine profit, so it will encourage investment."

Sharing Cuts and Profits

The plan -- formally known as the Broadway Alliance: a New Plan for Play
Production -- was announced last June after a year and a half of negotiations
between producers, theater owners, craft guilds and unions. Under its terms,
each of the three major Broadway theater owners -- the Shubert and Nederlander
Organizations and Jujamcyn Theaters -- designates one of its theaters for
Alliance productions. The Belasco is a Shubert house. Dramas or comedies are
eligible but musicals are not.

Royalties, many salaries and other costs for plays at those theaters are cut by
an average of at least 25 percent, with all those working for reduced salaries
sharing in 10 percent of any profit after the play earns back its original
investment. The play must be produced for a maximum of $400,000, much less than
the $800,000 to $1 million the average serious Broadway play costs these days.
The lower ticket prices compare with the current range for Broadway nonmusicals
of about $25 to $45. The least expensive seats for "The Speed of Darkness" cost
$12.

The second play in the Alliance plan, "Our Country's Good," by Timberlake
Wertenbaker, is to begin performances in April at the Nederlander Theater.

"I'm pleased that after two years, we're finally going," said Harvey Sabinson,
executive director of the League of American Theaters and Producers, the
Broadway trade group.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 18, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Technology Is the Star Of 'Intruder'

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 490 words


John Milius's "Flight of the Intruder," about United States Navy pilots during
the Vietnam War, works less well as an adventure movie than as a slick piece of
bogus hardware.

Much care has been taken on the technology. The aerial scenes are small wonders
of movie-making craft, blending actual flight material with material shot in
studio mock-ups, with perfectly scaled miniatures and with rear projection.

These scenes, utterly impersonal, have conviction, which is just what's lacking
in the film's characters and what they do. Real people can't be simulated as
easily as flying machines.


The screenplay, set in 1972, is about the heroism of the carrier-based pilots
and bombardiers of the Navy's A-6 Intruders, low-altitude bombers that carry no
defensive armament and thus put their two-man crews at great risk.

Brad Johnson, with a jaw as strong as that of any Armani model, plays a pilot
who loses his bombardier during a dangerous mission over what he sees to be
worthless jungle targets.

His new bombardier, a tough veteran played by Willem Dafoe, shares Mr. Johnson's
sense of frustration.

Attempting to keep his men in order is Danny Glover, as their squadron leader.
He has his hands full when Mr. Johnson and Mr. Dafoe take it upon themselves to
bomb a missile dump in Hanoi, at that time off-limits to American aircraft.


The two men face court-martial.  President Richard M. Nixon becomes the film's
benign deus ex machina at this point. More happens, but none of it any more
rousing or unexpected.

Rosanna Arquette comes on briefly as a conveniently widowed young woman with
whom Mr. Johnson falls in love during shore leave in the Philippines, where
there's also a barroom brawl. Life aboard the carrier is enlivened by harmless
boyish pranks. The movie lurches on.

The performances are adequate, but "Flight of the Intruder" is as empty as a
six-pack after the Super Bowl. No issues are at stake. As portrayed here, war is
unattached to the rest of the world. Like a video game, it's an end in itself,
something to while away the time.

The movie's perfunctory macho posturings are neither entertaining nor
instructive. They are pipe dreams.

"Flight of the Intruder," which has been rated PG-13 (Parents strongly
cautioned), includes some vulgar language and violence.

Flight of the Intruder

Directed by John Milius; screenplay by Robert Dillon and David Shaber, based on
the novel by Stephen Coonts; director of photography, Fred J. Koenekamp; edited
by C. Timothy O'Meara and Steve Mirkovich; music by Basil Poledouris; production
designer, Jack T. Collis; produced by Mace Neufeld; released by Paramount
Pictures. Running time: 115 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.

Camparelli . . . Danny Glover
Cole . . . Willem Dafoe
Jake Grafton . . . Brad Johnson
Callie . . . Rosanna Arquette
Boxman . . . Tom Sizemore
Cowboy Parker . . . J. Kenneth Campbell
Razor . . . Jared Chandler

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 18, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

ON MY MIND;
The First Battle

BYLINE: By A. M. Rosenthal

SECTION: Section A; Page 31; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 732 words


The first battle was won brilliantly, but hold the victory parties; the war goes
on.

In and out of government, people I respect and spoke to through the first night
and day of war said it looked like a short war, but Saddam Hussein figured he
would lose the air battle. He will have to lose more, air or ground, before he
appeals to Arabs and Europeans to throw him a political ladder out of the grave
he has dug for himself.

He believes in martyrdom for others. But there's no sign that death appeals to
him personally. So we can expect France and Germany to try to rescue Iraq for
future munitions contracts, and Syria to help fight Israelis.

Some U.S. academics and hysterical left-wing radio outlets are already telling
us how bad it would be if Saddam Hussein were destroyed. You figure that one
out; I can't, except that maybe they all just like the man.

But away with them for a minute. For a minute, let's give thanks to those people
and countries that refused to continue on the road of appeasement and turned out
to be so right. Even if Saddam Hussein makes the war bloodier, already they have
helped save the lives of hundreds of thousands of men, women and children.

Saddam Hussein will not be around much longer to threaten death to Arab nations
standing in his imperial path, and to all Israelis. And whatever the course of
the war, far more Americans would have died if he had not been hit before he had
nuclear weapons, more chemical and bacteriological missiles, better defenses.

For that gift of life to those who will escape this mass murderer, the world
owes its gratitude to George Bush.

I voted for Mr. Bush and ever since have been grumbling about him. I was
disappointed in his chumminess with the Chinese Communists, his total embrace of
Mikhail Gorbachev, his readiness to appease Saddam Hussein before Iraq invaded
Kuwait, his unnecessary coldness toward Israel. I wasn't so crazy about Millie
either.

But at decision time, he faced down not only Saddam Hussein but Democratic and
Republican politicians who wanted him to follow a sanctions-only policy -- and
American journalism, which tilted against him. That policy would have allowed
Saddam Hussein to escape, to kill another day.

There are others who also have won morally or politically, though the war
continues. First among them are American servicemen and women who not only
showed courage but technological talents the world no longer expects of
Americans. In one day, they wiped out the idea that young Americans are not
smart enough for the 21st century.

Their top man, Gen. Colin Powell, showed himself not only to be personable and
handsome but to have another characteristic important to a Presidential
possibility. He is a hell of a manager. It's time to call General Eisenhower the
white Powell.

Dick Cheney, the Secretary of Defense, is another winner who could wind up on a
national ticket. Decency of character, straightforwardness, clarity of mind:
what else could anybody ask for but humor -- and he has that too.

Representative Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn is the Democrat to whom the country
owes most. He fought against Vietnam but when he thought a war against Iraq
justifiable he stood up against party leaders. I will never again tell him he
travels too much.

An admiring word for Senator Albert Gore, Democrat of Tennessee. He did a
difficult thing -- changed his mind in public, to back the President.

Another big winner: Henry Kissinger. Remember how they laughed and said nasty
things when he talked of surgical strikes that would hold down Iraqi civilian
casualties? For the Mideast diplomacy ahead, bring back Mr. Kissinger.

Abroad, two countries showed themselves staunch and true from the beginning --
well, of course, Britain and Israel.

Losers: at home, chiefly the Democratic Party and all its current Presidential
dreamers. But maybe they can get George McGovern to run again.

Abroad, President Mitterrand of France showed himself no de Gaulle and also no
Mitterrand -- at least not the Mitterrand who once knew a Fascist when he
smelled one.

And Germany, which the U.S. recreated as a world power, was right behind us --
you know how it goes, so far behind nobody could see it.

Anyway, soon, probably tomorrow, I will be back instructing Mr. Bush on how to
run things. But meantime, I have just four words for him: Thank you, Mr.
President.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

About New York;
In a Dark World, A Diverse Few Pray for Peace

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 779 words


At 3:30 A.M. yesterday, a cool breeze caressed a nearly empty Amsterdam Avenue
in front of the Cathedral of St. John the Divine. A newspaper truck rumbled
past. A man carrying a mountain of plastic bags stumbled toward tomorrow.

The neo-Gothic towers of one of the world's largest churches loomed against
wispy white clouds high in the violet sky. It was 11:30 A.M. in Iraq. Inside the
vast and nearly dark cathedral, two women sat alone holding candles. They have
been staying here in the deadest part of the night since Sunday, praying for
peace. Since early evening Wednesday, they and half a hundred other vigilants
could no longer pray that there would be no war.

"Peace be with you," Kristin Bergfeld, owner of a cleaning services company,
said by way of greeting.

Ms. Bergfeld recalled Wednesday evening. She held up the tiny, tiny remnant of a
candle that she had been burning when war exploded. "I will always have this,"
she said with palpable intensity. "I will always, always have this."

The vigil is held around the "Peace Altar" made by the late woodworking genius
George Nakashima. It is carved from a 125-foot English walnut tree, perhaps 300
years old. A small bouquet of white carnations and a red table rested on the
huge altar.

New York in times of national crisis is very much like New York at any other
time. People walk straight ahead through difficult lives, trying not to catch
the eye of strangers. They look for something interesting but are sure they have
seen it all before. A demonstration in Times Square, no matter the purpose, is
but another inconvenience.

But judging by call-in shows, talk in cafes and barbershops, the unexpected
smiles, there is some pleasure even in this hopelessly blase metropolis that
Uncle Sam is standing tall in a strange and dangerous conflict. Or at least
that, so far, few Americans have been casualties.

But in the liberal churches grave doubts persist. At the Episcopal cathedral,
Islamic religious leaders have been invited to pray for peace. At the Community
Church of New York, a Unitarian Universalist congregation, body bags were placed
on the front steps in dramatic protest. The impressive thing about the prayer
vigil is that it is so unimpressive. Individuals come quietly as pilgrims
seeking some measure of peace.

Over the course of the vigil at St. John the Divine, there was a Vietnam veteran
in a three-piece suit whose son is somewhere in the Persian Gulf. There at the
same time was a woman who had been thrilled to get a picture in the mail of her
best friend's fiance. He too is in the Gulf. The two held hands, sobbing
inconsolably.

Pilgrims have included an executive who had been in Baghdad two days before. A
Nicaraguan who had lived through that nation's bloodbath. A little boy who said
God lived in the green balloon he carried. A group of young women formed a
circle and danced.

There have been a 30-year-old investment banker and an unemployed man dying of
AIDS who lives in a single-room-occupancy hotel. On Wednesday night, there were
people who had wandered the city looking for an open church.

"You can bring horrible dreams here and be comforted," said a poet, writer and
actor ("what New Yorkers do"), Seanan Forbes, the other woman praying.

Around 4 A.M., Lewis S. Payne, a social worker, padded in. As much as he
disagreed with Washington's attack, he was now enraged at Iraq for hitting
Israel. "I found myself really angry last night," he said. "I actually felt a
rage." He stepped into a corner and put on Zen Buddhist robes. He joined with
the women to sing hymns, then settled onto the prayer mat and pillow that he had
brought. He crossed his legs. He expressed despair at the seemingly inexorable
pace of events.

"It's as though we're playing out a dream and everybody knows the scenario," Mr.
Payne said. "The whole thing is an absurdity."

Time passed. Every so often, security men would saunter past. A woman who had
brought her cat in a box slept in the choir seats. A drunk staggered here and
there. The vigilants talked and prayed and made paper cranes, a symbol of peace.
They recited a G. K. Chesterton poem in unison, "Our earthly rulers falter, our
people drift and die."

Ms. Forbes left after finishing her second consoling letter to "Any Service
Member." Outside, birds began to chirp and dawn teased the stained glass. Mr.
Payne suggested that he and Ms. Bergfeld pray.

"Forgive us, forgive us for this madness we bring on ourselves," he said through
tears. Then they hugged, two human beings alone with their hopes, fears and
conceptions of God.

Morning traffic drowned out New York's birds. It was 3:05 P.M. in Iraq.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Trade Gap Narrowed in November

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 37; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 781 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 18


The nation's trade deficit fell 12 percent in November, to $9.7 billion, the
Commerce Department reported today, as the weakening economy dampened demand for
oil and other imports.

Even though oil prices were still rising during the month, the nation's
petroleum bill fell by 13 percent, the largest drop in at least three years, as
volume fell by 14 percent. Industry, motorists and other users cut back their
purchases as the higher prices ate into their buying power.

"With a slowing economy, this shows that we've adjusted to higher prices," said
Stephen Cooney, the director of international investment at the National
Association of Manufacturers.

A United States success in the war in the Persian Gulf that started two days
ago, he added, "should mean no long-term effect on oil prices."

A Widespread Decline



Virtually all other major categories of imports declined as well, including
automobiles, which had risen nearly 40 percent in October.

The November trade shortfall -- the excess of imports over exports -- was below
a revised deficit of $10.99 billion for October, originally reported at $11.61
billion.

The report showed that total merchandise imports fell 6 percent, to $43.32
billion. Exports were also off, but by a lesser amount, 4 percent, to $33.62
billion.

"The big import decline confirms a recession," said David Rolley, a senior
economist at DRI/MCGraw Hill. He predicted a "further substantial decline" in
imports in coming months as the economy continues to fall.

Next Friday, when the Government issues its first report on output in the fourth
quarter of 1990, many economists expect it to show an annual rate of decline of
around 3 to 3.5 percent. Such a drop would follow nearly eight years of steady
growth, a period of expansion second only to the record 106 months of growth
during the Vietnam War buildup of the 1960's.

Although exports slackened during November, foreign sales -- now serving as one
of the main economic props -- were at their third-highest level on record. Many
economists described the decline in exports as a normal monthly fluctuation.

Still, just about every major category of exports fell, with declines of around
$200 million each in computers, chemicals and electrical and specialized
machinery. Food was among the few buoyant export sectors.

Decline in Growth



Michael R. Darby, Under Secretary of Commerce for Economic Affairs, pointed out
that export growth has actually been falling during the last three years, but
stressed that exports still remain an important source of general economic
growth, helped by the dollar's decline during 1990.

The dollar's exchange rate -- near postwar lows against other major currencies
-- makes United States products more competitive by lowering their prices in
other currencies.

According to Mr. Darby's calculations, exports were rising at a rate of 30
percent in 1988, 13 percent in 1989 and 8 percent in the first 10 months of
1990.

Ian A. MacKinnon, senior vice president for the Vanguard Group of Investment
Companies in Valley Forge, Pa., said the deterioration in the deficit since the
Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait by Iraq was almost entirely attributable to the jump
in oil prices after the invasion.

He predicted that if the dollar continues about where it is now, "We believe the
country will be in a position of trade surplus in two years."

 Record Set in 1987

The trade deficit has been narrowing since 1987, when it rose to a record $152
billion. In 1989 the gap declined to $109.40 billion, from $118.53 billion in
1988. The annual rate for the first 11 months of 1990 was $103.58 billion.

Two-thirds of the November drop in imports was accounted for by petroleum. The
volume of oil imports was off 14 percent, to 214 million barrels, from 249
million in Octoer. Volume had declined 2 percent in October after rising sharply
in September.

The average price for a barrel of oil imported in November was $29.44, or 40
cents more than in October and $10.30 a barrel more than the average price in
the first 10 months of 1990.

The price of oil on the New York Mercantile Exchange closed today at $19.25.

The bilateral deficits with most trading partners declined in November. The gap
with Japan narrowed to $3.79 billion, from $4.45 billion in October.

The second-highest deficit in November was with China, which has sharply
expanded its exports of textiles, toys and other products in recent years. The
deficit with China eased to $1.078 billion, from $1.175 billion in October, and
it just nosed out Canada. The deficit with Canada stood at $1.070 billion,
compared with $1.354 billion in October.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: "Balance of Trade," tracks imports and exports and deficit as
excess of imports over exports, Dec. 1989-Nov. 1990 (Source: Commerce Dept.)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The Air War;
Fighters Target of Flak Triggered by Other Jets

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 741 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Jan. 18


Having been almost unchallenged during the first day of war, pilots of the
United States Air Force's F-117A Stealth fighters say they are now encountering
heavy antiaircraft artillery and ground-to-air missile attacks.

But they said that the Iraqi fire was being triggered by allied aircraft other
than the Stealth planes, which are almost invisible to radar. All of the Stealth
fighters based here have returned without losses from their apparently
devastating raids.

Col. Alton C. Whitley, commander of the 37th Tactical Fighter Wing, showed
reporters videotapes of the initial attacks on Thursday. Primary targets hit by
the F-117A's included underground bunkers, command stations, microwave
communications links and other priority objectives.

Other targets included a house described as used by the Iraqi President, Saddam
Hussein.

Antiaircraft Fire More Intense

Col. Klaus J. Klause of Franklin, Pa., deputy commander of operations for the
wing, said tonight that although Baghdad was evidently unprepared for the first
attack early Thursday morning, the city's defenders were fighting hard Thursday
night.

"The city was lighted up with cars still in the streets," he said. "But last
night, Baghdad was blacked out and they were sending up heavy antiaircraft fire.
We could see the light of their flak twinkling all over the place. They sent up
some unguided missiles, too."

Pilots returning to this air base said Iraqi fighters seemed to be avoiding
target areas.

The two squadrons of F-117's operating against Iraq represent only a small
proportion of all the allied combat aircraft flying missions day and night. But
the F-117's play a special role because their ability to evade radar allows them
to approach heavily defended targets relatively safely. They carry
precision-guided bombs that can be steered by the pilots.

Detailed View in Darkness

The pilot's view of the target is through a sensor that creates a detailed image
even in total darkness. By moving a control, the pilot can keep his cross-hair
sight centered on the target and thereby guide the bomb.

The system, dramatically displayed in video images brought back by the pilots,
is so accurate that specific parts of buildings can be pinpointed for
destruction.

Colonel Klause, 48, said that antiaircraft fire had become comparable to the
fire he encountered over North Vietnam while flying F-4 fighters.

"It's distracting to see that twinkling because you want to concentrate on
hitting the target," he said.

More Night Missions

In preparations that are becoming almost routine, ground crews in their heavily
protected bunkers continued to prepare the F-117's for more night missions.

As a laser-guided bomb was being secured in its bay on an F-117A, the plane's
crew chief, Airman First Class Gina Maskunas-Delaney of Killeen, Tex., chalked
this message on its side: "We care enough to send the very best."

Despite Iraqi charges that the American raids are causing heavy civilian
casualties, the F-117A pilots believe they are limiting their own destructive
effects to military targets.

"We're all acutely conscious to prevent collateral damage and civilian
casualties," Colonel Whitley said. "The precision the F-117A and its weapons
allow us to destroy targets without damaging nearby structures."

'Your Heart Beats Faster'

The pilots acknowledge that attacking defended targets is extremely stressful.
"Your heart beats faster, your mouth goes dry, and when you pull away from the
target you take a big gulp from your water bottle," one said. "Of course you
still have to find the refueling tanker on the way home, but the hardest part is
over."

The F-117A owes its ability to evade enemy radar to its peculiar shape. The
fighter's outer surface consists entirely of flat surfaces that meet in straight
edges. The faceted exterior deflects enemy radar from straight ahead to the side
so that little or no radar echo is reflected to the enemy antenna.

Although the Lockheed fighter flew in June 1981, its existence was denied by the
Pentagon until November 1988.

Pilots here regard the successful air raid conducted by F-117's as a vindication
of the view that Stealth aircraft are essential to the Air Force.

"It happens that Lockheed's designer of the F-117, Ben Rich, was given a
retirement party last night," Colonel Whitley said. "His plane worked so well we
dedicated last night's missions to him."

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The crosshairs of a Stealth F-117, top, finding an Iraqi Scud
missile storage hangar in a photograph from a video camera mounted in the plane.
Moments later, the hangar disappears in a flash of light, hit by a laser-guided
bomb. (Department of Defense via Reuters)

Chart/Diagrams: "Lasers in Action: 'Pace Tack' Guides Bombs to Targets"

Pave tack is an infrared laser and computer system that can pinpoint targets for
weapons.

Once the target is within sight, the Pave Tack operator aims at the target by
manually adjusting the cross hairs on the video display over the target. When
the target is within the cross hairs, the operator can lock the laser on it.
Computers and stabilized sight equipment keep the target locked in the cross
hairs automatically, even through evasive maneuvers by the plane.

When the laser is locked on the target, "smart" weapons can be fired from the
plane to hit the target

The Pave Tack system can be used to navigate by identifying checkpoints, and by
providing information on relative position and altitude.

The system includes an on-board video recorder that can store the sightings and
attacks made on a mission.

"Bombs With Brains"

Weapons come in three types: "dumb," which have no guidance system; "Smart,"
which use guidance that relies on outside help, and "brilliant," which are
totally self-guided.

In the Pave Tack system, lasers are used to guide "smart" missiles. These
missiles have an electronic eye that is programmed to find reflections from the
specific color and intensity of the laser coming from the system.

Once the missile has located the reflection of the laser, it is programmed to
move toward the reflected light like a moth to a flame. To move toward the
target, the missile can either adjust its tail fins or, in some types, change
direction through its own propulsion system.

(Sources: Ford Aerospace and Communications Corporation; "Advanced Technology
Warfare," Salamander Books, 1985)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
Lyndon Johnson's Duet With Power

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 792 words


Laurence Luckinbill's impersonation of Lyndon B. Johnson in James Prideaux's
monodrama, "Lyndon," is a life-size portrait of a larger-than-life character.
The Johnson visage -- from the jug ears to the jowls -- fits Mr. Luckinbill, and
so does the role, surprisingly so, considering the actor's previous
accomplishments. With his even features and usually urbane manner, Mr.
Luckinbill would not seem a natural to play Johnson.

Through his acting and his talent for mimicry (and with the help of Kevin
Haney's makeup), he assumes the Johnson persona. He becomes a gangly, good old
Texas boy, balancing a bucolic charm against a fierce willfulness. This Johnson
knows far more than one might think; he certainly knows his enemies and his long
memory is a spur to fulfilling his great ambition.

The secret of power, he says, is timing, which, one might add, is one of the
secrets of Mr. Luckinbill's performance (at the John Houseman Theater). In tune
are his gestures, rough-as-sandpaper voice and guileful expressions. He punches
the air as if it were an opponent, smiles with his eyes as he twists someone's
arm and becomes abashed when he is momentarily deterred from his goal. As
directed by Richard Zavaglia, Mr. Luckinbill humanizes our 36th President. But
anyone expecting a revealing perspective on Johnson's career should look
elsewhere, beginning with Robert A. Caro's critical biography in progress.

In contrast, Mr. Prideaux's play, drawing on Merle Miller's "Lyndon: An Oral
Biography," is more oral than history. It is a selected -- and laundered --
version of Johnson's life in the public eye. There is no mention, for example,
of the charge that Johnson had his aides stuff the ballot box in order to win
his initial election to the United States Senate. In fact, there is not a single
reference to his competitor in that race, Coke Stevenson, the Texas Governor
treated to adulation in the second volume of Mr. Caro's biography. All that Mr.
Prideaux offers in regard to that pivotal campaign is an amusing picture of
Johnson barnstorming by helicopter and shouting down from the sky at prospective
voters.


The play takes place in the Oval Office in 1968 just after Johnson has announced
he will not run for a second Presidential term. Addressing the audience as loyal
supporters, he rambles back to his boyhood and onward through his early years.
The first part of the show is folksy and anecdotal, filled with ribald
Johnsonian humor. At one point, Mr. Luckinbill imitates Johnson imitating
President Roosevelt, with the Texan stopping to shine his shoes, country-style,
on the back of his trousers before paying a call on the man who became one of
his mentors. Such details add authenticity to the performance.

Once Johnson becomes Vice President, the play becomes more schematic. In quick
vignettes, he tells us about the assassination of President John F. Kennedy and
about his own assumption of the office. While Johnson reminisces, antiwar
protesters are demonstrating outside his White House. It is here that Mr.
Prideaux strikes dramatic shallows, as the play glosses over Johnson's role in
the Vietnam War.

The defense of the play would be that the story is told from Johnson's point of
view; we only hear what he wants to tell us. But because of the importance of
the subject, the playwright has a greater obligation, at least to have a sharper
focus on what he chooses to dramatize. This was the case, for example, with
"Secret Honor," Donald Freed's monodrama about Richard M. Nixon.

When Johnson is not discussing Vietnam or other thorny issues, the play is on
more secure ground, especially when it is dealing with his quirks of character,
including the dismissive attitude he takes to anyone he feels he can manipulate.


The chief asset is Mr. Luckinbill, who manages to capture the man both on a
general and a specific level. There is more than a measure of J. R. from
"Dallas" in his performance; he approaches Johnson as a man one hates to hate
(because he is so colorful). Mr. Luckinbill conveys the roguishness as well as
the relish that Johnson feels for his own performance on a major world stage.

As played by Mr. Luckinbill, Johnson is such a theatrical figure that he does
not need questions to stimulate a response. Watching him hunker down in the Oval
Office, one is entertained by his exuberant performance in a play that does not
measure up to the complexity of the character.

LYNDON

By James Prideaux; based on "Lyndon: An Oral Biography" by Merle Miller;
directed by Richard Zavaglia; makeup designed by Kevin Haney. Presented by Eric
Krebs, in association with Don Buford. At the John Houseman Theater, 450 West
42d Street.

Lyndon Johnson . . . Laurence Luckinbill

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Laurence Luckinbill in the title role of "Lyndon." (The John
Houseman Theater)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A Picture of the War

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 360 words


The camera doesn't lie. Yesterday it brought home the marvels of high-tech
warfare in the Persian Gulf. But the camera doesn't necessarily tell the whole
truth, any more than the home team's highlight film adequately depicts a
football game.

People who watched the morning briefing from Saudi Arabia saw an awesome display
of precision bombing. Air Force F-111 fighter-bombers using laser-guided bombs
put a crater smack in the middle of an Iraqi airfield runway, then demolished a
suspected storage bunker for Scud missiles.

Viewers next got a bird's-eye look from an F-117 Stealth fighter plane dropping
a laser-guided bomb right down the air shaft of an Iraqi air defense
headquarters near Baghdad. And finally came the piece de resistance: an F-117
dropping another laser-guided bomb onto Iraq's Air Force headquarters,
demolishing it.

These new precision-guided munitions can destroy targets while sparing the
vicinity, precisely what's needed to hold down civilian casualties. Pinpoint
accuracy also improves the likelihood of direct hits. That avoids the need for
repeated sorties over the same target, making it easier on pilots.

But not always. Careful viewers could see that the air defense headquarters had
been struck previously without being destroyed, presumably by similar
precision-guided weapons.

And not all the bombing is so precise. Alert listeners heard the architect of
the bombing plan, Air Force Lieut. Gen. Charles Horner, say that "the B-52 has
been striking targets throughout the whole campaign across both Kuwait and
Iraq."

He showed no films and would not elaborate. But students of the Vietnam War may
shudder at the memory of the sights and sounds of a B-52 dropping 50 tons of
bombs on "free-fire zones," wreaking indiscriminate havoc.

And bombing military targets, however precisely, should not be equated with
winning the war. Liberating Kuwait, warned Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, the U.S.
commander in the gulf, is likely to require more than "surgical" strikes. He
spoke of being "only 36 hours into what is a campaign." Before very long that
campaign is likely to include grueling ground fighting.


LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

WAR IN THE GULF: The Overview;
Air Assault Fails to Wipe Out All Mobile Missiles

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1415 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Saturday, Jan. 19


Allied warplanes mounted a huge effort to destroy Iraq's mobile missile
launchers on Friday and again this morning, but apparently failed to wipe them
all out.

Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the American commander in the Persian Gulf, said Air
Force planes had found and demolished three launchers loaded with missiles aimed
at Saudi Arabia, had knocked out three empty launchers at the same site and were
continuing to attack five other empty launchers.

At a military briefing for reporters on Friday, General Schwarzkopf said the
attack came after Iraq fired Scud missiles at Israel and at a major American air
base in the Dhahran area in Saudi Arabia. [Excerpts from the briefing, page 11.]
This morning at least three more missiles struck Tel Aviv at 7:20, once again
sending residents rushing for sealed shelters and putting on gas masks.

Bush Urges All-Out Effort

In Washington, President Bush, worried that further missile barrages lobbed at
Israel would bring it into the gulf war and vastly complicate the task of
holding the allied coalition together, called the effort to knock out the
missile launchers "the darndest search-and-destroy operation that's ever been
undertaken in that area."

Allied bombers also pounded Iraqi command centers, airfields and other targets
around the clock. Officials said more than 2,000 combat sorties had been flown
since the start of the fighting and General Schwarzkopf said more than 80
percent had reached their targets.

Since the allied military action to liberate Kuwait began before dawn on
Thursday, at least eight allied planes have been lost: an FA-18 Hornet
fighter-bomber and two A-6E Intruder attack aircraft belonging to the United
States Navy; a United States Air Force F-15E strike fighter; a Kuwaiti A-4
attack plane; two British Tornados and one Italian Tornado. Baghdad radio
claimed that 94 allied planes had been shot down.

Iraqi Planes Downed

American officials say that eight Iraqi planes have been downed in aerial combat
and many damaged or destroyed on the ground. Many of the 700 planes in the Iraqi
Air Force have probably dispersed to airfields in the north or are protected in
concrete bunkers.

General Schwarzkopf also made the war's first report of significant clashes
between Iraqi and allied ground forces. He said that United States Marine units
near the town of Khafji on the Kuwaiti-Saudi border had been hit with about 35
rounds of artillery fire and about 12 rockets, and that two marines and one Navy
medical corpsman were reported "slightly injured." But senior officers said no
ground offensive was imminent.

General Schwarzkopf said more United States amphibious vessels, some presumably
loaded with marines, were moving into the Persian Gulf. The Navy is already in
action in gulf waters, having sunk or disabled three Iraqi patrol boats, he
said.

"The picture is not perfect," General Schwarzkopf said of the overall situation
36 hours after the war began, "but I think it's pretty good. The President of
the United States said the other day that this is not Panama; it will not be
over in a day. And it certainly won't."

Launchers Hard to Find

As they did on Thursday, American officials, especially the Defense Department,
turned aside almost all requests for detailed information.

At a news conference at his headquarters in Riyadh, General Schwarzkopf said the
allied pilots had destroyed "a rather considerable percentage" of the Iraqi
mobile launchers. But he conceded that the estimate of the number of launchers
deployed by Iraq had varied widely even within the intelligence agencies.

General Schwarzkopf said finding the launchers was like "finding a needle in a
haystack"; another officer compared the problem to "spotting a pickup truck from
a 707."

In Washington, military experts were reported today to have said that they
believe Iraq still has anywhere from 400 to 800 Scud missiles in bunkers or at
camouflaged sites that could potentially be fired from launchers. But it was
uncertain whether air attacks had destroyed launchers closest to those missiles
and how easily the missiles could be transported to launch sites.

According to a Government official who attended a closed-door briefing on the
war, the military experts said Iraq had regrouped somewhat after Wednesday's
attack and had begun to mount a more active air defense against allied aircraft.

In coming days, the experts were reported to have said, Iraq is expected to
attempt missile attacks on ships in the northern Persian Gulf and to begin
reinforcing bomb-battered ground positions in Kuwait.

The Government official spoke on the condition that he not be named.

John Simpson of the British Broadcasting Corporation said in a report from
Baghdad, filed under censorship, that he had seen a pair of "spectacular
explosions" in the center of the city and on its periphery on Friday as
intensive raids continued there.

He said Iraqi Information Ministry officials had told him that several American
pilots had been captured and would soon be made available for interviews by
reporters. "We have already won," he quoted a senior Iraqi as saying, "because
it wasn't a two-day war after all."

Iraqi Troops Attacked

Also on the target list was a concentration of as many as 30,000 members of the
Iraqi Army's elite Republican Guards, deeply entrenched along an arc northwest
of Kuwait. Pilots of the United States Marines' Aircraft Wing Group 11, carrying
armor-piercing 500-pound cluster bombs, reportedly launched attacks on
camouflaged bunkers, tanks and other vehicles.

Col. Manfred Rietsch, the group's German-born, 49-year-old commander, said Iraqi
communications and air defenses had been greatly weakened. As he spoke at an air
base whose location cannot be disclosed under wartime ground rules, wave after
wave of fighters, bombers and electronic countermeasure planes roared aloft.

"The first night the Iraqis shot pretty much everything they had," said Colonel
Rietsch, who is considered one of the Marine Corps' top combat pilots. "Since
then, we've had antiaircraft artillery barrage fire. They are shooting, but not
with as much of a game plan of coordinating attacks."

Navy pilots aboard the aircraft carrier John F. Kennedy in the Red Sea said
Iraqi antiaircraft units seemed befuddled by the size of the allied assault.
Rear Adm. Riley D. Mixson, commander of the Red Sea Battle Group, composed of
about 30 ships, said the assault was "probably the most ambitious joint effort
that we've ever had in our history."

The pilots said that Iraqi planes were avoiding confrontation, that Iraqi
ground-to-air missiles were ineffective and that they had little trouble
avoiding the conventional flak that formed the bulk of Iraq's defense.

"They couldn't quite make up their minds which strike group to go after," said
Comdr. John Leenhouts, 40, the executive officer of a squadron of Navy A-7
attack planes.

But Capt. James Johnson, 29, a lanky Air Force pilot with the 35th Tactical
Fighter Wing, commented after returning from a run over Baghdad that "there's a
lot more stuff up there than I had thought there would be." And Lieut. Gen.
Charles Horner, the commander of allied air forces, said some pilots who flew in
Vietnam were reporting that conditions over Iraq were "as tough or tougher than
anything they've ever seen."

When asked why so many Tornados had been lost, John W. R. Taylor, editor
emeritus of Jane's All the World's Aircraft, said the Tornados, whose mission is
to destroy airport runways, could be expected to take losses because they
typically fly just a few hundred feet above their targets and may have been
assigned to extremely well-defended targets.

General Horner also showed the news conference in Riyadh videotapes of the
precision bombing carried out by some of the American planes in the first day of
fighting.

The most advanced planes flown by allied pilots can operate in bad weather or at
night, but heavy clouds kept some pilots from hitting their targets. Two
squadrons of F-16A fighter-bombers returned from their sorties today with bombs
still under their wings.

The pilots would have had to drop to dangerously low altitudes for visual
identification of targets, said Capt. Rocky Morrison of the Marines.

"Instead of dragging a lot of people down there and getting shot up, we just
turned around and came home," he said. "We'll do it another time. We'll take
whatever time it needs to do it."

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 20, 1991, Sunday

CORRECTION:

A front-page headline in some editions yesterday about air strikes in the
Persian Gulf misstated American losses. Of the eight allied planes reported lost
as of Friday, four were American, not all eight.


GRAPHIC: Map of the Middle East highlighting Kuwait, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and
Israel.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

WAR IN THE GULF: For American Jews and Arabs, the Tug of Divided Emotions;
Words of Support for U.S. Goals and Prayer for Israel

BYLINE: By ARI L. GOLDMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1029 words


In homes, on the streets and in their places of business, many American Jewish
men and women wept openly late Thursday when news of the attacks on Israel was
first reported. Even as word came that the missile attacks were not as deadly as
first believed, hundreds rushed to synagogues for special prayer vigils that
continued through the day yesterday and into last night.

Mainstream Jewish organizations, which have supported President Bush's Persian
Gulf policy since Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2, redoubled their words of
support. "We endorse the wisdom and courage of the President's decision to use
force against Saddam Hussein," said Shoshana S. Cardin, chairwoman of the
Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations, the umbrella
group for 46 national religious and communal groups.

The 5.8 million Jews in the nation, with mixed views on many issues, generally
agree that they have a vital interest in the security of Israel, public opinion
polls show.

And there was evidence yesterday that some American Jews who had been unsure of
the wisdom of the gulf war were swayed after missiles landed in Tel Aviv and
Haifa.

Opinions Change After Attack

Eric Kracov of Washington told a poll taker from The New York Times on Saturday
that he favored continuing economic sanctions rather than military action to
force Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait. But in a follow-up interview yesterday, Mr.
Kracov said he was fully behind the war.

"The bombing of Israel convinces me that Hussein has to be stopped by force,"
said Mr. Kracov, a 33-year-old lawyer.

Before the war, Robert Miller, a coat manufacturer in Manhattan's garment
district, said he joined a fast at his synagogue, but added, "I don't know what
I prayed for." He said, "It's a terrible thing to pray for war."

Yesterday, however, the 40-year-old Mr. Miller was far more decisive. "I am
praying for the safe return of our troops, the security of Israel and the
crushing of Saddam Hussein," he said.

A sociologist who has conducted studies of American Jewry said the bombing of
Tel Aviv also threatens to complicate issues for American Jews.

'Question of Dual Loyalty'

"Until Thursday night," when the missiles hit Israel, said the sociologist,
Samuel C. Heilman of Queens College of the City University of New York, "Jews
found themselves in a situation where being American and being Jewish coincided.
The old question of dual loyalty -- who comes first, America or Israel -- was
wiped away. The interests of Israel and the interests of the United States were
identical."

But after the Iraqi bombing, tensions developed between Washington and Jerusalem
over Israel's desire to retaliate. The United States, fearing a threat to a
coalition that includes several Arab states, called on Israel not to act, and
for now Israel has not, though it has reserved the right to do so.

"If Israel decides to retaliate and that puts America in a difficult position
both in the battlefield and the political field, then American Jews will all of
a sudden have to make a choice of whom to support," Mr. Heilman said. "The
question of dual loyalty may be with us again."

In their official statements, Jewish organizations tried to demonstrate that the
goals of the United States and Israel were identical. "The latest events
underscore the commonality of interests of the United States and Israel," said
Mrs. Cardin of the conference of presidents.

She continued: "Israel took enormous risks in acceding to the American request
not to launch a pre-emptive strike against the missile sites in Iraq. In acting
with such restraint, Israel accepted on itself great danger to its people and
territory."

The words of support for the United States in Mrs. Cardin's statement contrasted
with the caution expressed by Christian groups in recent days. The National
Council of Churches, which represents 32 Christian denominations with 42 million
members, said in a statement on Thursday, "Operation Desert Storm may be a
success for advanced military technology, but the resort to war reflects a
failure for the human spirit."

The World Council of Churches, based in Geneva, issued a similar statement
yesterday. "We express our horror that massive air raids are currently taking
place on Iraqi and Kuwaiti territory," the world council said. The
three-paragraph statement made no mention of the attack on Israel.

But the national council, based in New York, distributed a statement late
yesterday saying: "We deplore Iraq's missile attack last night on Israeli
cities. We are deeply thankful at the news that apparently very few lives have
been lost and that no chemical weapons were used."

Traditional Jewish liberalism did not get in the way of American Jewish support
for the war. Martin Weinkle, a 42-year-old bookseller in Boston, recalled that
he was active in the effort to stop the war in Vietnam, but added, "I am very
proud of what we are doing at this point."

Jews in cities around the United States reacted with special concern Thursday
night. "People came in crying," said Adam Harris, the manager of Negev Caterers,
a kosher deli on West 72d Street in Manhattan.

In St. Louis, Rabbi Lucy H. F. Dinner said that she, too, cried. She heard the
news when arriving for a forum at the local Jewish Community Center. The forum
was canceled.

At the Jewish Community Center in Houston, men and women who had come for
fitness classes put down their gym bags and gathered silently around televion
sets.

People who had Broadway tickets Thursday night were seen entering the theaters
carrying radios with earphones.

Word of the bombing came during a special memorial service honoring the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. at the home of Israel's consul general in New York, Uri
Savir. Mayor David N. Dinkins locked arms with Mr. Savir and about 100 guests to
sing "We Shall Overcome."

Last night, in an campaign endorsed by several leading rabbis, Jews around the
nation added a third candle to the two traditionally lighted on the eve of the
Jewish sabbath. Kindled less than 24 hours after the attack on Israel, the
candle represented a silent prayer for peace.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 26, 1991, Saturday

CORRECTION:
3An article last Saturday about Jews' reaction to the war in the Persian Gulf
referred imprecisely to the timing of a statement issued by the World Council of
Churches that condemned the air raids on Iraq and Kuwait without mentioning the
ones on Israel. Although the statement was issued and dated Jan. 18 in New York,
it was written and issued in Geneva on Jan. 17, before the first attack on
Israel occurred.


GRAPHIC: Photo: For security reasons, Temple Beth Shmuel, a Cuban-Hebrew
congregation in Miami Beach, hired an off-duty police officer to stand guard.
(Susan Greenwood for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Giacomo Manzu Is Dead at 82; Prolific Sculptor of Varied Images

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 812 words

DATELINE: ROME, Jan. 18


Giacomo Manzu, one of Italy's leading sculptors, died on Thursday at his hilltop
home at Ardea, just south of Rome. He was 82 years old.

He had suffered from a heart ailment for some time, his family said.

Mr. Manzu, whose work often mixed religious, allegorical and sexual imagery, was
best known outside Italy for the monumental bronze doors he made for St. Peter's
Basilica, the Cathedral of Salzburg, Austria, and the St. Laurens Church in
Rotterdam, the Netherlands. But in a career that covered nearly seven decades,
he also made portrait busts, female nudes, sets and costumes for the composer
Igor Stravinsky, and secular works for public spaces, among them two reliefs for
the Palazzo d'Italia in Rockefeller Center. A large bronze of a woman holding a
baby stands at the United Nations headquarters. In 1969 a permanent gallery of
his work was built in Ardea with money donated by prominent patrons from 14
countries.

Cardinals and Communism

His long, prolific life, his stance against war and his graceful, mildly ironic
style -- his work often included homely details like a straight-backed chair --
made the sculptor something of a national institution.

His most controversial work was the "Door of Death" at St. Peter's Basilica,
standing 20 feet high and 11 feet wide, to the left of the main entrance.
Commissioned by the Vatican in the early 1950's, it was not completed until
1964, after the death of Mr. Manzu's close friend, Pope John XXIII, who had
prodded him to finish it.

Vatican officials were disturbed by the artist's professed Communism and his
insistence on portraying humanity at the crossroads of death rather than a more
spiritual theme. Portions of the door's 10 panels also drew strong criticism,
including one in which a cardinal looks at a man hanging upside down, apparently
a reference to executions of Fascists after the war. After one prelate requested
Latin inscriptions to accompany the images of Christ, Abel, St. Joseph, Mary,
St. Stephen and many others, Mr. Manzu told friends: "I can't put words on these
panels. This is not a comic strip."

Self-Taught but Self-Confident

Mr. Manzu was born on Dec. 22, 1908, one of many children of a poor shoemaker
and his wife. The family name was Manzoni, but the sculptor later changed it to
Manzu. At the age of 11, he began working for a local carpenter; later he worked
for a gilder who made plaster decorations. A family friend once said that his
first sculptures were made of wax left over from candles in the church where his
father was a sacristan.

By 1929, self-taught but convinced of his sculptural gifts, Mr. Manzu moved to
Milan, where he showed his work in group exhibitions. His first one-man show was
held in Rome in 1938. During these years, his imagery was mainly tender,
romantic figures of women and young girls. Although he visited Paris, where he
made his first contact with Impressionism, his sculptural inspiration came
mainly from ancient Greek art and medieval stonework. He mocked intellectual
pretensions. "For me there is just work," he once said. "Esthetic and
intellectual theories do not concern me."

In 1938, he attracted the attention of critics when he exhibited the first of
his long series of bronze sculptures of cardinals in Milan. Always a figurative
sculptor, he nevertheless regarded the cardinals as his "abstractions" because
he was not interested in their religious content but in their form and line.

Over the years, he produced many still lifes and figures of young women, for
which his second wife, Inge, was often the model. During World War II, he had to
go into hiding after attracting attention because of his anti-Fascist and
anti-Nazi drawings. In 1948, he gained worldwide recognition when he was awarded
the grand prize in Italian sculpture at the Venice Biennale. That year, his work
was also included in an exhibition of 20th-century Italian art at the Museum of
Modern Art in New York City.

A Humanist, Friends Say

He taught art at the Brera Academy in Milan; illustrated several books of
poetry, including one by the Sicilian poet Salvatore Quasimodo, and designed
sets and costumes for his friend Stravinsky's opera "Oedipus Rex" at the
composer's request. He also designed Stravinksy's tomb in Venice.

Although he never took an active part in politics, he said he was a man of the
left and voted Communist. In 1968 he received a Lenin Peace Prize from the
Soviet Government for his stance against United States policies in Vietnam. His
friends liked to say that the shy, modest Mr. Manzu was a humanist and that
there was no paradox in the fact that he could sculpture the bust of a pope and
the crucifixion of Christ, and also design a monument to Lenin, which stands on
the island of Capri.

Mr. Manzu is survived by his wife, Inge. Information on surviving children was
incomplete.

NAME: Giacomo Manzu

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Giacomo Manzu (Associated Press, 1979)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Air Commander;
General Who Planned Air Assault, With Lessons of Vietnam: Charles Albert Horner

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 819 words


The lush green jungles of Vietnam were far from the Saudi desert and from the
tactical demands weighing on Lieut. Gen. Charles A. Horner, commander of the
American Air Force in the Persian Gulf, as his jets streaked over Iraq
yesterday, pounding missile sites, command centers, radar stations and other
targets.

But, friends and colleagues of the front-line officer say, the American
experience in Vietnam, where General Horner flew 111 combat missions as a highly
decorated F-105 fighter pilot, heavily influenced the general's perceptions of
modern warfare, just as it has shaped the strategies pursued by the United
States in the Gulf war.

In August, when Iraq invaded Kuwait and General Horner was sent to Saudi Arabia
as Air Force commander and briefly as acting commander of all American forces
there, he argued forcefully against a protracted war, if one had to be fought,
against any gradual escalation, as in Vietnam, and for swift decisive strikes to
win as quickly as possible.

"Many of us here who are in this position now were in Vietnam, and that war left
a profound impact on our feelings about how our nation ought to conduct its
business," the general said at the time. A war in Iraq, he said, "should not be
dragged out in an effort to achieve some politcal objective."

Tough, Popular Commander

As events proved, General Horner's views -- shared by many senior commanders and
by millions of Americans -- have become a cornerstone of American policy in the
Gulf. And the 54-year-old three-star general is orchestrating the air war with a
skill and an enthusiasm that have won high praise from the White House, the
Pentagon and old friends at home.

"We are extremely proud that he's over there and doing the job," James W.
Alexander, a longtime friend, said in a telephone interview yesterday from
Sumter, S.C., where he is a Chamber of Commerce official and General Horner is
commander of the Ninth Tactical Air Force at nearby Shaw Air Force Base.

A tough, popular commander with a jovial, easygoing manner off duty that
reflects his smalltown boyhood in Iowa, General Horner is regarded by
subordinates and fellow commanders as a hard-driving, task-oriented field
officer who regularly takes to the skies, not to bomb or strafe, but to keep up
his flying proficiency and to understand the problems of pilots.

Since 1987, when he was promoted to general, he has been in charge of the
Central Command Air Forces, which are based in South Carolina but responsible
for the Middle East Theater that stretches from Kenya to Pakistan and contains
70 percent of the world's oil reserves.

He was named commander of American forces in Saudi Arabia on Aug. 9, but held
the post for only a few weeks, until he was succeeded by Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf. Since the war began three days ago, General Horner has largely
stayed out of the limelight.

But yesterday, after another day of battle successes, he appeared at a news
conference in Riyadh, told how his pilots had downed eight enemy aircraft,
showed videotapes with dramatic pilot's-eye views of bombing runs and spoke of
the task of bringing thousands of details together to fight a complex air war.

Charles Albert Horner was born in Davenport, Iowa, on Oct. 19, 1936, and
attended high school in Des Moines. He joined the Air Force with a second
lieutenant's commission in 1958, shortly after graduating from the University of
Iowa. In a 32-year career as a pilot and officer, he served in Europe, Southeast
Asia and the United States and has amassed 4,500 hours of flying time.

A year after his parents, his sister and her husband and their two children died
in a car crash in 1964, the young officer went to war in Vietnam, joining a
tactical fighter wing at Korat Royal Air Force Base in Thailand, from which he
flew scores of combat missions over North Vietnam -- 41 in his first tour of
duty and 70 in a second.

After his two tours of duty in Vietnam, General Horner served as an F-105
instructor at Nellis Air Force Base in Nevada and went on to hold a number of
positions at the Tactical Air Command at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia.

Since May 1, 1987, he and his wife, the former Mary Jo Gitchell, have lived at
Shaw Air Base, his headquarters. The couple have three children, Susan Ann, John
Patrick and Nancy Jo.

In an interview last month with The Christian Science Monitor, the general
declared that the technology of war -- the speed of planes, the electronic
precision of cruise missiles and night combat, the enormous destructiveness of
modern weapons -- had become so efficient that peace was the only hope for any
rational person.

"War is mankind in its most ludicrous state," he said.

Asked who was to blame for bringing the Middle East to the brink of war, he said
nothing of Saddam Hussein or Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. He smiled wearily and
replied, "Mankind is responsible."

NAME: Charles Albert Horner

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lieut. Gen. Charles A. Horner, commander of the U.S. Air Force
in the Persian Gulf. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Man in the News

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A Quick Victory? It Better Be

BYLINE: By John Mueller; John Mueller, professor of political science at the
University of Rochester, is author of "War, Presidents and Public Opinion."

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 730 words

DATELINE: ROCHESTER, N.Y.


President Bush has vowed that the war with Iraq "will not be another Vietnam."
In its essential shape, however, the war will be quite similar, except that
everything will be compressed in time. And, as in Vietnam, the key to the
outcome is not the unquestionable American ability to impose damage but the
enemy's ability to maintain a fighting force that can inflict casualties on
Americans.

In a Gallup Poll taken last Wednesday, 79 percent of Americans supported the
U.S. decision to go to war. Of those interviewed, 17 percent said they thought
it would last a few of days, 39 percent saw it ending in a matter of weeks and
23 percent feared a war of some months' duration. Only 5 percent could imagine
the war lasting a year or more.

By contrast, when the Vietnam War began in 1965, a "can do" military generally
anticipated, or hoped, that the enemy would break after suffering punishment for
some two or three years -- about the duration of the Korean War. The public and
Congress seemed to accept that estimate, and they generally supported the war
for that long.

While President Bush has said that no cost would be too high to liberate Kuwait,
the public obviously envisions -- and, in all likelihood, will only tolerate --
a walkover war attended by casualty rates more like those suffered in Panama
than in Vietnam.

In several recent polls, for example, support for war falls off quickly when
casualty numbers are added to the query. In one, taken shortly before the war
broke out, approval dropped by 19 percentage points -- from 63 to 44 percent --
when the question suggested that 1,000 U.S. troops might die. This attitude may
have been reinforced in the war's early stages by reports of widespread
destruction of Iraqi military and industrial installations and remarkably light
allied casualties.

Tolerance for losses is far lower in the gulf than in Vietnam for at least two
reasons. First, in Vietnam (as in Korea) the enemy was seen by the
Administration, Congress and public to be part of the international Communist
threat that had as its ultimate goal the destruction of the United States
itself. Accordingly, the war inspired high levels of support, at least at first.
Saddam Hussein may threaten American interests, but no one sees him as that sort
of menace.

Curiously, the military often claims that a central lesson from the Vietnam
experience is that forces should not be committed to war unless there is solid
public backing. That was not a problem when the Vietnam War began. It is now.

Second, in Vietnam (and also in Korea) there were seen to be no alternatives
when American troops were sent into action: Either the troops went in or the
enemy would succeed. In Kuwait, by contrast, there was the option of continuing
with the economic sanctions.

To inspire a decline in support for the war in the U.S., the Iraqis need not win
a single battle. They need only maintain a dedicated fighting force that is able
to push American casualties beyond tolerable levels -- and those levels are far
lower than they were in Vietnam or Korea.

Of course, the Iraqis may very well collapse on cue. The Communists in Vietnam
accepted losses that, as a percentage of population, were all but unprecedented
in modern warfare -- about twice the rate of the Japanese in World War II, for
example.

But, as Clausewitz observed, war is the least predictable of human activities.
The Iraqis -- or significant numbers of them -- might refuse to break, and
develop instead a Masada or Alamo complex. Massive bombing, in fact, does not
usually break the targeted people's will, particularly in the short run. It
often generates rage and cohesion, creates martyrs, stiffens resistance and
inspires the perception that there is nothing more to lose.

The Iraqis might, for example, be able to sustain a Tet-like house-to-house
battle in Kuwait City. Or they might retreat from Kuwait and launch persistent
counter-attacks from Iraq, requiring a quagmire-like invasion of that country.

If something like that comes about, American losses will become intolerable and
public support for the war -- Bush's war, it will surely be called -- will
swiftly erode. As in Vietnam, the battle will be over American public opinion,
and the Iraqis seem to understand this. There is still a danger they may conquer
us even while being devastated on the battlefield.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Campus Life: U.C., Santa Barbara;
Easing Tensions Between Town And Gown

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 31; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: SANTA BARBARA, Calif.


Surrounded on three sides by the Pacific Ocean, the University of California at
Santa Barbara assumed what critics considered a haughty position when it
announced to the surrounding community that it intended to expand physically by
60 percent within the next l5 years.

Now, 15 months later, the University of California system's Board of Regents has
approved agreements between the campus and the community that are expected to
improve relations that have been strained for more than two decades.

The university has pledged to spend more than $3 million to improve roads, to
postpone plans to build more faculty housing on ocean-bluff tops, to work to
enhance the quality of life for the predominantly student area, Isla Vista, and
to contribute to low-cost housing for the university's staff in this high-cost
city.

It is the first time any of the nine University of California campuses has
admitted an obligation to support its staff housing requirements.

"About one-third of the staff people, everyone from janitors to professors, live
within the city," said Santa Barbara's Mayor, Sheila Lodge. "That obviously has
an impact in a number of ways." Because the cost of an average house in Santa
Barbara is $348,000, the university has a hard time luring and keeping
employees.

Payment for Bed Space

Under the agreement, when the university begins building additional housing, it
will pay the county a set amount from $50 to $137 for each new bed space
completed. Financing will come from residents in other university-owned housing.

Some give credit to Barbara Uehling, the Chancellor, for helping to improve
relations between the community and the campus. Mrs. Uehling said the university
made major concessions in the long-range development plan because "we recognize
that we are part of a community, a very sensitive one."

County Supervisor William Wallace termed the plan livable but emphasized that
the commitments to enhance Isla Vista may be stalled because of budget crises at
both the county and university levels. Isla Vista, a densely populated area
sandwiched between the main and west campuses, houses about 70 percent of the
university's 18,000 students, according to the university's community housing
office.

Isla Vista gained attention in 1970 when forces opposed to the Vietnam War
burned the Bank of America building, prompting Ronald Reagan, then the Governor,
to mobilize the National Guard. Recent years have seen smaller-scale stemming
from out-of-control parties and leading to injuries, destruction of property,
vandalism and charges of police brutality.

'An Unreconcilable Problem

"The entire mesa of Isla Vista is too densely populated," Mr. Wallace said.
"It's an unreconcilable problem. All we can do is try to mitigate it."

One member of the community's negotiating team, Leo Jacobson, a 24-year resident
of Isla Vista, said he believed that the university was finally making a
commitment to solving problems that had been created as its students crammed
into the area.

"There's no question that the power of the university and the county combined
can arrange for most of the necesssary mitigations," he said.

But Michael Chester, president of Associated Students at the university,
criticized the school administration for not encouraging more student
participation in developing the plan. Mr. Chester, a junior from Los Angeles
majoring in sociology, said the long-range plan did not make enough commitment
to student-oriented projects.

Immediate Problems

"From a student perspective, it's not going to be helping students to get along
better, like in the classroom," he said. "Immediate problems like classroom
space are not being solved."

Robert Kuntz, the university's assistant chancellor for budget and planning,
said the final document did not resolve every concern despite the four years of
planning and more than $1 million paid in consulting and planning fees.

Mr. Kuntz quoted the president of the University of California system, David
Gardner, who said of the plan: "No campus had given more. No community had asked
for more."

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Dance;
Sokolow Takes a Bow for 50 Years

BYLINE: By ANNA KISSELGOFF

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 43; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 800 words


For more than 50 years, Anna Sokolow has reigned supreme as a choreographer of
deep social commitment. Above all, she has been concerned with the crushing toll
that society exacts on the individual in a world at war, or at war with itself.

Amid the the studies in alienation and protest that make up her signature
pieces, Miss Sokolow is also a magnificent creator of lyrical dance poems.
Typically, these odes to love are terse or penetrating; pain, as in most of her
work, is rarely absent.

In honor of Miss Sokolow's 80th birthday and the vision she has sustained
despite decades of dance esthetics remote from her own, the Dance Center at the
92d Street Y presented a tribute on Thursday night: "An Evening of Dance With
Anna Sokolow." The choreographer herself took a shy bow at the end.

Three of her works were performed by her current company, the Players' Project.
The audience in Kaufmann Concert Hall, where she made her concert debut in 1936,
included dance and theater personalities like Jerome Robbins, Pearl Lang, Joseph
Wiseman, Robert Lindgren and Igor Youskevitch.

Agnes de Mille, who has never allowed the vestiges of a stroke to keep her
eloquence down, defined Miss Sokolow's vision. Miss de Mille held center stage
while seated in a wheelchair and boomed out a concise digest of American modern
dance's early years and its historic concerts on the same stage in the 1930's
and 40's.

It was Dr. William Kolodney, then education director of the Y, who made this
"dear hall" a center for American dance, she recalled. Dr. Kolodney also invited
the modern-dance pioneers to teach at the Y. Miss Sokolow, who had joined Martha
Graham's company in 1930, was on the first faculty.

As Miss de Mille noted, Miss Sokolow was encouraged to choreograph by Louis
Horst, whose theories of composition paved the way for a new generation of
choreographers when he was Miss Graham's musical director and mentor.

"He taught choreography as a fine art," Miss de Mille said, "and Anna was his
prize, really. Everything she did was a little work of art, a large work of
art."

Miss de Mille summed up: "Anna never did a dance because it was commercially
easy to do. She always did the best she could, and with the highest vision. We
are all grateful to her for for holding true, for forging down the road, no
matter what the cost. The best, always the best -- oh, Anna, thank you."

The topicality of some of Miss Sokolow's themes on the program were obvious to
the audience. "Opus 65" expressed its open sympathy with a youth rebellion
during the Vietnam War; the 1988 "Kurt Weill" included war images set to the
composer's music, and the preamble to "Steps of Silence" (1969) was a recited
text on prisoners in the Soviet gulag by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn.

Miss Sokolow's great gift, however, is for the distilled image, and she is
anything but a creator of poster art. Feeling is at the heart of her work, and
the emotion infused into her dancers is meant to carry straight to the viewer.
More often than not, she is on target and she hits deep.

The recent "Kurt Weill" fits the composer's roots in German Expressionism with
Miss Sokolow's singular brand of American Expressionism. Unlike the Germans,
including a new generation that includes Pina Bausch, she is more abstract.
Stillness is a large part of her choreography, and Miss Sokolow can sum up a
state of being -- an entire society -- in an arrested pose.

"Steps of Silence" (the music is by Anatol Vieru) carries this process to a
searing extreme with its distorted bodies. Yet the finish to this
concentration-camp scene is theatrical and true. Newspapers blow in from the
wings and cover the bodies on the floor, history's human debris.

Jim May, Lorry May, Susan Thomasson, John Passafiume, Alex Dolcemascolo, Eric
Hess, Lauren Naslund, Gonda Dharmaperwira and Eleanor Bunker, who make up the
Players' Project, are finely attuned to Miss Sokolow's timing. Having taught
actors for decades, she has tended to function like a theatrical director toward
her dancers. In "Kurt Weill," which uses music from a string quartet, tangos and
the expected "Threepenny Opera" selections, the dancers are indeed players. A
whole social world comes to life in Miss Sokolow's friezes of social embraces to
the tango; the apache dance flavor is strong at the end. Even at her most
illustrative, with helmeted soldiers stamping and looting, the "Soldier's Wife"
section becomes political commentary, not a literal picture.

One of the first choreographers to use jazz, she turned to Teo Macero's
experimental jazz in 1965. One of the Joffrey Ballet's successes was "Opus 65,"
whose sullen, leather-jacketed young people jumped into the orchestra pit at the
end. Under Betsy Pool's lighting, they looked as confrontational as ever.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In honor of her 80th birthday, the choreographer Anna Sokolow
was given a tribute by the Dance Center at 92d Street Y. (Johan Elbers for The
New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The War Machine Drives U.S. Economy

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 367 words


To the Editor:

The chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, Michael Boskin,
now acknowledges that "after the longest economic expansion in the peacetime
history of the United States, the country probably has entered a recession"
(Business Day, Jan. 3).

The first part of that statement, referring to the 93-month-long upswing that
began in November 1982, represents another neoconservative effort to rewrite
history. It has been uncritically accepted by many, including your own economics
reporters (see, for instance, "Why It's Too Soon to Predict Another Great
Depression," The Week in Review, Nov. 11, 1990, and "Leading Indicators in 5th
Drop: 1.2% November Fall Suggests No Early End to Downturn," Business Day, Dec.
29).

Dropped from sight in this version of history is the record-setting 105-month
expansion of February 1961 to November 1969. Escalation of the Vietnam War took
place during the last half. What counts for economic purposes, however, is not
whether warfare is being waged, but the degree to which military spending is
stimulating the economy.

During the first half of the expansion of the 1960's, the military spending
share of the gross national product actually fell, from 9 percent in 1961 to 7.2
percent in 1965. By contrast, the first half of the 1980's upswing was
powerfully assisted by the Reagan Administration's $2.2 trillion military
buildup. The military proportion of gross national product rose steadily, from
5.3 percent when President Reagan took office, to a peak of 6.7 percent in
mid-1986.

If the expansion of the 1960's was prolonged by Vietnam outlays, as was
certainly the case, it must also be noted that the expansion of the 1980's would
have begun later than November 1982 in the absence of Mr. Reagan's ballooning
military budgets. From July 1981 to November 1982 the United States economy was
going through one of its two deepest post-World War II recessions to date, with
unemployment reaching 10.8 percent and fixed business investment declining 15
percent. During these months only military spending was growing rapidly.

RICHARD B. DU BOFF
Professor of Economics, Bryn Mawr College
Bryn Mawr. Pa., Jan. 4, 1991

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The Press;
Press and U.S. Officials at Odds on News Curbs

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 16; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 959 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 19


Three days into the fighting, the United States Government continues to exercise
tight control over news of the war, withholding information about the extent of
the bombing and the destruction in Iraq and restricting interviews with troops
and returning pilots.

At the same time, journalists, particularly on television, have periodically
failed to distinguish fact from rumor, and the public has received false and
misleading reports.

As a consequence, editors and news executives on one hand and military and
political officials on the other are uneasy about the war coverage so far.

The journalists feel they and by extension their readers and viewers do not have
the information they need to assess how the war is going, information that
reporters and editors believe could be provided without compromising security.

The officials believe that the unreliable information that has occasionally been
broadcast is evidence journalists cannot be trusted. "I spend more time putting
out fires than dealing with real information," said Marlin Fitzwater, the White
House spokesman.

Vietnam Deception Recalled

Both sides of this controversy concede that they are fighting the last war, the
one in Vietnam.

Journalists now mistrust the Government and especially the military in large
part because of their experience of having been deceived in Vietnam, where
officials consistently painted a much rosier picture of the war than turned out
to be justified. "Given the record of significant deception, reporters and the
American people are entitled to skepticism," said Marvin Kalb, a veteran
television correspondent who is now director of the Shorenstein Barone Center on
the Press, Politics and Public Policy at Harvard University.

Similarly, the view prevails within the military that the free rein journalists
had in Vietnam led to reporting that seriously damaged morale and turned the
country against its own troops.

There is general agreement on two other points growing out of the Vietnam
experience.

The first is that if the press had more access to unfavorable information --
evidence, say, that equipment was malfunctioning or that a particular tactic had
gone awry -- the journalists would focus on it. It is in the nature of
journalism that bad news tends to be overemphasized and good news underplayed.

The second point growing out of Vietnam is that if the public knew how gruesome
the fighting was, more people would turn against the war. There is even a
suspicion among journalists here that the Government wants to keep news of the
damage and casualties in Iraq to a minimum to keep Arab allies from turning
against the United States out of horror.

On the Military's Side

If members of Congress reflect public opinion on the question whether the
Government is controlling the news too tightly, then the public, at least at the
outset of the war, is clearly on the side of the military.

At a briefing for lawmakers on Thursday evening, Representative Mary Rose Oakar,
an Ohio Democrat, complained to Defense Secretary Dick Cheney about the degree
of control. Her question was greeted with a chorus of groans from colleagues of
both parties, and Mr. Cheney brushed off the question by saying he saw no
problem.

"Not everybody was against me, but most of them certainly were," Ms. Oakar said
later.

The main complaint from editors is that by selectively releasing information,
the Government has prevented reporting of the scale of the military operation in
Iraq and Kuwait.

"We are not getting any information that really fully and properly describes the
magnitude," said Max Frankel, executive editor of The New York Times. "We don't
know how many are participating, how much ordnance is being dropped. It's hard
to remember this is a nonstop, massive operation, the likes of which we may not
have seen before."

Other editors agreed and said they could not understand why, after the fact, the
Government could not describe the extent of destruction or provide some word
about casualties from a night of bombing in Baghdad or of carpet bombing by
B-52's in Kuwait.

"I can appreciate the national security concerns," said David Gergen, editor at
large of U.S. News & World Report, who was director of the White House office of
communications in the Ford and Reagan Administrations. "But it appears to me,"
Mr. Gergen added, "that there is too strong a tendency to lean toward less
coverage the better."

The Government's view, shared by many military experts, is that journalists do
not understand the extent to which certain details could be helpful to the enemy
and even endanger the lives of American pilots. At a Pentagon briefing for
reporters Friday afternoon, Lieut. Gen. Thomas Kelly declined, for instance, to
say what percentage of Iraqi planes had been knocked out of action. "If I were
in Iraq, I would want to know the answer to that question," he said.

Reports Prove Wrong

The main concern of Government officials is the misinformation that has found
its way regularly onto the air.

Then, on Thursday night, most if not all of the networks reported that Israel
had launched a counterattack on Iraq. And after the second attack on Israel this
morning, CBS News reported unequivocally that four missiles had struck Tel Aviv
and 11 had hit Jerusalem. All those reports turned out to be wrong.

"There has been a lot of speculative reporting, and it complicates things a
little bit," Maj. Gen. Robert Johnston of the Marines told reporters at a
briefing in Saudia Arabia today.

Television editors say that the unavoidable problem with live coverage is that
viewers get to observe the gathering, checking and processing of news rather
than the final product they are used to seeing.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Tampa Journal;
Larger Conflict Looms In Plans for Big Game

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: TAMPA, Fla., Jan.  18


Barbara Casey, the coordinator of this city's Super Bowl festivities, arrived at
Tampa Stadium at 7 A.M. today. It was the last strategy session before the game
and she heard reports from 15 committees dealing with things like budget and
finance and banners and transportation -- right on down to vans, limousines and
buses.

"We're worrying about details like the media having its party and transporting
wives of players on boats for the parade and 'Are you wearing your red, white
and blue?' " Ms. Casey said later, between phone calls and yet more meetings.
"And I'm thinking, 'This is so petty and shallow that I could be caught up in
these things when people may be dying in another country.'

"On the other hand," she said, "the show goes on, life goes on. What are we
supposed to do -- just all sit in our chairs and stare at our TV's?"

Since war erupted in the Persian Gulf, Paul Tagliabue, the commissioner of the
National Football League, has been been in constant meetings on whether to go on
with the playoffs this Sunday and the Super Bowl on Jan. 27. For now, Mr.
Tagliabue has decided that the game should be played, but he has also said that
he would be following events in the Middle East right up until kickoff and that
"there could be a change at any moment."

Amid such uncertainty, people in Tampa are preparing for what is supposed to be
the biggest party in America. The weeklong celebration includes a parade, a
street festival, a flotilla, a black tie ball and dozens of parties.

Mayor Sandy Freedman, who watched war reports on Cable News Network on a
television set in her office, was going to the first event tonight, a conga line
dance party. "The war is never out of anybody's thoughts -- here or anywhere,"
Mayor Freedman said. "But the community at this point believes we ought to go
forward."

Still there is anxiety here over security at a stadium that will hold 74,000
fans. "Someone just said to me that he didn't want to go to the game," said
Leonard Levy, a printing company executive who is the vice chairman of the Super
Bowl Task Force. "They're scared. I said, 'Hey, you got to have confidence in
the N.F.L. If there's any risk at all, they're not going to allow the game to go
on.' "

The Tampa Public Safety Administrator, Bob Smith, has said there have been no
threats or rumors of possible terrorist attacks. But extra security measures are
being taken. Crews have begun installing concrete barriers at stadium entrances
to prevent cars or trucks from smashing into the stadium. A six-foot-high fence
will ring the stadium. All tours of the stadium have been canceled. On game day,
all cars will be inspected.

The game will be broadcast to more than 50 countries, and Walter Baldwin, an
insurance company executive who is the chairman of the Super Bowl Task Force,
said many members of the armed forces in the Persian Gulf would be watching.

"This is a diversion for our boys in Saudi Arabia," Mr. Baldwin said.

One of those boys is the son of Perry Harvey, Jr., a Tampa City Councilman.

"My major concern is just praying for my son," Mr. Harvey, who is the president
of the Longshoreman's Association, said today. "My wife and I were planning on
having a Super Bowl party, but I just don't feel like it right now. But I think
the rest of the city should go on."

The task force has spent more than $2 million on preparations, most of it money
from corporate sponsors. About 100,000 visitors are expected in this port city,
and hotels, restaurants and other local businesses are hoping for an estimated
$125 million in revenue. The N.F.L. also anticipates handsome profits: The
stadium is sold out, at $150 a ticket.

The Tampa Tribune and The St. Petersburg Times have planned special Super Bowl
editions. On Thursday morning The St. Petersburg Times put out a War Extra
edition. Mark Davis, a Tribune reporter, spent much of the past week juggling
Super Bowl feature stories and interviews with families of people serving in the
gulf.

"They never canceled the Rose Bowl," Mr. Davis said, "even after the Japanese
attacked Pearl Harbor in 1941. They moved it from Pasadena to Durham, N.C., but
they didn't cancel it. They played through Vietnam, and boys were dying every
day."

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 820 words



 War in the Gulf 14-18A

Allied forces now have air superiority over Iraq after three days of bombing. In
a raid on nine oil-drilling platforms off the coast of Kuwait, American forces
captured 12 Iraqi soldiers, the first prisoners of war. Page 1

Military analysis: The U.S. war plan has now succeeded in controlling the skies
and destroying arms plants, but officials say the bombing campaign has shown no
sign of breaking Iraq's fighting capability. 1 Ground troops know their turn to
fight is coming soon 15

France's military chief says war will last two to three months 15

Israel has no choice but to retaliate for the second Iraqi attack, Israeli
officials said, but has so far refrained from doing so. The U.S. has already
sent Israel missiles capable of shooting down Iraqi missiles. 1

Iraq's missiles: More a weapon of terror than destruction 15

Calling Shamir, Bush thanks Israel for continued restraint 16

Israelis are shaken by false, then real alarms 17

Baghdad is increasingly embattled as the relentless bombing raids continue,
cutting off water and power and forcing residents to sleep in bomb shelters and
basements. Iraqi radio broadcasts remained defiant. 1
 Turkey's role in bombing sparks fear of reprisals 15

King Hussein of Jordan calls for a temporary cease-fire 17

Saudi religious leader declares a holy war against Iraq 18

U.S. aircraft will evacuate Americans in Saudi Arabia 18

Will the war increase terrorism? Law enforcement officials say they have no hard
evidence indicating a rise in terrorist activity in the United States is
inevitable, but they are heightening security precautions anyway. 18A

Despite downings, families of missing pilots remain hopeful 18A

The war troubles college students, who feel compelled by the legacy of the
previous generation to act. Campuses have not yet seen the rage of Vietnam-era
protests, but students are being forced to take a stand. 18A

Tampa Journal: War dims the Super Bowl's glitter 20

International 3-12, 19

The Soviet crackdown in Lithuania has so far stopped at Vilnius, and there have
been no moves to impose direct rule. But with a division of bitter Soviet troops
in Kaunas, an imposing military threat remains. 1

Anonymous committee in Latvia declares it has assumed power 9

Gorbachev's adviser quit over doubts on economic change 8

The secrets of East Germany's spies have begun to unravel as officials sort
millions of files collected by Stasi, the former secret police. Their findings
have raised moral issues and created a political controversy. 12

Slovenia and Croatic brace for Yugoslav military assault 4

Modest democratization programs begin in Albania 6 China is putting on trial the
students and intellectuals who led the democracy movement that was crushed in
1989. Nine people have quietly been sentenced, and perhaps a dozen more will be
tried this month. 10

A Chinese dissident in New Jersey relives 1989 massacre 10

The 500th anniversary of the arrival of Christopher Columbus in the Americas has
galvanized the political and economic frustrations of Indian and black groups in
Ecuador and elsewhere in Latin America. 19

Hesitant Haitians return to polls to elect local legislators 3

Liberia's rival rebel leaders agree to cooperate 3

 National 20-23

The sudden fall of Eastern Airlines left many passengers, employees and
communities served by the airline wringing their hands. But some workers who
have been on strike since March 1989 called it a victory. 22

Miami Springs, Eastern's headquarters, mourns its loss 23

For passengers, shock, betrayal and long, long lines 23

The Teamsters plan to hold elections -- under a court order -- that could rank
among the most democratic inthe history of organized labor. A fair vote, experts
say, could cleanse the image of unionism in the country. 20

Gov. Buddy Roemer of Louisiana, who has helped stabilize the state's economy and
root out corruption, is seeking re-election this year in what will likely be a
bruising race against David Duke and Edwin Edwards. 20

Louisiana lawmakers' error may invalidate drug cases 21

U.S. to study safety of Pacific nuclear dumping ground 21

 Regional 24-27

New York's largest savings bank, Crossland Savings, is under investigation for
setting up subsidiaries in Delaware that officials say were dummy companies used
to evade taxes on profits of $150 million. 24

Catholic order in New Haven devotes its help to the homeless 24

Mayor Dinkins's labor strategy has simultaneously tried to settle past, present
and future contracts for city employees and order the first major layoffs in
more than a decade. 25

Neediest Cases 24

Campus Life 31-33 Obituaries 26

Hamilton Fish, former New York Congressman

Arts/Reviews 43, 46

Fashion 36-37

Life Style 34

Pastimes 44-45

Weddings 40-42

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: On Campus;
A War Again Stirs Anguish, but of a Quieter Kind

BYLINE: By ANTHONY DePALMA

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18A; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 901 words


Unsettled by the grim images of war, college students born in the shadow of the
defiant 1960's are struggling to reconcile their feelings about the conflict in
the Persian Gulf with expectations of how they ought to act.

Since the missile attacks began in the Middle East, campuses have come alive
with protests against the military intervention and with counter demonstrations
of support for what is seen as an unfortunate but necessary war. Because of
their age, students have expressed fears about the possibility of a military
draft, and they are worried about friends already in Saudi Arabia.

Students share these concerns with most Americans. But they, more than any other
group, feel the pressure of being compared with and living up to the legacy of a
previous generation of antiwar protesters.

For today's 14 million college students, most born after 1970, the antiwar
movement that did so much to turn public opinion against the United States
effort in the Vietnam War is already part of history, but history of a
particularly personal nature. Often accused of being conservative and apathetic,
many students seem to have seized on this confrontation as a chance to define
themselves in a similar way.

Forced to Take Stand

"This is forcing us to take a stand," said Michael Coles of Concord, Mass., a
sophomore history major at Harvard. "One side wants to go ahead and protest for
peace, and the other side is more cynical about what the generation of the 60's
did."

Until the missiles started flying Wednesday night, no campus saw days of rage on
any scale resembling the 1960's. Many colleges held forums and teach-ins that
were unusually civil but almost always sparsely attended. The calm was
compounded by winter break, which kept many students away from campus until last
week.

But since the bombing began, emotions have intensified. Students have walked out
of class, offices have been occupied and some students have been arrested. Some
campuses have begun to resemble those of the 1960's, except that nearly every
rally includes both antiwar and pro-intervention demonstrators, with those
opposed to the war usually in the majority.

"This is definitely a divided campus," said Trish Hooper of Pittsburgh, a senior
at Kent State University in Ohio. At an emotion-charged rally the day after
hostilities began in the Middle East, about 500 protesters gathered on the
student center plaza. The crowd was evenly divided: one side carried a huge
American flag and sang the National Anthem; the other carried signs and chanted,
"No blood for oil."

Memories of 1970

Ms. Hooper, editor of the campus daily newspaper, said Kent State had been calm
during the standoff in the gulf, but the attack against Iraq helped solidify
those on both sides of the issue.

There may be no campus in America where the antiwar protests of the 1960's meant
more than at Kent State, where four students were killed by National Guardsmen
on May 4, 1970. "The shootings are obviously part of the consciousness here from
the first day you step on the campus," she said. "But people are not being
actively against the war in the name of what happened on May 4. They see
something in Iraq that they don't believe in."

At the University of California at Los Angeles, 113 demonstrators were arrested
Friday after occupying the administration building for nearly 24 hours to demand
that the university hold a daylong teach-in on the war.

Vietnam-era protests also echo loudly in the minds of students like Antoinette
Arnold, a graduate student at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill., but for
a different reason.

"I have no choice but to support the action entirely," she said. "If we don't
support them, it will be Vietnam all over again."

However, many aspects of the current situation do not resemble the Vietnam era
at all, a factor that is complicating campus response to the conflict. Military
intervention in Vietnam was incremental, taking place over several years and
allowing years for dissent to build. The current crisis has developed over six
months, with shooting uncertain until it began Wednesday. Many hope that fast
military action by the United States and its allies will end the war before a
draft is needed.

Another big difference between the 1960's and today, said James Chace, Luce
Professor in Freedom of Inquiry and Expression at Bard College in New York, is
that the enemy now is clearly drawn.

"In the 60's, rightly or wrongly, a lot of people felt sympathetic to the North
Vietnamese," he said. "Virtually no one defends Iraq."

In recent days, rallies have brought out more emotion than has been seen in some
time.

"I haven't been sleeping or going to class," said Chris Murray, of Cleveland, a
junior at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio. "I've only been glued to the TV, and
I'm very scared."

Lisa Nellor of Kansas City, Kan., a junior at Stanford University, spoke for
many others still trying to sort out their feelings.

"There's a lot of people who are very strongly putting on demonstrations for
peace," the American studies major said, "and there seems to be a more silent
group of people who feel somehow that this was justified. They're not pro-war,
but they support what the President has done. I feel torn between the two,
because I don't want war, but I have to admit that in some ways maybe we're
doing the best we can."

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
How Presidents Take The Nation Into War

BYLINE: By BARBARA KELLERMAN; Barbara Kellerman is visiting professor of
political science at George Washington University. Her most recent book (with
Ryan Barilleaux) is "The President as World Leader."

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1265 words


IN the early days of the Republic, George Washington declared that "it is our
own true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances with any portion of the
foreign world." However, since the Presidency of Woodrow Wilson, the United
States has frankly abandoned its professed proclivity for isolationism.

America's attempt to make the world safe for democracy by entering the Great War
paved the way for what at least since the Second World War has been the role
Americans have frequently played: world policeman. As a consequence, while
Americans still cherish the notion that they are a peace-loving people, the fact
is that the United States is quite often at war.

For all the recurrent wrangling about whether it is the executive or the
legislature that has the power to decide to fight, in modern American history it
has been the President who has assumed nearly total responsibility for
determining the nation's role in world affairs.

Executive decisions to enter into combat inevitably invoke a national ideology
shaped by the belief that the United States is different from, and even superior
to, the other nations of the world. Americans have considered it their mission
to spread -- usually by example but sometimes by direct intervention -- freedom
and justice around the world. There is no overestimating this essentially moral
imperative: It provided the underpinning for decisions by at least three of the
last ten Presidents to engage in military adventures, and by four others to lead
America into major wars.

It was John F. Kennedy who was responsible for escalating, over two years, the
number of military personnel in South Vietnam from 948 to 16,000. It was Richard
M. Nixon who decided, without the knowledge of Congress or the American people,
to expand the Vietnam War into Laos and Cambodia. And when Ronald Reagan decided
to send soldiers and marines to Grenada, he did no more than notify Congress
once the invasion was under way.

In the last 50 years, four other Presidents have committed the American people
to all-out war: Franklin D. Roosevelt, Harry S. Truman, Lyndon B. Johnson and
now George Bush. How does the Commander in Chief determine that the benefits of
combat are likely to outweigh the cost in young lives? The virtue of the mission
is a necessary precondition. But it does not fully explain how Presidents decide
to put others at risk -- particularly when the number of casualties is likely to
be high. While the immediate circumstances were very different, in each case a
few key elements explain the President's decision to fight.

The individual. Like everyone, Presidents make decisions based on who they are.
Life history matters: Lyndon Johnson was the first Congressman to enlist in the
armed forces, one day after Pearl Harbor, and George Bush was the youngest pilot
in the United States Navy. World view matters: When America was still reluctant
to drink of "the hell broth that is brewing in Europe" (Hemingway's phrase),
Franklin Roosevelt declared that "the world has grown so small and weapons of
attack so swift, that no nation can be safe." President Truman, a voracious
reader of history, believed that a threat demanded a strong response, swiftly
executed; he "was not brought up to run from a fight," he liked to say. Skills,
capacities and interests also matter, as do deep-seated motives, impulses, and
values.

The event. Presidents go to war in response to an event or series of events that
seems to them to threaten world order in general, and American interests in
particular: War engulfs Europe and later Pearl Harbor is attacked; North Korea
invades South Korea; the destroyer Maddox is fired on by North Vietnamese
torpedo boats in the Gulf of Tonkin; Iraq seizes oil-rich Kuwait as its "19th
province." Since Munich, such marker events inevitably elicit from Presidents a
powerful impulse to avoid appeasement. As President Truman put it, "If we are
tough enough now there won't have to be any next step."

The enemy. The fiend, the "other," is identified and labeled, and becomes in
time an object to be obliterated at all costs. Nazis, Hitler, swastika; Commies,
Stalin, hammer and sickle; Red Chinese, North Koreans, Viet Cong; and recently a
new nemesis, the swaggering, suddenly familiar figure of Saddam Hussein.
Presidents become persuaded that their antagonists are genuinely evil, and
thereby justify the violence of their campaign against them to the American
people.

The environment. Presidents operate in domestic and international contexts that
may or may not favor strong Presidential action. President Bush, in cobbling
together the international coalition against Iraq, benefited mightily from the
enormously improved relations between the United States and the Soviet Union.

Moreover, once the war option is on the table, there are other major players,
domestic and foreign, with whom Presidents, lacking the authority of kings, have
to contend. Well into 1941, Franklin Roosevelt had to reckon not only with
isolationists in Congress, but also with pro-Nazis like Father Coughlin and
Socialists like Norman Thomas. And Lyndon Johnson's escalation in Vietnam was
undermined by domestic protests almost from the start.

Of course, the environment contains friendly voices too.  F.D.R.'s special
relationship with Winston Churchill spurred the President into action before
America's declaration of war. "The voice and force of the United States may
count for nothing if they are withheld too long," wrote the Prime Minister to
the President in 1940. (Fifty years later another Prime Minister whispered
virtually the same words into the ear of another President.) For their part,
Presidents Truman and Bush sought, and received, cover and support for their own
hawkish impulses from both Congress and the United Nations.

The decision-making process. Once the precipitating event takes place a
machinery is established to fashion a response. A small decision-making group is
called together, comprising the President's most trusted advisers; the group
that makes initial recommendations tends to play a key role for the
duration.When Japan attacked Pearl Harbor, Franklin Roosevelt brought his
Cabinet in for consultation; they were soon joined by 10 members of Congress.
The group decided that the President would go before Congress the next day and
ask for a formal declaration of war. When North Korea invaded South Korea, Harry
Truman promptly summoned the nation's top military and diplomatic leadership.
Over dinner, they agreed on a firm stand to help Korea. Lyndon Johnson's gradual
escalation in Vietnam was decided on by about eight top Government officials
whose work, despite some changes in membership, was more or less continuous. The
men, who met at noon on Tuesdays, called themselves the Tuesday lunch group or
the Tuesday cabinet. And since Aug. 2, President Bush has been at the center of
a very small decision-making group that includes James A. Baker 3d, Dick Cheney,
Brent Scowcroft and Gen. Colin L. Powell.

Given who George Bush is; given Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and the demonization
of Saddam Hussein; given the high degree of Soviet-American cooperation during
the Gulf crisis and the apparently unanimous support from his advisers for the
decision to fight, it comes finally as no surprise that last week the Commander
in Chief ordered the start of warfare in Iraq and Kuwait. Along with one of his
heroes, Henry Stimson, George Bush has always believed that by the end of the
Roosevelt era the United States could never again be "an island to herself."

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d outside
the Oval Office on Wednesday, just before the first attacks on Iraq. (George
Tames for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PUBLIC & PRIVATE;
The Back Fence

BYLINE: By Anna Quindlen

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 786 words


If annyone had looked inside the meeting room, they would have seen a peculiar
sight. More than a hundred people had paid to hear a lecture, but the speaker
had stepped aside because of circumstances and instead the audience was staring
at a kind of Frankenstein monster, a figure with a brown podium for a body and a
small television for a head.  Suddenly the head had a face, the face of George
Bush, telling the nation it had gone to war.

We had always expected it to be the television war, and that is what it has
been. Tom and Dan and Peter and the pleasant generic news readers of Cable News
Network stared into our eyes day after day, night after night. No one could bear
to turn them off.

But it is not the television war we expected. There has been precious little war
to see in these first few days: magnificent planes, the occasional soldier, a
few minutes of footage of what looked like a fireworks display shot in bad
light. And the talking heads: this has been a great windfall for retired
generals. Once we learned that war had actually begun and Israel had been hit,
there was little to discover except that Peter Jennings looks fresh as a daisy
on a few hours' sleep.

It was not because of the press of news that we seemed incapable of turning the
TV off. The television had become a kind of modern communal meeting place from
which to absorb history aborning. It was America's back fence, the one place in
this time of dislocation where we were all connected, all having the same
sensation at the same time, even if the sensation was shame at thinking that a
correspondent in a gas mask looked like a mutant bug.

The television war, they called Vietnam, and it was because it taught us what it
really looked like, what happens before the clutch of soldiers hoists the flag
to the top of the hill. It made all the ugly stuff real, the brutality and the
blood. Red is the color of war. Mr. Jennings recalled the other day that General
Westmoreland once complained in those days that the television camera saw such a
narrow view. But it was wide enough.

The television hasn't had a view for these last few days; in truth, television
has acted like radio, with still photographs of faces superimposed on maps. But
action was not all we were looking for. Sitting in front of the television was
the closest we could come to compartmentalizing the sea change. The most
enduring memory of my childhood is of a time much like this one, those long
November days of watching the Kennedy murder, mourning and burial, in the
blackest blacks and the whitest whites I have ever known. Before this, that was
the most continuous television I had ever watched. Like this, it did not provide
much news. It gave you a feeling of America sitting in a circle.

What Americans have seen these last few days is what they had hoped and prayed
for: war without tears.  The descriptions of how this missile was picking off
that one sounded like a grand video game of the sky. Fighting raged for three
days, and the closest we came to seeing casualties was a crumpled van on a Tel
Aviv street.

Everyone hoped that was because things were going well, whatever that means. Or
perhaps it is because no one really knows exactly how things are going.
Reporters are far away from the front, reporting from hotel rooms with sealed
windows or basements where they crouch for safety's sake. The Department of
Defense is taking pool reporters where it wants them to go, which is nowhere
much.

So for now, we are eased into the unspeakable, confronting the concept of combat
well before we confront its realities, an incremental process that can only
benefit those who believe this is a noble endeavor. We see map war, diagram war,
computer war. The closest anyone got to something else was CNN, which has given
new meaning to the term "intelligence network." For half a day it had three
reporters in a Baghdad hotel room describing bombs bursting in air. But the
Iraqis cut off their communications, perhaps because Dick Cheney said at a
televised briefing that he was getting information from CNN. A television war,
indeed. The Iraqis watch the Secretary of Defense on television reporting that
he is monitoring the front by watching television.

A new age has begun. Our children will date themselves by the grade they were in
when the United States fought Iraq. And as soon as we get accustomed to that, we
will need more than retired generals. What we have seen in these first few days
is a kind of primitive ritual made modern. When things are very scary, we are
afraid to be alone in the dark.  There have been people and light in our living
rooms. Don't confuse that with war, or news. Both are yet to come.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

We Learned the Wrong Lessons in Vietnam

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 456 words


To the Editor:

With the first military "successes" of the war against Iraq broadcast loudly
around the country, one can sense the emergence of a self-congratulatory feeling
that we have learned the lessons of Vietnam. Those lessons, intoned by the
President and his advisers, are reflected in the massive air strikes, the
all-out mobilization and the political will to pursue Washington's political
objectives. However, those who have clearly understood the United States loss in
Vietnam can see in the immediate aftermath of the attacks on Iraq and Kuwait a
recapitulation of the tragic nature of the war in Vietnam.

In Vietnam, the overwhelming air power convinced the policy makers that they
could bomb Vietnam into submission. Instead, the Vietnamese demonstrated that
technology cannot triumph over ingenuity and perseverance. Whether the Iraqis
can call upon the same primal resistance remains to be seen. On the other hand,
the technocratic triumphalism trumpeted by the Administration and the news media
displays both an arrogance of power and a moral insensitivity that is all too
reminiscent of the Vietnam era.

The moral blindness of the technocratic abstractions about military targets
conveniently neglects the devastation of human life. Given the level of
censorship in this war, unlike the more intrusive role of the news media in
Vietnam, the public may never really see the human toll in life and limb. No
litany of "clean, surgical" strikes can cover over that weapons of mass terror,
from cruise missiles to air fuel bombs, will kill actual human beings.

Finally, the myopic politics that got us into Vietnam and now into a war with
Iraq show the contradictions of an imperial America. While some people and
countries might welcome the role of the United States as supercop, that welcome
will soon turn sour. (And over the long term, such policies will bankrupt us and
doom us to be a second-rate economic power.) One cannot expect to dictate
solutions when the problems have not been adequately addressed.

In Vietnam, we never understood the determination of Vietnamese nationalism, and
now we are underestimating the grievances and desires of Arab nationalism. Of
course, we can self-righteously point to the totalitarian aspects of both
nationalisms. However, to turn away from negotiation in the Middle East is to
enter an unending cycle of violence.

Now is not the time for Americans to rally round a policy of madness, built on
the arrogance of power. If we want a peace that will prepare us to live as a
good neighbor in the world, we need to stop being the bully on the block.

FRANCIS SHOR
Detroit, Jan. 17, 1991

The writer is an associate professor of humanities at Wayne State U.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

We Learned the Wrong Lessons in Vietnam;
Administering Iraq

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 301 words


To the Editor:

A bandit chief captures control of a nation of 17 million people and 10 percent
of the world's reserves of oil, and uses the people and the oil wealth to
terrorize his neighbors. Once that bandit chief has been put out of harm's way,
the question remains of what to do to stabilize the region.

Presumably, there will be a transition military government, similar to that in
Germany and Japan after World War II, under the control of occupying powers. But
this time the occupying will probably be in the name and under the control of
the United Nations. Questions will arise from the beginning of how to compensate
Iraq's victims and how to assure that its assets will not be diverted again to
military adventures. Those purposes would be served by creation of an
international authority under United Nations control to administer Iraq's oil
assets.

The authority would operate the oil fields and associated refineries and other
facilities in Iraq, the conditions and proceeds to be decided according to
United Nations resolutions. First claim on the proceeds should be for the
victims of the Iraqis in Kuwait, including its natives, foreign displaced
persons and its government. Second priority should be to defray the costs
sustained in the measures necessary to restore legality in the area. Third
priority should be the needs of critically needy humanitarian relief, for
children in third world countries, for example, to strengthen such activities
supported by United Nations and Unesco funds. And fourth priority should be for
Iraq's peaceful economic and social development.

United Nations control would cease when it had decided its mission had been
fulfilled, and control might be restored to a responsible Iraqi government.

LAWRENCE CRANBERG
Austin, Tex., Jan. 9, 1991

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

We Learned the Wrong Lessons in Vietnam;
A Feminist Issue Still

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 146 words


To the Editor:

Speaking as feminists, we are opposed to any war in the Persian Gulf where young
men and women lay down their lives in a conflagration whose cost in blood and
dollars will be prohibitive. We remember Vietnam. We remember that the United
States has armed Saddam Hussein and stood by during his massacre of the Kurds by
chemical warfare.

This is not a war to defend democracy: Women in Kuwait cannot vote; no one in
Saudi Arabia can vote, and women cannot even drive cars; a lesbian or homosexual
is subject to barbarous methods of execution. This is not a war for any moral
purpose, only for oil and power.

For 20 years we have said war is a feminist issue; it still is. Our priorities
remain at home: poverty, racism, AIDS, the dangers to our economy and ecology.

KATE MILLETT, ROBIN MORGAN, GLORIA STEINEM, TI-GRACE ATKINSON
New York, Jan. 15, 1991

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

We Learned the Wrong Lessons in Vietnam;
Peacetime Dialogue

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 290 words


To the Editor:

Saddam Hussein has failed to heed the call of peace, consequently, he now has to
face the stark reality that Iraq is not likely to exist after a war in the
Persian Gulf because:

* Turkey has historical claims to Northern Iraq based on the same arguments
Saddam Hussein has used in annexing Kuwait. The Turkish Parliament has approved
conditional cross-border fighting.

* Iran fought for eight years to control both sides of the Shatt al Arab
waterway.

* Syria, too, is waiting for a situation made to order for the ambitions of its
leader, Hafez al-Assad.

The military resolution of the Persian Gulf crisis will focus attention more
closely than ever on the Arab-Israeli conflict, which is also a fundamental
cause of instability in the region. A decisive United States victory will create
new opportunities for peace in the Middle East. American leaders will have
unprecedented political leverage with their Arab allies.

It is incumbent upon Congress and the Bush Administration to bridge their
differences on bringing peace to the Arab-Israeli conflict, so that upon the
resolution in the Persian Gulf, the United States can swiftly move forward with
a peace initiative to engage moderate Arab and Israeli leaders in a direct
dialogue for the first time since Anwar el-Sadat and Menachem Begin signed the
Camp David Accords in 1979.

The Sadat Peace Foundation urges the Bush Administration to make every effort to
continue the Arab-Israeli dialogue by requesting guarantees from moderate Arab
and Israeli leaders to sit down at the table after the liberation of Kuwait and
the dismantling of Saddam Hussein's Government.

HODA S. ELEMARY
Executive Director, Sadat Peace Foundation
New York, Jan. 17, 1991

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

We Learned the Wrong Lessons in Vietnam;
Arab-American Danger

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 291 words


To the Editor:

You report the alarming decision by the Federal Bureau of Investigation to
interview as many as 200 Arab-Americans a week about possible terrorist activity
(news article, Jan. 8). This action seems to me, as an American of Japanese
ancestry, similar to developments that led to the tragedy of the
Japanese-American internment in 1942. It is all the more ominous in light of a
draft paper by the Immigration and Naturalization Service, leaked a couple of
years ago, that proposed rounding up and interning Arab-Americans in the event
of a national emergency.

The F.B.I. is casting unwarranted suspicion on Arab-American business and
community leaders who have nothing to do with terrorism. Law enforcement
officials around the country have not found any evidence linking any
Arab-American to terrorist activity.

Arab-American organizations have reported a growing number of threats and
violent acts against Arab-Americans since Iraq's Aug. 3 invasion of Kuwait.
Instead of targeting Arab-Americans, the F.B.I. should be investigating those
who have been victims in the many unprovoked attacks against Arab-Americans
around the country. A few years ago, Alex Odeh was killed when a bomb exploded
in the Los Angeles office of the Arab-American organization of which he was an
officer, yet the terrorists behind that crime have never been brought to
justice.

F.B.I. and Justice Department officials are sworn to uphold and defend the
Constitution and the laws of the land, including civil rights laws. They should
not use the threat of terrorism or war as a justification to single out a group
based on ancestry, and then violate or threaten to violate their fundamental
rights.

JOHN OTA
Oakland, Calif., Jan. 15, 1991

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TV VIEW;
Talkin' 'Bout My G-G-Generation

BYLINE: By Joyce Maynard; Joyce Maynard, who writes a syndicated column called
"Domestic Affairs," has just completed a novel about a woman obsessed with
television, to be published by Dutton next year.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 31; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1592 words


Over three consecutive nights, beginning tomorrow, PBS will broadcast a six-part
series chronicling the events and impact of the 60's. Where Ken Burns, in
creating his masterful Civil War series, had to draw on the written word, the
still photograph and the contemporary historian to summon up the sense of an
era, the makers of this documentary series faced a different challenge: to sift
through a staggering abundance of television-ready material in a way that would
live up to its title, "Making Sense of the 60's."

We have no substitute for the Civil War diarist Mary Chesnut in this latest PBS
series, to reflect in dazzlingly articulate journal form on the events and
characters of the times. This time, television itself serves as a kind of
journal -- a video scrapbook. Watching the series, it's important to remember
that its images -- of Selma and Camelot and Woodstock, Altamont and Kent State,
as well as the bland unreality of 60's entertainment programming -- are not
simply what happened, but what all of America saw happening. Certainly -- as
more than one person reflects in the series -- the 60's was a decade of
unprecedented eventfulness.

It was also a decade in which, thanks to television, America was granted
unprecedented access to events. Television in the 60's served not simply to hold
a mirror (sometimes accurate, often distorted) up to our lives, but also to
transform the events it brought us. "Making Sense of the 60's" is about a
decade, but because that decade was the first one in which television was a
fixture in virtually every middle-class American household, an underlying theme
of the series is television and its effect on America.

And where, for a child of the 1930's or 40's, so many images remain individual
and particular, so many of the images that define the 60's are ones we all
share.

When I flash back on the decade of my coming of age, I think not so much family
portraits or scenes from my hometown as of scenes remembered from the television
screen. The Beatles' with their then-shocking hairstyles, and the hysterical
screams of fans who greeted that first appearance on "The Ed Sullivan Show";
antiwar protesters facing the National Guard at Kent State; a flag on the moon.

Ask me to describe what I wore on my first date or how I spent my 16th birthday,
and I may draw a blank. But I remember the chair I was sitting in when I saw
Jack Ruby kill Lee Oswald -- live, on national TV. I remember the banal, as well
as the extraordinary: I can still sing the theme song to "The Patty Duke Show,"
and I remember the outline of the Ponderosa. I can tell you not just who played
Beaver Cleaver, but the names of every cast member, right down to Larry
Mondello's mother. And the funny thing is, I'm not the only person I know who
remembers those things. Not by a long shot.

Television brought performers and world leaders into our homes in a way that
tended to blur the line between the two -- made friends out of some, made foes
out of others, made a President out of the host of "Death Valley Days."
Television delivered to us images that would otherwise have remained distant
datelines in the newspaper, crackling radio reports from an unimagined front.
Only those stationed in Korea really know what that war looked like, but we all
know how it looked in Vietnam -- or think we do. And having seen how it looked,
the nation was spurred to respond. So we got not simply our first televised war,
but our first televised antiwar protest. We became a nation endlessly turning a
camera on itself. Which is in many ways what "Making Sense of the 60's" is
about.

From the first, it was a curiously incongruous set of pictures television
offered us. As a schoolchild in the first years of the decade, I formed my ideas
about what a family was supposed to be like -- the roles of mother and father,
the dream of a good life -- from the orderly all-white households of the
Cleavers, the Andersons and the Nelsons. And then sat down with my own parents
(who bore so little resemblance to those happy couples) to watch pictures of
black children barred from white schools on "The Huntley-Brinkley Report."

I fell in love with Jacqueline Kennedy -- for a 9-year-old American girl, the
closest thing to a real-life princess -- when I watched her White House tour
special. And recoiled in horror, a year or two later, to see in those endlessly
televised replays of the assassination, her fashionable outfit stained with her
husband's blood.

Television fed me hundreds of hours of commercials, full of housewives whose
chief problem in life was the condition of their husbands' shirt collars and
their bathroom bowl.  And then it gave me a women's movement. It instructed me
in the rules of my society. And then showed me a generation whose single-minded
purpose it was to break them.

In all sorts of ways, the politics of the 70's and the 80's were shaped by what
television showed us in the 60's. If television has taught us anything, it is a
recognition of the emotional power that comes with giving a voice to words,
putting a face on a name and a picture onto an idea -- whether the idea is
Vietnam, abortion or the importance of owning hundred-dollar Michael Jordan
sneakers. It was television that created the need for image consultants and
media packagers. Who remembers exactly what Richard Nixon said during the
Kennedy-Nixon debates? Who doesn't remember his 5 o'clock shadow?

And just as members of what used to be called "the establishment" shaped their
image-making to the requirements of television, so too, increasingly, did those
of us who liked to view ourselves as challenging the establishment. The civil
rights activists and antiwar protesters belonged to what was perhaps the last
unself-conscious political movements of our times.

Today's breed of activist (as I know from my own experience, opposing the
creation of a nuclear waste dump in my town) has been well schooled in the
concept of the news hook and the sound bite. It's not enough to be marching
somewhere with a placard. You need to make sure cameras are there, recording the
event.

For me -- veteran of (as I was once crazy enough to calculate) roughly 5,000
hours of television-watching -- the 10 years I spent in the 60's glued to the
screen left me with a deep-seated distrust of the medium. Even when a show or
series comes along that stands out as original and innovative, I seldom turn on
my set. The show in which I probably take greatest pleasure is "The Wonder
Years," specifically because it depicts a boy inhabiting the 60's, who is almost
exactly the age I was then. And whose life -- like mine during that period -- is
shaped by a curious mix of individual and universal experiences, and a poignant
awareness of the gulf between his own life and life as seen on TV.

I love to watch "America's Funniest Home Videos" (descendant of the 1960's
classic, "Candid Camera") because it puts the video camera in the hands of the
viewer and restores some measure of participation and control over the
television image to the person at home. To someone who can still remember the
arrival of her family's first set, with its cumbersome picture tube and two
channels of fuzzy black-and-white reception -- the idea of owning a video camera
remains astonishing and magical. To my children, of course, the device holds no
greater magic than a computer, or a fax.

My daughter is now 12, the age that I was, in 1965. My two sons are 8 and 6,
around the age I was when we got our first TV. Among their favorite shows are
reruns, on Nickelodeon, of the situation comedies I watched myself, back in
those years. ("Mr. Ed." "Dennis the Menace." "My Three Sons." "Donna Reed.") But
where I took in those shows with the innocence of a person eating a plateful of
bacon and eggs who's never heard of cholesterol, my children sit and hoot at
them. Not just at the hairdos of the women, the bell-bottom pants, the outdated
cars. They laugh at the vision of life those shows portray, and how far it is
from the world they inhabit.

It wasn't the world I inhabited 25 years ago either, of course. But where I
believed that such a world actually existed (as I believed in a godlike
President Kennedy, an infallible space program and in the notion that all you
needed was love), my children bring a large measure of suspicion, cynicism and
detachment to what they see on television -- from the lip-synched videos of
Milli Vanilli to the promises of politicians.

From where I stand now, at my kitchen counter chopping up vegetables for soup,
with the theme song to "Mr. Ed" playing in the next room, the 60's are a distant
dream. A horse is still a horse, of course of course, and no one can talk to a
horse, of course. Donna Reed is still standing in her doorway, waiting for her
husband to remember he forgot to kiss her goodbye. Only now we know, as we
didn't then, that hers was probably a dysfunctional family.

The 60's required Americans to compare their lives to what they saw on the
television screen, and then come to terms with the discrepancy between the two
images. Delivered to us now, 30 years after the beginning of a decade blamed for
having launched a generation with unrealistic expectations, the PBS series may
not quite live up to its claim of making sense of those confusing, tumultuous
times. But it strikes me as a valuable exercise, at least, re-examining the
images that planted those expectations. Courtesy of the very medium that
delivered them to us in the first place.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s 1965 march from Selma to
Montgomery, above (Ivan Massar/PBS); at left, counterculture couture, from
"Making Sense of the 60's"--the emotional power of putting a picture to an idea
(Bob Fitch/PBS)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In Hollywood, Class Doesn't Put Up Much of a Struggle

BYLINE: By BENJAMIN DeMOTT; Benjamin DeMott, a social critic, is the author of
"The Imperial Middle: Why Americans Can't Think Straight About Class," published
by William Morrow.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 2; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2203 words


Increasingly in recent years movies have been dealing with power issues and
class relationships -- inter actions between masters and servants, executives
and underlings, yuppies and waitresses, millionaires and hookers, rich
aristocrats and social-nobody lawyers. Think of "Reversal of Fortune" and "The
Bonfire of the Vanities." Think of "White Palace" and "Pretty Woman." Think of
Michael Corleone's struggle for social acceptance in "The Godfather Part III."
Think of "Working Girl," or "Driving Miss Daisy" or "Dirty Dancing." Script
after script links up clout and cloutlessness, often to stunning box-office
effect.

Not every movie version of the power theme speaks specifically about class
relationships, and some versions are only loosely linked to social reality. The
two worlds of "Edward Scissorhands," for example -- hilltop mansion and tract
house; solitary helpless artist versus artist-baiting mob -- are derived less
from everyday experience than from fairy tales, allegory and satire.

Usually, though, conventional realism is the chosen mode, and class skirmishes
are sketched. The camera in "White Palace," a popular film released a few months
ago, studies St. Louis's fancier suburbs and its rundown Dog Town; class
conflict erupts at the movie's crisis point. Nora, the waitress-heroine (Susan
Sarandon), listens smolderingly to her yuppie lover's upper-middle friends and
relations uttering their hypocritical socio-political pieties, and explodes.
Storming her way out, she cries: "I'm working class!"

At first glance the angry explicitness of her outcry and the movie's declaration
of difference look promising. They could signify that Hollywood is reaching
toward maturity, trying to teach itself and the nation how to think straight
about social hierarchy -- the realities of class and class power. The need for
such instruction is patent. This country has an ignoble tradition of evading
social facts -- pretending that individual episodes of upward mobility obviate
grappling with the hardening soco-economic differences in our midst. Movies that
deal responsibly with class relationships could, in theory, moderate the
national evasiveness.

But, regrettably, contemporary "class movies" don't deal responsibly with class.
The tone of their treatment of rich and poor is new; it is harsher and meaner
than that of Frank Capra's "little guy" sagas or George Cukor's social comedies
or John Ford's populism that were pleasing to our parents and grandparents in
the 30's, 40's and 50's.

The harsher tone, however, doesn't bespeak fundamental change. At their best,
Hollywood's new-style "class movies" nod at realities of social difference --
and then go on to obfuscate them. At their worst, these films are driven by
near-total dedication to a scam -- the maddening, dangerous deceit that there
are no classes in America.

One favorite story line stresses discovery: people who think firm class lines
exist come to discover, by the end of the tale, that they're mistaken;
everybody's really the same.

In the 1988 blockbuster "Working Girl," Tess McGill (Melanie Griffith),
initially a bottom-dog secretary-gofer, is positive she can make it to the top.
But her peers in the word-processing pool regard her aspirations as foolish.
They tell her, flat out, that the real world has lines and distinctions and that
her daydreams of glory and business power are foolish. "I sing and dance in my
underwear," says one pal, "but I'm not Madonna." The implicit message: Get real,
Tess. Accept the reality of levels.

But Tess, of course, accepts no such thing. She reads W, takes classes to
improve her accent, seizes her boss's office when the latter breaks her leg
skiing -- and winds up not only doing deals but ordering the boss (Sigourney
Weaver) to get her bony bottom out of sight. What does it take to get to the
top? Desire, period. Tess's desire flies her straight up to a managerial perch,
allowing her to become, almost effortlessly, all she can be: no problem, few
barriers, class dismissed. In the final frame the doubters in the secretarial
pool acknowledge their error; they rise to applaud the heroine who proved them
wrong.

A second familiar story line involves upendings: characters theoretically on the
social bottom shake the cages of characters who try to use their position to
humiliate those below. The top dogs are so stupid they don't realize that
socioeconomic power only lasts for a second and that they can be overcome by any
intrepid underling.

Consider "Pretty Woman," the 1990 film that became one of the highest- grossing
movies ever and is now near the top of video best-seller and rental charts. The
would-be humiliators in this movie are snobbish salespeople on chic Rodeo Drive.
Vivian (Julia Roberts), a hooker, runs afoul of them when she is sent on a
shopping spree by the corporate raider (Richard Gere) who has hired her for a
week. The raider wants elegance and the hooker aims to oblige -- but on her
first pass at the drive she's suited up in hooker garb, and the salespeople are
offended. "I don't think we have anything for you. Please leave."

Quickly the snobs are undone. The corporate raider flashes plastic and tells a
shop manager that they'll be spending big and need appropriate cosseting.  In
minutes -- through instruction in fork-tine-counting, for instance -- the raider
effects the few alterations of manners required to transform Vivian the street
hooker into grandeur.

Regally togged, her arms filled with sleek clothes boxes, Vivian returns to the
salespeople who were mean to her and sticks it to them in economic not moral
terms. If they had been nice to her, they would have made a killing. ("You work
on commission, don't you?")

Power is temporary and snobs are dopes -- so goes the message. Ostracize a
hooker in midmorning and she'll ruin you before tea. Class dismissed.

Comparable dismissals occur in movies drawing huge audiences of high school
students. They usually have plot lines showing bottom dogs gliding smoothly and
painlessly to the top. In "Dirty Dancing" (1987), Patrick Swayze, playing a
talented working-class dancer (he has a card in the "housepainters and
plasterers union"), competes for esteem with a Yale medical school student --
and wins in a breeze.

In John Hughes's "Some Kind of Wonderful" (1987) and "Pretty in Pink" (1986),
working-class heroes or heroines become romantically interested in classmates
who rank above them, in terms of money and status, in the school society. As the
attachments develop, the poor students commence to display gifts and talents
that prove them equal to or intrinsically superior to the arrogant, insecure
characters in whom they've become interested.

Once the nonclass, merit-based order or hierarchy has been established, and
superficial, class-based gradations have been eliminated, the poor boy or girl
chooses whether to continue the relationship with the pseudo-superior as an
equal or to end it. Either way, the experience bolsters the belief that, in
school and out, social strata are evanescent and meaningless.

It's hardly surprising that the myth of America as a classless society emerges
at its most schematic in movies aimed at relatively youthful, unsophisticated
audiences. But the same impulse to paper over social differences surfaces in
many more ambitious films purporting to raise subjects considered controversial
by Hollywood standards (social injustice, war, the treatment of minorities).

And not infrequently that impulse drives film makers -- such as Francis Ford
Coppola in "The Godfather Part III" and Barry Levinson in "Avalon" -- to
overplay ethnic influence and underplay class influence on character.

But what is truly striking is the array of ploys and devices by which movie
makers bring off escapes from significant confrontation with class realities.
The Vietnam War film "Platoon" (1986), for example, lets on at the beginning
that it will show us an upper-middle white soldier learning about differences
between himself and the sons of the working class who compose the majority of
his comrades in arms.

But in place of the experience of learning, we're offered liberal platitudes and
star turns. The hero writes his grandmother that his fellow soldiers are the
salt of the earth (little corroboration supplied); the soldiers themselves --
particularly the blacks among them -- are brought on for a succession of amusing
monologues, following which they disappear, shipped out dead or alive; at no
point is the gritty stuff of class difference even momentarily engaged.

In the much-acclaimed "Driving Miss Daisy" (1989), the early intimation is that
the focus will be on relations between white employers and black servants. But
almost immediately the outlines of that social difference are blurred. The white
employer is Jewish and her synagogue is bombed; poor black and rich white become
one, joint victims of discriminatory violence. ("You're my best friend, Hoke.")
Class dismissed once more.

The story is nearly the same even in those unusual movies that focus solely on
minority communities. Social difference is glanced at, defined in a few snippets
of dialogue -- and then trashed, often by means of a joke. In "House Party,"
Reginald Hudlin's 1990 film about teen-age life, the joke is about sex. Through
establishing shots and talk, two girlfriends are placed at a social distance
from each other. One lives in "the projects," the other in an expensively
middle-class suburban home.

The film offers a single moment of reflection on the social difference in
question; a young man points out that there is plenty of space for making out in
the rich girl's house, none where the projects girl lives. Yet once more, class
dismissed.

The reason all this matters is simple. Treating class differences as totally
inconsequential strengthens the national delusion that class power and position
are insignificant. It encourages the middle-class -- those with the clearest
shot at upward mobility -- to assume, wrongly, that all citizens enjoy the same
freedom of movement that they enjoy. And it makes it easier for political
leaders to speak as though class power had nothing to do with the inequities of
life in America. ("Class is for European democracies or something else," says
George Bush. "It isn't for the United States of America. We are not going to be
divided by class.")

Movies that deal responsibly with class relationships might help to embolden
leaders to begin talking candidly about real as opposed to phony issues of
"fairness." But movies obviously can't do this as long as their makers are in
terror of allowing class permanently out of the closet.

It's true that occasional moments occur when movie audiences can grasp the
substantive dimensions of social difference. A person reached toward from above
or below is seen to possess inner, mysterious resources (or limits) about which
someone differently placed on the social scale can have no inkling, and can't
conceivably lay claim.

There is one such moment in "Working Girl." Following orders, Tess, as
secretarial underling, books her boss, Katharine Parker (Ms. Weaver), into a
chalet for a ski weekend. She is helping Katharine fasten her new ski boots in
the office when she is asked where in the chalet the room is located. Tess
doesn't know; Katharine dials the resort and at once a flood of flawless German
fills the room.

The camera angle shows us Tess's awe; we gaze up with her (from the glossy white
boots that she, as footman, is buckling) to this animated, magical, Ivy-educated
mistress of the world, self-transformed into Europe, performing in another
language. Katharine is demonstrating quite casually that bottom dogs have no
exact knowledge of what lies between them and their ideal, that top dogs possess
secret skills nobody learns overnight, as in charm class, or by changing
hairstyles -- skills traceable to uncounted indulgent hours of tutoring, study
and travel.

The bottom dog's eyes widen; a frightening truth dawns. If a talent so
mesmerizing -- this poured-forth foreign self -- can be invisible until now,
must there not be others equally well concealed? Maybe this dream to be her is
foolish. What unimaginable barriers stand between me and my desire?

In the movie culture the answer to such questions is, of course: no real
barriers, none. "Be all you can be" means, at the bottom as at the top, "Be
whatever you wish," fear no obstacle, see no obstacle, there are no obstacles.
"Working Girl" is, finally, a story about how ambitious working girls just can't
lose -- one more movie that obliterates class.

"White Palace," for all its initial explicitness about the reality of social
differences, is, finally, a story asserting that such differences simply don't
matter; pure passion erases them every time.

The other week Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan told a Wall Street Journal
reporter that the fundamental issue in this country is "class, not race." It's
essential, he said, "to at least start thinking about it, start talking about
it. Let's be honest. We're not doing that."

One reason we're not is that movies remain firmly resolved against letting us.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: James Spader and Susan Sarandon in "White Palace"--filet mignon
and hamburger on one plate? (Richard Brookhiser looks at cinematic WASP's. Page
13.) (Universal); Diane Keaton, Al Pacino and George Hamilton in "The Godfather
Part III"--These days, even mobsters are struggling for social acceptance.
(Paramount) (pg. 1); Christopher Reid and A. J. Johnson in "House Party"--Even
in movies that focus solely on minority communities, social difference is
glanced at and then trashed, often by means of a joke (Bill Nation/New Line
Cinema); Vivian the hooker (Julia Roberts, right) encounters a hostile
saleswoman (Dey Young) in "Pretty Woman"--Characters on the social bottom shake
the cages of those who try to humiliate them (Touchstone Pictures); Johnny Depp
and Winona Ryder in "Edward Scissorhands"--Some movie versions of the power
theme are derived less from everyday experience than from fairy tales, allegory
and satire. (Zade Rosenthal/20th Century Fox) (pg. 22)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
Varied Productions Visit Stamford

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 12; Column 4; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 967 words


AN affectionate down-home folk tale recounts the coming of age of a black farmer
from North Carolina in the late 1950's and 60's. Highlights: his five-year
prison term for refusing to fight in Vietnam, his detour to "a very, very large
American city" to sample the seamy side of life, his return to his boyhood
sweetheart -- and his roots. Critical consensus: "sweet, simple, funny and
endearing."

An icily elegant narrative dissects the sexual politics among the loathsome
French aristocracy, seven years before the Revolution, featuring betrayal,
corruption and seduction of the innocent. Critical consensus: "lethally comic,
diabolical, cynical and cautionary."

With such disparate though popularly proven fare, the Stamford Center for the
Arts concludes its fourth theater season. The folk tale is the original American
play "Home" by Samm-Art Williams, staged by the Negro Ensemble Company, and the
elegent dissection is the English playwright Christopher Hampton's elaborate
adaptation of the 1782 Choderlos de Laclos epistolary novel "Les Liaisons
Dangereuses," in the Royal Shakespeare Company production.

"Home" plays on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M. "Liaisons" is scheduled
for eight presentations from Jan. 29 through Feb. 3. All performances are to be
held at the Palace Theater, 61 Atlantic Street. (The number for reservations is
323-2131.)

Expanding Image

The center's executive director, Randall Brion, said it expects to expand,
validate and vitalize its theater image in Stamford with the opening of a
two-theater "performing arts complex" later this year.

Theater was added to the center's mixture of contemporary and classical dance
and music, children's programs and and special events, when the Hartman Theater
in Stamford closed three years ago. The center made its first foray into
big-time theater in 1988 with the pre-Broadway tryout of "Macbeth," starring
Christopher Plummer and Glenda Jackson. "Born Yesterday," also Broadway-bound,
with Madeline Kahn and Ed Asner, followed.

Other theatrical events have included George C. Scott in the one-man show
"Clarence Darrow" and touring editions of "Dreamgirls," "Nunsense," "The
Sunshine Boys" with Mickey Rooney and Donald O'Connor and "The King and I" with
Rudolf Nureyev.

This season's theater series began with a traveling production of the musical
"Mame" starring Juliet Prowse (eight performances in September) and the
monodrama "Tru" with Robert Morse re-creating his Tony Award-winning turn as
Truman Capote (eight performances in November and December).

The new spaces will provide a contrast to the cavernous 1,580-seat Palace
Theater. Mr. Brion said he hopes to lure international and American regional
companies to the 700-seat playhouse, while the 150-seat Studio Theater will be
given over to community presentations and to the Connecticut Public Broadcasting
activities by day, "on a flexible schedule." With the new halls, the center's
theater presentations can have "more of an emphasis on legitimate drama and less
on commercial events," he said.

Brief 'Home' Tour

"We'll go on as a presenting organization, with no plans for an artistic
director, which is unusual in the theater world," Mr. Brion said. "There's a lot
of great work out there -- and we'll continue to offer a catholicity of taste."

Meanwhile, local audiences have chances to see the life-enhancing "Home" and the
decadent, doom-saying "Liaisons." The brief tour of this "Home" will continue
for three performances at Morgan State College in Baltimore. The local
presentation is a prelude to the observance of Black History Month in February
and the beginning of a campaign "to expand minority arts in Fairfield County,"
said Sheldon Hampton, the founder of the Black Artists Theater Company, a new
troupe in Stamford.

"Home" had its beginnings in 1979 Off Broadway at the Negro Ensemble Company,
where it was brought back a year later. Then it wound up on Broadway, where it
received a Tony nomination as the best play. The story of the honest Cephus
Miles and his healthy homecoming has been called a long narrative poem, a form
of story theater and a modern myth. In the spare production, one man and two
women play a gallery of roles during Cephus's 13-year odyssey.

In contrast, "Les Liaisons" is making a Stamford stopover -- its only one in the
metropolitan area -- during a world tour that began in Glasgow in July and is
scheduled to wind up in Toronto in March. Mr. Brion, who saw the play's original
London production twice, tried "to establish a rapport with the producers and
the Royal Shakespeare Company in the hopes of their future visits to the new
theater in Stamford," said Frank Gero, co-producer of the play in London and of
the tour with his wife, Woji Gero. "And we wanted to visit the United States
again."

It's no secret that the closing of "Les Liaisons Dangereuses" after 20 weeks on
Broadway in 1987 rankled some theater people. At that time, the English cast had
to depart, according to an exchange agreement between the American and British
actors unions. Although an American cast, with Glenn Close, Kevin Spacey and
Kelly McGillis, had been lined up to take over, the New York producers decided
that the drop in box office receipts at the time and the costs of recasting did
not warrant the play's continued run.

While Ms. Close was notably vindicated by winning the role of the cruel Marquise
in the film version, with an Oscar nomination to follow, Mr. Gero said he felt
partially redeemed by the current tour, which goes on to Boston after Stamford.
He and his wife saw the play during its initial 23-performance engagement in a
small studio theater in Stratford-on-Avon and then had it transferred to the
West End, where it ran for more than four years.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Pip Miller and Leigh Funnelle in scene from "Les Liaisons
Dangereuses."

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Both Uniting and Dividing, the War Reaches Into Small Towns of
America;
Flags and Protest Mix in Vermont

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 777 words

DATELINE: BELMONT, Vt., Jan. 20


Allen Devereux took his American flag out of winter storage today and put it on
the pole in front of his mountainside home in this tiny snow-covered hamlet.

"We want to show people we're behind the boys," said Mr. Devereux, a veteran of
World War II who for 40 years ran Belmont's only store and served as postmaster.

On the other side of town, Semah Unterman, a retired school principal from
Brooklyn, was preparing to go to a meeting of the local SANE/Freeze peace
organization in Rutland. "I'm very distressed," she said of the war in the
Persian Gulf. "I think we made a terrible mistake in starting the war. We never
gave negotiations a chance."

Mr. Devereux and Mrs. Unterman are friends. But their conflicting views reflect
how divided opinion about the war is in Belmont, a village of 190 people that
boasts that, at 1,860 feet above sea level, it is the highest settlement in
Vermont with a post office.

Changes Since 1960's

Despite its size and its isolation in the Green Mountains, Belmont also shows
how deeply the war has reached into America. One resident, George Hinckley, is
in the Army Reserves and was sent to Saudi Arabia just last week.

His wife, Betsy, received a phone call from him on Saturday, saying he was all
right. But today she was too distraught to talk. "Just say I support my husband
totally," Mrs. Hinckley, a bookkeeper for a nearby car dealer, told a reporter.

To an extent, the differences of opinion over the war reflect the changes in
Vermont since the late 1960's, when a flood of well-educated, liberal and often
youthful people came from New York and Boston in search of a quiet rural life.
They ended Vermont's reputation as a bastion of Yankee Republicanism and have
made the state one of the most liberal in the nation. In November, Bernard
Sanders, a self-proclaimed socialist, was elected Vermont's only Congressman,
defeating a Democrat and the Republican incumbent.

Mr. Devereux, an amiable 70-year-old man whose family has served in the Vermont
National Guard for five generations, said he can remember when there were only
three Democrats in the whole town. "But we've changed the same as the rest of
the state," he said, "and now we're about evenly divided between Democrats and
Republicans."

"I'm part of the silent majority who thinks we're doing the right thing at the
right time," Mr. Devereux said. "We learned a lesson in Vietnam. You can't have
one hand tied behind your back."

Plans to Write Letters

In his Yankee twang, Mr. Devereux said he was "a little unhappy" with Mr.
Sanders and Senator Patrick Leahy, both of whom voted against the Congressional
resolutions to support President Bush. "They'll hear from me about it," he said.
"I expect I'll be writing them letters. Don't believe in demonstrations to make
your point."

Mr. Devereux's views were echoed by Mitch Hart, a 38-year-old Belmont native who
works in the general store. "Even if we didn't like going to war, something had
to be done over there," Mr. Hart said. "As long as they don't hold back like
they did in Vietnam, we'll be all right, I reckon."

Mrs. Unterman, 70, a native of Brooklyn who moved to Vermont in 1971, said she
felt very frustrated in trying to express her views. "People misinterpret the
position I take," she said, sitting in her hilltop living room, overlooking a
panorama of snowy fields, pine-covered mountains and a frozen lake. "They say
it's unpatriotic to oppose the war.

"Now that we are in the war, I support our boys and girls. I am not a total
pacifist."

Today, after the antiwar meeting in Rutland, she and three neighbors who went
with her were trying to decide whether they should work for a cease-fire now or
just concentrate on trying to strengthen the role of the United Nations after
the war is over.

Minister on the Spot

The Rev. Glenn Davis, the minister of the town's only church, Village Baptist,
said, "I have to be very careful what I say, because there are people in my
congregation who feel strongly on both sides."

The most outspoken opponent of the war in his church is a man Mr. Davis
described fondly and admiringly as the town's "oldest hippie."

"Before he came to Christ, he'd lived an unrighteous life, with long hair, and
belonged to a motorcycle gang," Mr. Davis said. "Now we call him our social
activist."

Mr. Davis's wife, Laura, takes what she calls a biblical view of the situation.
"War is a horrible thing," she said, fixing tuna sandwiches for her four young
children. "But the Bible says man is a fallen thing. We all have the potential
for evil inside us. So I can't think there is never going to be a war."

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "We want to show people we're behind the boys," said Allen
Devereux, a World War II veteran, about the American flag he and his wife,
Hazel, have raised outside their home in Belmont, Vt. (Evan Richman for The New
York Times)

Map of Vermont highlighting Belmont

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: HIGH TECH;
War Hero Status Possible for the Computer Chip

BYLINE: By WILLIAM J. BROAD

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1422 words


If the Pentagon's claims of success in the Persian Gulf war bear up, a hero of
the conflict will be the ubiquitous computer chip, no larger than a fingernail
and usually made of silicon, which processes reams of information in an instant
for planes, bombs, sensors and cruise missiles.

"It's the triumph of silicon over steel," said John E. Pike, a senior analyst at
the Federation of American Scientists, a private group in Washington.

Yesterday, the chip's prowess was evident as highly computerized Patriot
anti-missile missiles flashed from their launchers in Saudia Arabia, streaked
skyward and destroyed Scud missiles in a ball of thunder and flame.

Military experts say the computerized weapons of the international force in the
Persian Gulf war seem to be working much better than expected. While cautioning
that the overall performance of the new weaponry is not yet known, experts say
computers big and small have clearly endowed the equipment with vast new powers
of precision and coordination.

Large computers are now synchronizing the forces arrayed against Iraq and
churning out detailed battle plans. Computerized jammers are snarling Iraqi
defenses. And smart weapons with tiny computer "brains" are zeroing in on
targets with deadly precision.

Information vs. Volume

"What's making all this work is weapons based on information instead of the
volume of fire power," said James F. Digby, a Rand Corporation analyst who wrote
an influential paper in 1976 on precision-guided munitions. "It reduces greatly
the tonnage of explosives you have to ship over."

Experts stress that the computerized arms are anything but invincible, as driven
home by the difficulty in locating mobile Scud missiles experienced by planes
and satellites carrying computerized sensors.

Even so, many experts say the gulf war appears to mark the coming of age of
computerized weaponry, a goal that has been much heralded and criticized for 15
years as the emerging systems acquired a mixed record of success and failure.

"I'm impressed," said Herbert F. York, a former head of Pentagon research and
development who teaches at the University of California. "It took such a long
time. And it's still extremely expensive. But some of the disappointments I've
felt over the years are being washed away."

Censorship May Hide Failures

Among the highly computerized systems in the war are Navy Tomahawk cruise
missiles, Pave Tack laser-guided bombs, Air Force F-117A Stealth fighters and
the Army Patriot anti-missile systems whose interceptions of Iraqi Scud missiles
in flight is a wartime first.

Many experts cautioned that the public's view of the war is limited by Pentagon
censorship and selective presentation of facts so that computerized failures are
generally not known.

"Everything is looking pretty good and I must say I'm impressed," said Eugene J.
Carroll, a retired rear admiral and deputy director of the Center for Defense
Information, a private group in Washington. "But all the news is coming through
a filter. We see the hits but not the misses. Management of the news has put an
emphasis on the success of our new weapons."

Pierre Sprey, a Washington-based defense consultant and longtime advocate of
simpler military systems that rely less heavily on computer chips, dismissed
much of upbeat news as disinformation.

Effectiveness Questioned

"They're retargeting a lot of the places where they already claimed great
success," he said. "The bombing just isn't that accurate. In the future, the
ineffectiveness is going to become painfully obvious."

The promise of computerized weaponry was first demonstrated in the Vietnam War.
The Air Force, for example, flew several hundred unsuccessful sorties to knock
out the Thanh Hoa bridge, with 10 planes being shot down. Finally, four Phantom
jets armed with Paveway I laser-guided bombs destroyed it in a single run.

But as new, more advanced generations of smart weapons emerged in the 1970's and
80's, they engendered fierce debate as field trails revealed shortcomings and
failures. The computerized arms were widely faulted as too costly, ambitious and
unreliable to be suitable for war.

The criticism was bolstered when technical glitches hit some military actions,
including the 1983 invasion of Grenada, the 1986 raid on Libya and 1989 invasion
of Panama. The height of high-tech failings occurred in 1988 when the Navy
cruiser Vincennes, equipped with the highly computerized Aegis radar, the
world's most advanced naval air defense system, mistakenly shot down an Iranian
commercial airliner, killing all on board.

Chips to the Rescue

Given this history, private military analysts were openly apprehensive this fall
and winter about a possible war in the Persian Gulf, especially because of the
challenge of coordinating the vast multinational force. Predictions of chaos
abounded, with experts saying the majority of the first casualties would be
self-inflicted.

Instead, the omnipresent computer chip appears to have come to the rescue. At
American military headquarters for the war in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, a bevy of
large computers has generated the overall battle plan and every day churns out
hundreds of pages of detailed action orders.

"We have a lot of computers," Lieut. Gen. Charles A. Horner, commander of the
American Air Force in the gulf, told reporters last week. "You can bring
together the tens of thousands of minor details, radio frequencies, altitudes,
tanker rendezvous, bomb configurations, who supports who, who's flying escort,
who's -- there are just thousands and thousands of details, and we work them
together as one group, put them together in what we call a common air-tasking
order, and it provides a sheet of music that everybody sings the same song off."

Another quiet aspect of the chip revolution is tiny, computerized radio
receivers that pick up signals from the American military's orbiting Navstar
satellites, allowing tanks, ships and plane to pinpoint their positions,
reportedly down to an accuracy of less than 100 feet. That navigational data, in
turn, is often fed into smart weapons before they speed toward targets.

Computers Read 'Maps'

"The more precise their initial position, the more precise their journey will
be," said Ron Hertenstein, vice president for research at Forecast
International, Inc., a Newtown, Conn. firm that markets defense and aerospace
information.

For instance, the aerial assault against Iraq was kicked off by waves of 18-foot
Tomahawk cruise missiles fired from Navy warships in the gulf and the Red Sea.
Flying low and largely undetected, the smart missiles hit key targets such as
Iraqi command centers.

The Tomahawks, never before used in combat, have tiny on-board computers that
read internal "maps" and process information from sensors to perform course
corrections in flight.

Mr. Hertenstein of Forecast International noted that accuracy also cuts down on
civilian causalities.

Jammers Disorient Radar

"We can attack a target in the middle of Baghdad and keep the damage to innocent
people to a minimum," he said. "That certainly does make the situation more
acceptable if not palatable."

Another highly computerized system is electronic warfare planes, including the
Navy's EA-6B Prowler and the Air Force's EF-111A Raven. These aircraft have
electronic jammers that send out high-energy pulses to disarm or disorient enemy
radar and other communications.

The jamming devices are directed by powerful computers that first sense an
enemy's frequencies and then tailor false signals to fog an enemy's radar
display with bright spots, making it impossible to find real information.

Admiral Carroll of the Center for Defense Information laid the "pronounced
ineffectiveness" of the Iraqi armed forces to such computerized impediments.

Patriot Modified for Missiles

"We've penetrated their system so severely with our jammers and spookers that
they can't see us coming and their antiaircraft batteries are absolutely blind,"
he said.

Also impressing many experts has been the active defense of the alliance by the
Patriot system, which uses a phased-array radar to track enemy targets and a
powerful bank of computers to actively guide anti-missile missiles toward their
targets.

The Patriot initially was developed to shoot down enemy aircraft, not high-speed
missiles. But in recent years it has been modified, mainly through the use of
enhanced computers, to defend against limited missile attacks.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: American Patriot missiles intercepted nine Iraqi-launched Scud
missiles and knocked them from the sky last night before they could hit their
targets in eastern Saudi Arabia. A lamp post fell on a Saudi street after a
probable aerial collision of the missiles. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: RELIGION;
Amid Prayers for Peace, Preachers Split on War

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1201 words


After days of brutal war in the Persian Gulf, with round-the-clock bombing and
reports of fearful missile strikes and lost pilots, many people across the New
York metropolitan area and the nation paused over the weekend to pray for peace
and to reflect on spiritual values at a time of crisis.

There was no escaping the news from the front: more sorties, more bombing runs,
more images of destruction spilled from every broadcast. And military and
political leaders spoke again of what was necessary, of staying the course and
of how the nation had thus far succeeded.

But in churches and synagogues it was time for spiritual leaders and ordinary
people to have a say, to share the fears and confusion of Israelis stunned by
missile attacks and the families of American pilots missing in action, to pray
for those in battle -- but also to hear again that nations and their leaders
err, and that war is a kind of failure.

'Do Not Take Delight'

"Do not sing at the death of our enemies," the Rev. William B. Doster told a
solemn congregation yesterday at the Union Church of Pocantico Hills in
Westchester County. "Do not take delight in human suffering. Do not clap at the
death of other people. Realize it pains the heart of God."

It was a mild, springlike day across the metropolitan area. Gentle winds
streaked thin clouds into chalk marks across the sky and explored the
winter-bare landscape, tugging at yellow ribbons and American flags set out on
porches and the lapels of Sunday worshippers to show support for American troops
in the gulf.

In great cathedrals and synagogues and in smaller congregations in city and
suburb through the weekend, there were prayers that the war would be short and
that friends and loved ones would come home unhurt. There were prayers, too, for
President Bush and for his military commanders.

But on the war itself, there was no unanimity, as visits to a dozen houses of
worship showed. The comments from pulpit and pew appeared to reflect the deep
divisions and frustrations of the American people.

Opposers and Supporters

Some spiritual leaders denounced the war as an obscene exchange of blood for
oil, as a diversion of resources from domestic wars against poverty and drugs,
or as an exploitation of black troops who might bear the brunt of the fighting
and dying in the coming ground war. Many people vowed relentless protests.

Others, citing Iraqi aggression against Kuwait, missile attacks on Israel and
the willingness of Saddam Hussein to use chemical and biological weapons,
expressed strong support for President Bush and the prosecution of the war.

In a potpourri of other emotions, some said they had changed their minds in
recent days, accepting the necessity of war now that it had begun. But many more
said they were still torn between fighting an unrighteous dictator and
allegiance to the nonviolence of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., whose
birthday, officially marked today, was Jan. 15, the deadline set for the war.

"I wondered all week what Martin Luther King would have said about this war,"
the Rev. Emily Jean Gilbert said at Judson Memorial Church in Greenwich Village.
"The bible of nonviolence seems so simple, even simplistic, and yet it has
changed the world. We need that kind of vision again. Death and destruction do
not have the final word."

Though the nation was already at war, parishioners at Our Lady of Visitation
Roman Catholic Church in Paramus, N.J., were reminded by Msgr. Frank LoBianco
that Americans still had choices: to fight or demure, to obey one's inner
beliefs or the country's call to duty. "It takes a lot of love to forgive those
who are evil and unjust to others," the monsignor said.

Among his 200 parishioners yesterday were Thomas and Mary Devine, the parents of
eight children, two of whom, Lieut. Thomas Devine Jr., 26, and Lance Cpl.
Michael Devine, 21, are Marines deployed in the Persian Gulf. "They have a job
to do, and it's best done now than later," Mr. Devine said. "I'm confident and
proud of them. People have been coming up to us and praying for us."

At the Lincoln Square Synagogue on Manhattan's Upper West Side on Saturday, some
congregants told of sleepless nights worrying about friends and relatives in
Israel. Some said they had undergone a change of views in recent days as Iraqi
missiles have rained down on Israel and the character of Saddam Hussein had
again come into focus.

"The fact that he would attack Israel, a noncombatant, and go after population
centers makes it clear that he does not share our standard of civil conduct,"
said Joyce Lempell, explaining why she had dropped her opposition to the use of
force.

Nathan Kruman said his views had also changed. "It's strange for me because
years ago I marched against the Vietnam War when it was so clear that violence
is bad, that war is bad," he said. "But now I see that violence can suck you in
to the point where you have no choice but to fight."

At the Forest Hills Jewish Center in Queens, Rabbi Gerald C. Skolnick insisted
that Israel had a right to retaliate. "In this century, we have known what it's
like to be victims to suit the needs of the rest of the world," he declared. "It
will not happen again."

In the Westchester village of Croton-on-Hudson, 60 parishioners at the Asbury
United Methodist Church, founded 210 years ago, were urged by the Rev. Linda
Kimmelman yesterday to support American personnel in the gulf with cards,
letters and prayers. But she also called for a campaign of vigils and
demonstrations against the war.

"Why are we at war?" she asked. "Because human greed, lust for power and
national self-interest are alive and well. "Ask yourself, if the primary export
of Kuwait were broccoli and not oil, would we be in this war? Would we have
jumped in to liberate the people of Kuwait."

Anger in abundance was voiced with encouragement from the pulpit at St. Paul
Community Baptist Church in the East New York section of Brooklyn, where the
senior pastor, the Rev. Johnny R. Youngblood, presided over services that
expressed opposition to the war and tribute to Dr. King and his campaigns of
nonviolence.

'Warfare' in New York

"We are fighting on two battlefronts," the pastor told 1,100 people at a morning
service. "We catch hell at home and we have to go abroad to catch hell."
Chemical warfare is "ungodly," he said, but added: "There is chemical warfare
launched on the streets of New York -- it's called crack."

At the end of the service, John Wilscher, 44, an elder of the church who fought
in Vietnam, said: "The Jan. 15 deadline -- it's like a slap in the face. It
should have been a day set aside. It's a disgrace to Dr. King, because he was a
man of peace."

At the Scarsdale Congregational Church in Westchester, the Rev. Phillip S.
Washburn spoke of the fear, the sense of vulnerability that the conflict had
engendered in Americans. Members of the congregation were invited to speak, and
there was a little boy among them.

"I know that we are at war," the boy said. He paused momentarily, searching for
the right words, and finally found them. "I'm trying to say, he who lives by the
sword dies by the sword."

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Spiritual leaders and ordinary people have sought ways to
reconcile mixed emotions about the gulf war. In different houses of worship,
reactions to the war were varied. The Judson Memorial Church in Manhattan posted
a statement at its doors. (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Both Uniting and Dividing, the War Reaches Into Small Towns of
America;
In Texas, a Memorial to the Living

BYLINE: By ROBERTO SURO, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 838 words

DATELINE: NEW WAVERLY, Tex. Jan. 20


At her clapboard farmhouse about a mile out of town, Stacey Hogg spent this
afternoon carefully stenciling in the names of about 50 men and women on a sheet
of plywood that had been painted black, with streaks of tan to give it
marble-like effect.

Mrs. Hogg, who serves as the town artist whenever signs or decorating are
needed, is making a memorial to the town's sons and daughters in the military.
She has left room for anyone who enlists or gets called up from the reserves,
and when the board is finished it will be placed on the front lawn of the bank.

"I know it looks sort of like the Vietnam wall," said Mrs. Hogg, referring to
the memorial in Washington, "and maybe that's grim. But, we figured it took so
long to honor those who fought the last time that this time we wanted to do
something before it was too late for them to know about it to show how much we
appreciate these guys and that we'll never forget them, if something should
happen to them and I pray that it won't."

With 50 of the town's 800 people in the military and with 20 of them serving in
the Persian Gulf, war was an inescapable topic today at churches, in homes and
at the cafes where radios were turned up for each news bulletin.

Talk in Bible Study

At the First Baptist Church, for instance, the assigned topic for this morning's
Bible study class was the evils of abortion. But every discussion and every
prayer verged insistently toward the war.

A question about whether public protest or private prayer is a more effective
way to change abortion laws ended up producing anxious talk about the need to
tell relatives stationed in Saudi Arabia that antiwar demonstrations do not
accurately reflect public opinion.

Each episode of the gulf drama produces an instant, heartfelt reaction. This
afternoon, the phone lines were busy after reports of Iraqi missile attacks on
Saudi Arabia.

"Everyone here knows where everyone else's kids are stationed, what units they
are in, and when something happens like a rocket attack on Dhahran," said Myrna
Wheeler, who has a son and a son-in-law on the front lines. "Everyone knows
which families are going to need a little extra comforting."

'It Is Our Community'

Cynthia Clinton, whose son is in the Marine Corps awaiting orders to ship out
for Saudi Arabia, said: "This war is not something that is happening to our
community. It is our community right now."

New Waverly is a one stop-light town about 60 miles north of Houston where
fields and forests are visible from almost every front step. The war has already
left its mark on this landscape of small houses made of clapboard or brick.

Last August, when the American deployments began, dozens of trees and fence
posts were decorated with big corsages of yellow plastic. Some remnants are
still left, dirty and bedraggled by winter rains.

A sign in front of the Driftwood Barbecue says "America, God shed his grace on
thee." But the plastic letters "i" and "c" in America have fallen off.

At the Waverly House Restaurant, which serves as a sort of indoor town square,
up on the wall right next to the "Middle East Crisis Map," copies of which sell
briskly, are several pieces of poster board decorated with photographs of
uniformed young men and women. Grady Chandler, the restaurant's manager as well
as the town's Mayor, said, "Lately, it's been hard to keep up with all the ones
that have gone over."

A Fact of Life

New Waverly lost an uncounted number of sons during the Vietnam War, and the
likelihood that some funerals and mourning will result from this conflict seems
to be an accepted fact of life.

"The five months we spent waiting and watching after the invasion was like
having a friend or relative with a terminal illness in the hospital," Mrs.
Clinton said. "When the shooting started, it was like that person died. It was
awful and sad, but it was also sort of a relief because now we can and deal with
the fact that we are definitely at war with all that can mean to us."

Like many small towns in Texas and across the South, New Waverly has a tradition
of sending its young off to military service. Paradoxically though, it was an
abundance of oil on the world market that caused an unusually large number of
young people here to enlist in time for a war being fought at least in part to
insure the nation's oil supplies.

Until oil prices started dropping in 1982, Houston and the East Texas oilfields
offered a ready supply of jobs at many levels. Mr. Chandler said: "After the oil
bust came, there were no jobs for these kids coming out of high school and no
money to send them to college. All of a sudden letting Uncle Sam take care of
things started to look pretty good."

Bennie Vann, the guidance counselor at the local high school, said: "Lots of the
'A' students signed up because they were looking for a way to pay for college,
and then there have been plenty who were very capable even if they didn't get
top grades. So, you could say we have given our best."

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Texas highlighting New Waverly

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: BAGHDAD;
Arnett Stays Behind At Cannon's Mouth In One More Capital

BYLINE: By JOHN TIERNEY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 458 words


After the Iraqi Government's expulsion of other foreign journalists, Peter
Arnett of Cable News Network reported yesterday that he was the only
correspondent from a major Western television network still working in Baghdad.
He reported the Iraqis said they had selected CNN because of its "proven
impartiality."

Mr. Arnett's tenacity has been renowned since he won a Pulitzer Prize in 1966 as
a reporter for The Associated Press in Vietnam. Mr. Arnett was one of the few
correspondents who stayed in Saigon in 1975 to report on its takeover by
Communist troops. Ed Turner, CNN's executive vice president for news, said Mr.
Arnett, 57 years old, alluded to Vietnam when urged last week to consider
leaving.

"He said, 'Look, Ed, I've been on the wrong side many times, and I know what I'm
doing,' " Mr. Turner recalled. "He insisted on staying. He's a reporter's
reporter. All he wants to do is be where the action is. He's like a kid there."

Mr. Arnett was one of the three CNN reporters who, thanks to a telephone that
bypassed the regular system, were able to keep giving reports through the first
bombardment. At one point, Iraqi guards appeard and threatened to make them
stop.

He Browbeat the Guards

"Arnett just went in the coridor and started browbeating them," Mr. Turner said.
"He said, 'How can you dare to be thinking of interrupting us when we're
broadcasting this story to the world?' That's his style, and it worked that
time."

The Iraqi authorities have permitted Mr. Arnett to continue filing reports as
long as a censor previews the script and sits next to him throughout. Yesterday,
speaking on a $50,000 Inmarsat telephone that broadcasts directly to a
satellite, Mr. Arnett provided live reports on Baghdad.

Mr. Turner said the Iraqi Ministry of Information might have singled out CNN
because it was the only foreign network the Iraqis were really familiar with.
The ministry had for several years been providing television footage to CNN for
a program of news from around the world, Mr. Turner said, and CNN could be seen
on television sets at the Presidential Palace.

"They may think that by letting us get out the story here they'll get some
sympathy around the world as a country under siege," Mr. Turner said. "Who knows
what their real reasons are? The situation makes me very uneasy, but I'd rather
be there than not."

Mr. Arnett, a native of New Zealand, got his first newspaper job when he was 17
and went on to jobs in Australia and Thailand before joining The Associated
Press. He was expelled from Indonesia in 1962 for his reporting there.

He is continuing to work in Iraq with two other CNN employees, Robert Wiener, an
executive producer, and Nick Robertson, an engineer.


LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: THE ANTIWAR MOVEMENT;
NEWS FROM FRONT BLUNTS PROTESTS

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 979 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 20


Before the bombs began falling over Baghdad, David Pierce was a staunch opponent
of military action in the Middle East. Now he feels that the United States has
no choice but to keep fighting.

"A lot of people who were against fighting the war have switched sides," said
Mr. Pierce, a 40-year-old carpenter from Takoma Park, Md. Despite his doubts, he
came with his wife and two children to Saturday's antiwar demonstration near the
White House.

Mr. Pierce said he went to clarify his own thinking and to show moral concern.
"Things aren't as clear-cut to me anymore," he said, "but I just think now that
we've started fighting, we have to stay the course."

Mr. Pierce's change of heart reflects a big obstacle facing the nation's budding
antiwar movement. After picking up enormous momentum before the American attack
on Iraq, the movement has been slowed by a number of forces, including the
rally-round-the-flag spirit of a nation beginning a war.

Not a Video Game

"It's a very difficult time," said Bonnie Garvin, spokeswoman for the National
Campaign for Peace in the Middle East. Her organization is planning a
demonstration here for next Saturday, which organizers hope will attract more
than the 25,000 who showed up for the march on Saturday.

"When bombs are falling, there's a natural inclination of people to rally round
the flag and not seem unpatriotic," she said. "And what we're seeing on
television is just this Pac-Man game, as if it's just a clean little video game
and there are no bodies being torn apart, no people dying."

If the antiwar movement is to catch hold, it will be because of people like
Roger Quillen and his wife, Lynn. "We own our property, our own business and our
home, but I'd give all my material possessions up in a minute if it would bring
peace," said Mr. Quillen, a 48-year-old lobsterman and fish market owner from
Charlestown, R.I., who joined the march on Saturday.

Seeking a 'Smarter Way'

People like Paul Foley, a 35-year-old department store worker from Boston, Emile
Gourieux, a 19-year-old student from Bowling Green, Ky., and Patience O'Connor a
43-year-old planner and real estate developer from Washington, came to the
protest with a deep fear that the war is a moral calamity.

"I just think there's a smarter way to do this; we're looking at so much blood
being shed," Ms. O'Connor said. "What we're doing is deflecting all our energy
away from problems at home."

Such concerns are widespread. Before the conflict, polls showed the nation
deeply divided on whether to fight and confused about the reason for war. But
the beginning of fighting has produced a strong surge of support for the war and
for President Bush.

A New York Times/CBS News Poll of 908 adults interviewed Saturday found that 74
percent of the respondents approved of the war effort and 82 percent approved of
the way Mr. Bush was handling his job. The poll had a margin of sampling error
of plus or minus three percentage points.

If the War Drags On?

Antiwar organizers say such a pro-war surge is common and will dissipate if the
war drags on, and if the high-tech air war is replaced by a bloody ground war
with higher casualties.

Already the movement is split, with the coalition that sponsored Saturday's
march representing the more radical edge. Its organizers call for an immediate
withdrawal of American troops from the Middle East, the removal of American
bases from the region and an Arab solution to Iraq's takeover of Kuwait.

The National Campaign for Peace in the Middle East was formed in response to
fears that the coalition leaned too far to the left.

There was no ideological uniformity at Saturday's rally, and no consensus. Some
protesters called for an immediate withdrawal of American troops. More common
were calls for a cease-fire, and negotiations or renewed reliance on economic
sanctions.

United on Fundamentals?

Opponents of the war say that their differences reflect diversity rather than
fundamental division and that the peace movement has a far more broad-based
grounding than the protests against the Vietnam War in the 60's and 70's.

In fact, the movement has already seen local protests, participation from
veterans and families of servicemen and mainstream support in a way rarely seen
in the Vietnam protests.

An example is the Piedmont Peace Project in Kannapolis, N.C., made up of about
500 cotton mill workers, farmers, truck drivers and other workers. Some, like
Oneil Russ, a 55-year-old meat inspector and veteran, have children in the gulf.

Members say the war offers nothing for working-class people. Linda Stout, the
group's director, said: "We constantly remind people we're proud of our folks in
the military.  But at the same time, they didn't join to fight a war for oil
profits."

Antiwar protests have cropped up not just at universities with a history of
protest activity but also at places like the University of Montana, where 20
protesters disrupted a nationally broadcast basketball game Thursday night by
lying on the court.

But Ms. Stout and Ms. Garvin agree that even among working people skeptical of
the war there is a deep cultural divide with the most prominent elements of the
antiwar movement.

Disgust With Flag Burning

And a groundswell of pro-war rallies and angry comments on radio talk shows and
in letters to newspapers indicate that the harsh views toward antiwar protest
that marked the Vietnam era may be as strong now.

Still, antiwar activists say their movement has reached a level that took years
to develop in the Vietnam era.  Supporters say that, once the costs at home and
abroad become clear, deep doubts will resurface. "My brother is on his way over
there, and he completely supports what I'm doing," said Jeanne K. Whalen, who
was carrying a sign reading "Love Our Troops -- Hate the War."

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Despite a strong show of support for the President since war
began, about 25,000 people attended Saturday's antiwar demonstration at the
White House, calling for a cease-fire and reliance on sanctions. Paul Gourieux
traveled from Bowling Green, Ky., to express his sentiments. (Lisa Berg for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: ARLINGTON JOURNAL;
What Only the War Dead Can Teach

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va., Jan. 20


From the steps of the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, 14-year-old Kristin Progule
looked out over the rolling lawns of Arlington National Cemetery and the files
of white marble headstones lined up in military formation to the horizon.

"There are no words for it," she said, her face mottled with emotion and her
eyes damp. "It's like they're all numbers instead of individuals. If I had the
time, I'd read every one of the stones and lay something on them to let them
know we were here."

Kristin was watching the hourly changing of the guard at the Tomb of the Unknown
Soldier with the rest of the eighth grade from the Paul Revere Middle School in
Houston. The students were on a field trip. Here too were scores of other
tourists, those who might have come anyway on a bright Sunday, warm as early
spring, and those who visited because it seemed a fitting gesture in these early
days of war in the Persian Gulf.

Most of the 612 acres of Arlington National Cemetery were quiet this morning,
but for the cawing of crows. There are no burials on weekends, and pathway
markers direct pedestrians to the major sites.

Along the way, fathers explained to their children how to tell the ranks of the
dead by the number of stars on the headstones, and guides urged their followers
to stay off the grass.


Among the visitors at the tomb was a small boy named Timothy, who had so enjoyed
a field trip here last week that he brought his mother back to show her the
guards who keep 24-hour vigil and to tell her that their 21-step march in front
of the tomb represents the 21-gun salute that is the highest military tribute.

Timothy's mother, who would not give her name, said she doubted that the shrine
would ever receive the body of a serviceman killed in the Persian Gulf war. "I
don't think this war will last that long or be that inaccurate to have an
unknown soldier," she said.

For Kristin Progule, today was the last of a four-day trip to Washington, an
annual event that happened to begin this year the morning after the United
States sent its missiles into Iraq.

Ten of the 96 students scheduled to travel here were kept at home by anxious
parents. Others watched their mothers and fathers weep tears that clearly went
beyond those of a routine parting as the children boarded the bus to the
airport.

They went to the Smithsonian Institution and the Supreme Court, saw pandas at
the zoo and monuments in the moonlight. They sat in the Senate Chamber, even
though the lawmakers were in recess, and looked at the White House, which was
closed for security reasons.

But the trip had a special significance, coming in the first week of the first
war of their lives. At the Vietnam Memorial, its shiny black surface etched with
names, one girl cried "for no reason," she said, and another cried because her
grandfather had been killed in Southeast Asia. Kristin said that despite all the
television specials she had seen, "I never realized how many people had died
till I saw it, and it's a scary thought to think it could happen again."

On Saturday near the White House, the eighth graders stood on the fringes of an
antiwar demonstration in which the well-behaved crowd was estimated at 25,000.


Dorothea Smith, the principal of the Revere School, said it was educational for
the youngsters to see that protests often look larger and more unruly on
television than in real life.

Kristin said she was impressed by the seriousness of the protesters, but
insulted when some of them told the junior high students they were "too young to
understand."

Mrs. Smith has worked to instill patriotism in her students, who live in the
same district that George Bush calls home. The chaperones wore buttons made by
students in the special education class at Revere School that said, "Operation
Desert Storm: For Their Safe Return."

The site of so many graves in Arlington National Cemetery, 200,000 crowded onto
a wedge of land on the western bank of the Potomac River, seemed to stir and
unsettle the youngsters. Some shivered and pulled their coats around them
despite the balmy weather.

Kristin said she remained convinced that "we should be fighting" in Iraq, as she
was before the trip to Washington, because "we have to do something to help
other people so that when we're in a time of need, they'll help us."

But the enormousness of suffering represented by the nation's most hallowed
burial ground was mind-boggling, she said. "I'm really glad I saw it because I
had a whole load of reality dumped on me," she said. "I don't want anybody to
get hurt. Even on their side."

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Prisoners;
Iraqi TV Broadcasts Interviews With 7 Identified as Allied Pilots

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1122 words


Iraqi television broadcast crackly, sometimes inaudible interviews yesterday
with seven men it identified as allied pilots shot down in the Persian Gulf war
and taken prisoner. At least four were heard criticizing the allied attack.

The Defense Department would not comment on the interviews, reportedly conducted
with three Americans, two Britons, an Italian and a Kuwaiti. But the State
Department called in Iraq's charge d'affaires in Washington to protest "Iraq's
apparent treatment of U.S. prisoners of war" as being contrary to the Geneva
Convention.

Pentagon officials were somber after listening to an audio tape of the
interviews broadcast yesterday by the Cable News Network. One officer said the
answers left her numb.

First Allied Prisoners

"Presumably, they have a gun to his head," she said. The men would be the first
known allied prisoners taken by the Iraqis in the war.

In the interview, an aviator who identified himself as Warrant Officer Guy
Hunter Jr. was heard to say: "I think this war is crazy and should never have
happened. I condemn this aggression against peaceful Iraq."

The Pentagon has said a marine named Guy Hunter Jr., a 46-year-old chief warrant
officer from Camp Pendleton, Calif., is one of the 12 servicemen listed as
missing in action.

Other prisoners were heard answering questions from an unidentified man who
translated their remarks into Arabic.

One man identified himself only as "Lieut. Col. Cliff"; The interrogator cut in:
"Cliff Acree. What's your age?" He replied 39. Lieut. Col. Clifford M. Acree,
39, a marine from Oceanside, Calif., is among those listed as missing in action.

Some of the men's answers had the stilted, overly careful enunciation of someone
reading a statement that he had been ordered to read. Besides their names and
ages, the men were asked to give their service units and tell how they were shot
down.

U.S. 'Wrongly Attacked'

Then some were asked if they had "a message to be sent." Others were asked about
their opinions "of this aggression against Iraq."

One of the men, who said he was Lieut. Jeffrey Norton Zaun of the Navy, replied,
"I think our leaders and our people have wrongly attacked the peaceful people of
Iraq."

The questions apparently did not include whether they had been wounded and none
of them volunteered any details on their condition. But the man who said he was
Warrant Officer Hunter said at one point, "I am in good hands and being treated
well."

A correspondent for the Cable News Network who reported seeing the Iraqi
broadcast, Peter Arnett, said the seven apparent captives were wearing military
uniforms and were sitting in front of a white wall. "One man had a bandaged
hand," Mr. Arnett said in a CNN report that was cleared by Iraqi censors. "And
two others had bruised faces."

Some of the statements were hard to make out, and some of the details that could
be heard were vague to the point of meaninglessness. These may have been
deliberately nonresponsive answers made under duress or a sign that they were
captives determined not to capitulate.

Pentagon officials seemed shaken at the indication that American prisoners may
have gone beyond in the Code of Conduct drafted by President Eisenhower in the
1950's. Updated since then, the code now says captured American military
personnel "will make no oral or written statements disloyal to my country and
its allies or harmful to their cause."

The code instructs captured Americans to give only their name, rank, serial
number and birth date. It says prisoners "will evade answering further
questions" as much as possible.

Even though the interviews were played in the West -- no other Western reporter
has seen the video that Mr. Arnett described -- for some Americans the
interviews brought back memories of the Vietnam War and grainy film footage of
captured American soldiers and pilots. Others remembered a photograph of crewmen
from the Pueblo, captured by North Korea in 1968. Three of the crewmen in the
picture were making an obscene gesture, interpreted as a sign of resistance.

"Anything we see those American pilots saying that is in any way critical of our
Government or our country," said Senator John McCain, a Republican from Arizona
who was a prisoner of war in North Vietnam for six years, "we can assume is the
result of physical beatings and other abuse."

'You Do the Best You Can'

Senator McCain, who was a Navy pilot in the Vietnam War, said most of the
fighter pilots in the gulf war had probably been through a program called
Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape. He said this training teaches ways of
evading enemy interrogation.

"When worse comes to worst," the Senator said, "well, you do the best you can,
and when you're forced to say something that's important, you try to give them
false information, a kernel of truth covered over with evasions and
half-truths."

Colonel Acree was piloting a Marine Corps Bronco OV-10 turboprop with Warrant
Officer Hunter aboard as the navigator and weapons coordinator. Cindy Acree,
Colonel Acree's wife, released a statement about her husband before the
interview was broadcast.

"Just know that I'll wait as long as necessary for you to come home safely," she
said. "Stay strong, sweetheart."

Mrs. Acree was not at home after the tape was played on CNN. But Rosana
Martinez, the wife of another naval aviator in Colonel Acree's squadron, said it
had sounded like his voice.

Voice Not Like Son's

But Marjorie Zaun, the mother of Lieut. Jeffrey N. Zaun of Cherry Hill, N.J.,
said what she heard did not sound like her son's voice. "It was high-pitched and
tense," she told The Associated Press.

Still, the tape of the interviews were a grace note of hope on a day of worry in
the neighborhood where Lieutenant Zaun grew up in Cherry Hill.

"He's alive, he's alive," said the navigator-bombardier's father, Calvin, who
was in the Air Force in the Korean War. He added that the Iraqis "are putting
words into his mouth," according to The A.P.

Another of the men questioned on the Iraqi broadcast identified himself as
Adrian John Nichol, a 27-year-old British aviator. The British Ministry of
Defense has said he was the navigator on a Tornado fighter-bomber that was lost
on Thursday.

"I think this war should be stopped," he said on the tape.

The State Department protest about mistreatment of prisoners drew was no
immediate response from the Iraqi Embassy in Washington. But Reuters said that
Iraq's senior diplomat in Western Europe told the British Broadcasting
Corporation on Sunday that allied prisoners of war would be treated humanely
only if their governments officially acknowledged their capture.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A patriot missile launcher in place in Israel yesterday. Two
batteries of the anti-missile missiles were delivered by the United States. In
Iraq on Saturday, Iraqi soldiers, below, manned antiaircraft guns at a dam.
(Agence France-Presse; Associated Press) (pg. A1); Iraqi broadcasts gave hope to
families of 12 servicemen listed as missing in action. Calvin and Margerie Zaun
had trouble recognizing the voice as that of their missing son, Lieut. Jeffrey
N. Zaun, of the Navy. "It was high-pitched and tense," said Mrs. Zaun. But it
left little doubt that he was alive. (Associated Press) (pg. A7)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
High Tech and Spirits at Rio Rock Festival

BYLINE: By JON PARELES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1098 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, Jan. 20


Rock festivals have entered the computer age with Rock in Rio II, the 10-day,
nine-concert series that opened on Friday night here at Maracana Stadium.

An enthusiastic audience of 100,000 people ready to dance, sing, shout, wave
their arms or light matches on cue was dazzled by patterns of green laser light
and bathed in computer-controlled spotlighting. Giant video images of the stage
show appeared as the performers stage blasted songs to a sound system with
remarkable punch and sonic detail. When performers spoke from the stage in
English, subtitles in Portuguese appeared on the video screens; Prince would
shout, "All night long!" and a few moments later "Anoite toda!" would appear on
screen. For electronic excellence, Rock in Rio II may be unsurpassed.

In the record books, Rock in Rio II will fall just short of its predecessor,
which in 10 days in 1985 built up the largest attendance ever at a rock
festival. About 100,000 people attended opening night of Rock in Rio II on
Friday, 50,000 short of the sellout that would have helped break the record. Yet
it was hard to imagine how more people could have been squeezed onto the soccer
field and into the stands. (Tonight's show, with Guns 'n' Roses headlining, was
sold out in advance.)

Brazil is experiencing a recession, and ticket prices that are relatively low by
United States standards -- about $10 to $30 for eight-hour shows -- seem
expensive here. Since the outbreak of war in the Persian Gulf, filling stations
here in Rio have been closing at 8 P.M. each day and all day Sunday to reduce
consumption, limiting car travel. (Brazilians may find it more convenient to
watch the festival on Globo TV, which is broadcasting it live; in the United
States, MTV will have excerpts on Feb. 9.)

The festival has noted but not dwelled upon the war. At Saturday's concert, two
audience members carried a sign that said, in English, "Make Love Not War --
Rock in Rio II," while antiwar leaflets were distributed outside the stadium.


Performers have expressed hopes for peace with little further comment, drawing
cheers before the next love song or dance tune. "There's a war going on," Prince
said onstage in Saturday's wee hours. "I don't know what's up, but I think we'd
all be better off living for love." The reggae singer Jimmy Cliff, who opened
the festival on Friday night, drew a roar of applause when he called on
President Bush and Iraqi President Saddam Hussein not to create another Vietnam
War as a convenient lead-in to his song "(No More) Vietnam."

On Saturday night, the Engineers From Hawaii, a band from Porto Alegre, Brazil,
sang its biggest hit, about a young man who liked to sing Beatles and Rolling
Stones songs and then died in Vietnam. A few songs earlier, the Engineers
prefaced one song by saying that rains and mud slides in Rio de Janeiro in the
few days before the concert had killed more people than the Gulf war.

Most concertgoers -- among them two sons of Brazil's president, Fernando Collor
de Mello, and actors from Brazil's hugely popular television soap operas -- came
to dance. Whenever a band picked up the tempo, whether it was Joe Cocker's
version of "Unchain My Heart" or the Engineers' earnest folk-rock in Portuguese,
tens of thousands of hands waved in the air, and bodies shimmied. Every chorus
of a hit drew hearty sing-alongs. The enthusiasm has helped lackluster
performers like Colin Hay, the former leader of Men at Work, and ignited better
ones, like Santana, whose Latin rock moved to peak after peak.


Local touches make Rock in Rio II different from festivals in North America.
Only in Brazil would intermission entertainment include scantily clad samba
dancers performing alongside inflatable animals, the women's images blown up
three stories high on the video screens, or a batucada band playing carnival
music between sets to send the entire audience into motion. Vendors circulate
with hot coffee and cold soft drinks , dancing as they hold their insulated
carriers aloft.

Concertgoers received booklets of lyrics by the English-speaking performers, a
promotional effort by a language school. Among the 60 concession stands built
within the stadium for the festival are not only typical T-shirt and hot dog
vendors, but a bookstore dedicated to rock biographies and a computer software
outlet.

The festival has offered some glimpses of the younger generation of Brazilian
rock bands, who have clearly grown up on American and British rock and MTV. Yet
there are surprises. Supla, a bleached-blond Billy Idol imitator, at one point
leaped and spun like a Brazilian capoeira dancer. And the Engineers From Hawaii,
whose appearance recalls Loggins and Messina, mix echoes of Sting, the Who,
Elton John and John Cougar Mellencamp in trimly crafted songs that clearly mean
a lot to their audience, which sang along on nearly every one. The Engineers and
Lazzo, a Brazilian reggae singer who joined Jimmy Cliff for one song, drew as
much applause as the imported acts.


Prince, who has not toured the United States with his current band, played a set
that was alternately explosive and self-indulgent as he worked to be ever more
encyclopedic. Challenged, perhaps, by the success of M.C. Hammer, Prince's new
band includes three dancers, one of whom raps (far more skillfully than M.C.
Hammer); Prince also built a song on a tape-loop of James Brown, as rappers do.

His 90-minute set opened with a funk workout -- part Bo Diddley, part
Parliament-Funkadelic, part James Brown -- that had Prince spinning and
hip-swiveling in what he introduced as the latest dance craze, "the Horny Pony."
But he broke the momentum with slow arena rock, heavy metal, pop and ballads
("Nothing Compares 2 U," sung by Rosie Jane Gaines with Prince on piano, losing
parts of the crowd as 3 A.M. came and went. He also had a problem with the
language barrier; the kind of exhortations that help turn Prince's North
American concerts into call-and-response parties were lost on much of the
audience, with subtitles arriving two beats too late.

In many ways, Rock in Rio II embraces current rock's least endearing trends. The
sponsorship of multi-national corporations -- from Coca-Cola (which paid $3
million to place its logo everywhere), to the record companies that have
postered Rio de Janeiro with advertisements, to MTV, which recently opened MTV
Brazil -- threatens a worldwide homogenization of popular music. But when
heavily promoted performers arrive at Rock in Rio II, they're likely to discover
that the local audience is the festival's true star.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Prince performing at Rock in Rio II, a 10-day music festival, at
Maracana Stadium in Rio de Janeiro. (Marcelo Duek for The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
A Confusing Decade, Its Roots and Its Legacy

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words


"Making Sense of the 60's," the latest PBS opus, tells the story of that "most
tumultuous, confusing and controversial decade" through the recollections of
some of its participants. These middle-aged folk seem generally pleased with
their youthful activities, and they cannot complain of unkindness from the
producers of this six-hour series, which begins tonight at 9 on Channels 13 and
49 and runs two hours a night through Wednesday.

The first hour, "Seeds of the 60's," offers a picture of the 1950's that is
straight out of the New Left canon. Writers and others, most of whom seem to
have been chosen for their congenial opinions, comment on scenes from "Ozzie and
Harriet" and other easily put-down television shows. The program delivers a
simple scenario: see the poor baby-boomers growing up in the 50's, that time of
social and political conformity, anti-Communist fanaticism, fear of atomic
annihilation, sexual repression, weak career-driven fathers, mothers consigned
to housework and the pall of Eisenhowerism over the land. No wonder the poor
kids rebelled.

The sociological and political simplisms of the narration and the parade of
self-flattering reminiscences do not make for a fascinating hour. The program's
pleasures are mainly in the glimpses of old television shows, but it's not easy
to decide which is sappier, the narration or "Ozzie and Harriet."

In sum, "Seeds of the 60's" takes the youth rebellion pretty much at its own
assessment, as the upsurge of the idealistic young against prevailing injustice
and parental complacency. The exhilaration experienced by demonstrators is
accepted as a sign of grace. The producers seem to believe this was the first
generational clash in history, and they touch only lightly on the symptoms of
conformity and intolerance among the rebels.


The first hour concludes with television footage of the racial confrontations in
the South after the Supreme Court's 1954 school desegregation decision. Black
parents are presented as inspirations to their children, in contrast to the
portrayal of white parents as grotesques.

The message here is that the scenes of brutality against young blacks in the
South opened the eyes of young whites to the hypocrisy of all they had been
indoctrinated with at home and at school. Perhaps, but those pictures moved
older Americans, too; by the 1960's you did not have to be a youthful rebel to
march for racial justice. And it seems not to have occurred to any of these
commentators that the love and care that baby-boomers had received in the homes
that are mocked in this program might have made them more sympathetic to the
pains of others.

The second hour of tonight's opener, which is enlivened by folk songs of the
period, deals with the civil-rights movement, a rich subject that has been more
impressively treated in "Eyes on the Prize." The approach remains celebratory.
Here, typically, is the narrator on the aftermath of the freedom marches: "When
the white volunteers returned in that fall of 1964, they were no longer innocent
idealists, they were political activists determined to fight racism wherever
they found it."

Many of the sound bites parody themselves. A man who grew up to be a rock
promoter speaks of "the wrenching of our souls" by the assassination of John F.
Kennedy, as though you had to be under 30 to enjoy a good soul-wrenching. There
is a lot of self-dramatization in these six hours. A woman recalls "our" fear of
walking out under the sky during the Cuban missile crisis. Despite the first
person plural, some of the reactions described here cry out for psychological
rather than social analysis.


The series improves after the opener. In tomorrow night's treatment of the
counterculture, the producers manage to distance themselves from their subjects
and give a hearing to critics of the dropouts, a few of whom are able to see the
humor in their youthful affectations. One man describes himself as having been a
discerning acid head. The scenes of anti-Vietnam protests and inner-city riots
bring back the rage of the streets.

Wednesday's program touches on other movements that owe a debt to the 60's,
including feminism, gay rights and environmentalism. It concludes with "Legacies
of the 60's," a title that promises a degree of reflection not attainable
through the sound bite.

There are criticisms in passing -- of the way, for example, that some of the
antics of the privileged young offended the working class and smoothed the path
to the White House for conservatives. Some perplexity is expressed over whether
the changes in attitudes toward sex and in family and personal life have really
worked out all that well. Yet the overall message remains that the rebels of the
60's had it right, mixed with melancholy that their idealism was defeated by the
system, into which most seem to have adjusted without trauma.

Now and then, "Making Sense of the 60's" does make an effort to reassess the
impulses and consequences of a heady period, but the work is up against the
producers' rote preconceptions and the sound-bite technique. It is possible,
after all, to admire those who joined the sit-ins and teach-ins, and to
appreciate their contributions to greater openness without going gaga. More
critical questioning, off camera and on, might have made more sense of the 60's.


Making Sense of the 60's

A six-part documentary series. A production of WETA-TV in association with
Varied Directions International; written by Harvey Ardman, William Duggan Jr.,
Rocky Collins and Eric Strange; directed by David Hoffman; edited by Jane
Buchbinder, Chuck Scott, Will Conroy, Charles R. Boyd, Ruth Schell, Rocky
Collins, Sarah J. Kerruisch, Noland Walker, Renner S. Coblyn, Eric Strange,
Aaron Fischer and Tony Black; Kirk Wolfinger, Charles R. Boyd, Rocky Collins,
Eric Strange and Kimberly Green, producers; Ricki Green and David Hoffman,
executive producers; Carol Rissman, narrator. At 9 tonight through Wednesday on
Channel 13.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vietnam veterans demonstrating against the war, in a scene from
"Making Sense of the 60's," which begins tonight at 9 on PBS. (Bettye Lane)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Why Hurry Into a Costly Land War?

BYLINE: By James Reston; James Reston is former chief Washington correspondent
and former executive editor of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 702 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The allies have won the first phase of the war with air power, and are talking
about how to win the land war against Iraq's half a million men in Kuwait.
Fortunately, this time they haven't given themselves an ultimatum to start the
second phase by a date certain, but officials talk about the desert battle as if
it were inevitable.

This reminds me of former Under Secretary of State George Ball's story about how
the U.S. got into the Vietnam mess: A man took his little boy to the zoo and,
pointing to a long-legged creature, said, "That is a giraffe." And the boy said,
"Why?" That, Ball said, explained our rush to war. "We just didn't ask the
giraffe question: why, why, why?"

President Bush did ask "why?" and answered that the U.S. had intervened in the
gulf to defend U.N. principles and resolutions. He committed himself, with
Congress's support, to get the Iraqi Army out of Kuwait and restore Kuwait's
Government. But the U.N. resolutions did not tell him he had to fight a land
war; they authorized him to use what force he deemed necessary, and left it to
the other U.N. members to do likewise.

Since then, Mr. Bush has emphasized that this is not a war between the U.S. and
Iraq but a joint U.N. operation that entails the least possible loss of life.

He has warned against overconfidence, and has expanded his authority to call up
more reserves to back the 460,000 Americans preparing for the decisive battle.
Saddam Hussein mocks the almost unopposed raids over Baghdad, but he got his
wife out of town, banished all U.S. TV networks except CNN in order to limit
pictures of damage, and apparently waits confidently for more than a million men
to clash in the desert.

This is what raises the giraffe question. Nobody, to my knowledge, has explained
why we should accommodate him by fighting on the battlefield of his choice under
conditions familiar to his troops and unfamiliar to ours. Nor has the
Administration explained why it refuses to aim its "smart bombs" at Hussein
himself while old generals and warrior journalists recommend land battles for
young men to fight.

The answer seems to be that the weapons can destroy nuclear laboratories and
chemical and biological factories, but cannot be as effective against Iraq's
underground armies. They can "soften them up" from the air, it is said, but the
Army and Marines must "root them out." This is like benching Joe Montana and
grinding out yardage through the line.

No doubt Hussein's armies are well concealed, but they have to eat and get other
supplies in trucks that are not invisible to bombers, even at night. Also, some
of our commanders are convinced that continued bombing at present levels can
destroy Hussein's communication system and cut him off from control -- maybe not
in a few days but within a few weeks.

At least some observers here ask, why hurry to the land war before giving the
bombers time to cut them off from their essential supplies? If the Air Force and
the Navy can drop bombs down chimneys, they should be able to hit supply trucks
down to the last sandwich.

The Army and Marines don't like Dwight Eisenhower's "courage of patience," for
they want to prove they're as efficient as the Air Force and Navy. But Mr. Bush
has different problems. He has had two wars in his first two years in office,
and his popularity is high -- mainly because casualties have been so low. A
bloody land war is not likely to increase his standing in the polls or usher in
his new world order, which is more likely to rely on what happens in the Soviet
Union than in Iraq and Kuwait.

His best chance of reducing Hussein's authority in the Arab world is not to
slaughter Hussein's armies in battle but force them to surrender. It is not in
America's interest to create a military wasteland in Iraq and leave Iraq to
Iran's and Syria's tender mercies. So at least a prolonged effort to destroy
Hussein's communications and starve his armies into submission is necessary
before any land struggle begins.

Meanwhile, the bad news has to reach Iraqi soldiers in the desert. For if they
have nothing to eat but leaflets, some might prefer to leave Kuwait and go home
-- before they have no home to go home to.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: THE PRESS;
Conflicting Censorship Upsets Many Journalists

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 866 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Jan. 20


Many news corespondents covering the war with Iraq are bridling under a system
of conflicting rules and confusing censorship.

For the first time since World War II, correspondents must submit to near-total
military supervision of their work.

The men and women covering the war are permitted to see and hear a great deal as
members of pools who are given access to military sites. But they may not use
place names or other clues that could help the Iraqis. Most accept such
constraints without protest, but there have been instances when information that
correspondents were ordered to withhold was made available soon after by
officers in Washington.

This reporter encountered a telling example of the paradoxical censorship rules
in a pool assignment last week, when officers on the scene said American forces
had destroyed laboratories where the Iraqis were thought to be developing a
nuclear potential.

Best News From the Top

Permission to report the attacks -- a major development -- was denied by the
unit commander, who said the information could assist Iraqi intelligence
operations and should be witheld. Correspondents complied, but the information
was later reported in detail by the American military commanders during their
daily briefing in Saudi Arabia. The Pentagon is clearly eager to be the first to
report the most newsworthy information.

Seemingly haphazard application of censorship rules has blanked out or truncated
the timely release of some important articles even after they survived the
required military "security review." In other cases, information deemed
dangerous to American troops by commanders in the field has been cleared by the
Pentagon and published or broadcast.

Most journalists here agree that military information officers at the Joint
Information Bureau in Dhahran are helpful and fair. Many of the problems
correspondents face originate in Washington, they say.

About 60 pool reporters selected from several hundred men and women covering the
Persian Gulf campaign must share their dispatches and video and radio tapes with
all their colleagues. The pool reporters go out in small groups, usually six
reporters and camera operators, to some American unit on land or shipboard to
observe activity. But the service men and women selected for interviews by pool
members are chosen by information officers accompanying each pool, in
cooperation with the unit commander.

Appeal Process Over Release

In principle, every article or videotape prepared by a pool reporter is subject
to a one-time censorship procedure in the field, which is conducted by the
information officer in consultation with the unit commander.

If a reporter challenges any suggested changes or elisions, the challenge can be
adjudicated by the Pentagon and the reporter's editors. In principle, even if
the Pentagon rules against publicizing an event, information officers can only
appeal to publishers and news directors to suppress it.

The rules can work against print journalism while benefitting television and
radio broadcasters. While print journalists must submit written texts of their
dispatches to field information officers and commanders for "security review,"
radio and television reporters often brodcast live without texts, permitting
them greater latitude. Television tape, in eight-millimeter format, cannot be
reviewed by the videocassette recorder equipment available to information
officers in the field.

Varying interpretations of the rules imposed by the Pentagon have virtually
blanked out timely publication of some articles that had been cleared by local
commanders.

A pool dispatch prepared by The New York Times reported that F-117A
radar-evading Stealth bombers launched the war against Iraq with precise
laser-guided bombs that destroyed key targets in Baghdad.

Second Thoughts by Commander

An Army public information officer cleared the dispatch on the spot for
transmission to pool headquarters in Dhahran and then to news organizations
themselves.

But more than three hours later, the unit commander had second thoughts about
the dispatch, striking out a paragraph and changing words and phrases in others.

To hasten the transmission of the news, The Times reporter agreed to the
proposed changes so that American publications and news services could receive
it in time for deadlines.

The next day, however, the reporter learned that the entire article had been
supressed by the F-117A unit headquarters in the United States. More than a day
after it was written, when it had become stale news, the dispatch was cleared in
its original form.

Most reporters are uncomfortable with a news system so completely under military
control. The system implemented here has its roots in military dissatisfaction
with news coverage of the Vietnam War, which some military officials continue to
argue was lost by the news media.

A senior Air Force officer opened his briefing here last week by telling an
auditorium filled with reporters: "Let me say up front that I don't like the
press. Your presence here can't possibly do me any good, and it can hurt me and
my people."

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 22, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Ba Liep Journal;
Family Braves a Cruel Sea and Just 2 Come Back

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 871 words

DATELINE: BA LIEP, Vietnam, Jan. 15


Dang Chi Cuong came home today to his father's house in this little village in
the Mekong Delta, eight months after he left by boat with his wife and two
children.

"We met disaster on the sea," Mr. Cuong said simply as his 9-year-old son clung
mournful and bewildered to his leg. Thai pirates intercepted their boat of 77
people, he said. They raped the women, including Mr. Cuong's wife, Le Thi Han,
then tried to kill all witnesses.

Mr. Cuong's wife, 30, and their 6-year-old daughter, Dang Thi Bich Tuyen, were
killed. Mr. Cuong and his son, Dang Ngoc Phuoc, jumped into the ocean and
floated on bits of driftwood for four days until Thai fishermen rescued them. Of
the 77 people on the boat that day, May 13, 1990, only 7 survived.

The fishermen, who were as kind as the pirates were barbarous, took the
survivors to a Thai holding camp for Vietnamese boat people. Representatives of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees heard their story, Mr. Cuong
said. As for Thai officials, "they were not interested."

Asked about his destiny, Mr. Cuong stared into the distance, holding his son's
head to his hip. "I could not know what would happen," he said at last. "There
was no way to know."

In the Wrong Army

Mr. Cuong was wearing one of the nonsense-English T-shirts popular all over
Asia. He bought his in Bangkok with some of the $50 bonus the United Nations
High Commissioner provides each Vietnamese adult who agrees to return home. His
shirt displays the British, French and American flags and reads: "Do! Family.
Fun for every day in the year."

His father, Dang Van Mai, 56, fluttered his hands, upset by the commotion this
homecoming had caused -- the official visitors, a foreigner, the gawking
neighbors. Mr. Mai was a soldier for the wrong army, the South Vietnamese Army,
and he gets no pension. "I knew what happened to him and his family," Mr. Mai
said. "I was very sad to hear it."

Mr. Mai lives with his wife and three other children in a wretched, smoky hut of
thatch in this poor village in Cuu Long Province, without electricity, down a
long dirt road lined with rice paddies and cut by canals. Now, seven will live
there.

Mr. Mai has no work; his wife, Nguyen Thi Sau, 53, does odd jobs, either in the
rice paddies or in the houses of others, and is paid about 3,000 dong a day --
44 cents at the official rate of exchange. "It was almost enough for us," Mr.
Mai said. He did not know that his son would receive money from the United
Nations for agreeing to return -- $30 a month for a year for himself, $15 a
month for the boy. "He will need the money for his son," Mr. Mai said. "It's up
to him to begin his life again."

Neighbors found Mrs. Sau to tell her that her son and grandson had returned
home. Rice-stalk thin, she said next to nothing, and began to cry. Embarrassed,
she wiped her tears away with the back of her hand and spoke softly to Phuoc,
her grandson. He knelt in front of her, his face averted, picking at the knee of
her black peasant trousers. She held his shoulders and whispered in his ear. "He
misses his mother," she finally said.

Mr. Cuong said he had been working at his father-in-law's sugar mill. "But there
was not enough money and my wife was often sick," he said. She wanted to go to a
third country, to the United States, to get a better life."

They paid about $1,000 each for the passage, borrowing money. Some of his wife's
cousins also went along, and also perished. What will he tell his wife's family?

"I will go to them and tell them exactly what happened," he said. Will he feel
embarrassed before them? "I did not know what would happen on the sea," he said
again. "I could not know."

Failure Is Expensive

Many Vietnamese who leave by boat bear the hopes of their families. If they
succeed in resettling, they can take over their direct relatives. Failure,
however, is expensive and embarrassing. Mr. Cuong said he knew of such cases,
but refused to say if his was similar. Mr. Mai said he had not known his son was
leaving. A United Nations official said, "It is illegal to leave by boat, so
they are afraid to speak of it."

Mr. Cuong said he did not know that by leaving in May 1990 he had missed a
cutoff for Vietnamese boat people imposed by Southeast Asian countries in March
1989. Previously, all Vietnamese boat people were regarded as refugees and
guaranteed resettlement; those arriving afterward are screened, and only those
with a "well-founded fear of persecution" qualify as refugees. The others,
economic migrants, who are making up about 85 to 90 percent of those screened,
will have to return to Vietnam.

The United States has opposed involuntary repatriation, so the High Commissioner
has tried to induce Vietnamese to agree to return. Mr. Cuong and his son are
among 344 Vietnamese who have flown home from Thailand. So far, about 7,500
Vietnamese have returned voluntarily, 6,300 of them from Hong Kong. But more
than 100,000 remain in the region's camps, and new arrivals are still running at
about 2,500 a month.

Asked why he agreed to return, Mr. Cuong looked toward his son, still huddled
with Mrs. Sau. "After my wife died, I didn't care any more," he said. "I wanted
to come home."

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dang Chi Cuong, left, with his son, Dang Ngoc Phuoc, and father,
Dang Van Mai. Mr. Cuong and his son returned to the Mekong Delta eight
monthsafter they left by boat with his wife and daughter. "We met disaster on
the sea," said Mr. Cuong, whose wife and daughter were killed by pirates.
(Steven Erlanger/The New York Times)

Map: Map of Vietnam showing location of Ba Liep.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 22, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Public Opinion;
Poll Finds Deep Backing While Optimism Fades

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words


The American public's initial soaring optimism about the war against Iraq has
flattened a little, but support for the war remains broad and President Bush's
approval rating continues to stand at a record level, the latest New York
Times/CBS News Poll shows.

Last Thursday, the day after the bombing began with little apparent Iraqi
response, 40 percent of the public said they thought the war would be over in a
few weeks. By Sunday only half as many held that view. There was a smaller
decline in the percentage who said the war was going "very well" for the United
States.

But approval of how Mr. Bush is handling the Presidency stood at 86 percent in
Thursday's polling, and on Sunday it was at a statistically equivalent 84
percent. The 79 percent who said Thursday that the United States was right to
attack was about equal to the 76 percent who said so on Sunday. Before the war,
the country was evenly split between attacking and waiting for the economic
sanctions to have more impact. The margins of sampling error were plus or minus
four percentage points for the 544 people interviewed Thursday and three
percentage points for the 867 interviewed Sunday.

The four-day telephone survey of 3,002 adults nationwide began the night after
the first attacks on Iraq, and was designed to measure day-to-day shifts in
opinion. A companion survey of 550 adults examined the views of those who
opposed warfare before it began and shifted to support it once the bombs started
falling. Those switchers appeared to expect an easier war than they once had and
to have started paying more attention to the issue once war began.

'Something Needed to Be Done'

Asked to explain why they shifted, the switchers also indicated that their
patience, like Mr. Bush's, had been exhausted. Michelle Fabiano, a 23-year-old
teacher in Glasco, N.Y., said: "I just thought it got to a point where something
needed to be done. So much was invested -- our troops, other countries.' "

Wallace Anderson, a 71-year-old retired civil servant and World War II veteran
from San Antonio, said: "If you're going to have a war, go ahead and have it. In
World War II they didn't mess around."

While the poll found that support for war, rather than continued reliance on
economic sanctions, had increased sharply in all population groups since the
weekend before the attack, some major differences remained.

Only 47 percent of blacks said the United States was right to start military
action, and 43 percent said it should have tried sanctions longer. Among whites,
80 percent favored war and 16 percent preferred sanctions. That gap was about as
wide as the prewar gap, when 52 percent of whites and 23 percent of blacks
favored military action if Iraq was not out of Kuwait by Jan. 15.

Differences between men and women narrowed. Before the war, 56 percent of men
and 40 percent of women said they favored force after Jan. 15. Among the 3,002
surveyed after war began, 81 percent of men and 70 percent of women said the
country was right to attack.

Record Approval

Approval of Mr. Bush's handling of his job went from 66 percent the weekend
before the war to 84 percent for the four-day survey, reaching the mark that the
Gallup Poll recorded for President Franklin D. Roosevelt just after Pearl
Harbor.

The phenomenon of Presidents gaining public approval when deeply involved in
foreign crises has a long history, but Mr. Bush's gain was one of the two
sharpest ever measured, comparable to the 16 percentage points that President
Richard M. Nixon gained in 1973 when the Vietnam peace accords were signed.

President John F. Kennedy gained 13 points from the Cuban missile crisis in
1962. President Lyndon B. Johnson's approval rating went up 8 points after the
bombing of Hanoi in 1966.

But other events have produced smaller changes. President Ronald Reagan's
bombing of Libya in 1986 was popular, but his approval rating only went from 64
to 70 percent, and Mr. Bush's invasion of Panama in 1989 won him a gain of 9
percentage points.

Some of those previous gains dissipated quickly, while others lasted many
months. The poll could not offer any clues about the durability of Mr. Bush's
gains, but even if bad news from the front spurred a quick decline, the gain
thus far is immense.

Good View of State of Nation

The war has also produced a sharp rise in the general view of the state of the
nation, as measured by one question that Republican poll takers favor. When
those polled were asked if they thought things in this country were going in the
"right direction" or were "off on the wrong track," 57 percent said "right
direction" and 31 percent said "wrong track." The last time any poll found as
big a majority saying the country was going in the right direction was in
January 1985, when President Reagan's second term was beginning. A Washington
Post/ ABC News Poll at the time found 59 percent taking that view.

Other major findings from the latest survey were that 77 percent of the public
said they were "proud" of the United States role in the Persian Gulf and that 81
percent said the United States should not just force Iraq out of Kuwait, but
also "see to it that Saddam Hussein is forced from power."

In a question that was asked only on Sunday, 47 percent said they thought the
"United States military is holding back information about mistakes and setbacks
in the Persian Gulf," while 45 percent said they believed that the military was
providing an "accurate account."

How the Polls Were Taken

 The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews
conducted Jan. 17 to 20 with 3,002 adults throughout the United States,
excluding Alaska and Hawaii. The survey consisted of four independent dai8ly
samples, with 544 interviews on Thursday, 683 on Friday, 908 onSaturday and 867
on Sunday.

In a separate poll, The Times and CBS News also conducted re-interviews with a
panel of 550 adults from Jan. 17 to 19. This group amounted to 82 percent of 674
people who had been interviewed Jan. 5-7, before the war in the Persian Gulf
began.

The margin of sampling error for the sample of 3,002 was plus or minus two
percentage points. For each of the four daily samples and for the panel
re-interviews it was plus or minus three to four percentage points.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Charts: "How Long a War?" shows results of if people think the war will
last weeks, months or a year or longer.; "How Public Opinion Has Changed" shows
peoples opinions before the war and after the war started of military actions
against Iraq, the way George Bush is handling Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, expect
more than 5,000 American soldiers to lose their lives.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 22, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Bombers;
Giant B-52 Grows Old Virulently

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1016 words


More than 30 years after the lumbering aircraft first rolled off the production
line and 18 years after they tramautized Hanoi in the Christmas raids of 1972,
Air Force B-52 bombers are hammering targets throughout Iraq and Kuwait.

One of the oldest and by far the biggest combat plane flying against the Iraqis,
the B-52 has been so extensively remodeled since its Vietnam days, to bolster
its accuracy and make it safer from enemy attack, that little more than its
airframe and hulking silhouette remain the same.

"It's like you took a 1959 Ford Fairlane with the original engine and stuff,"
said Maj. Dick Cole of the Air Force in a telephone interview from the Pentagon,
"and you put in a new stereo and maybe a trip computer and some other electronic
wizardry. And maybe you've done this two or three times."

Of the 744 B-52's that were built between 1955 and 1963, all but 247 have been
retired, including the "D" models which were the most widely used in Vietnam.
Those earlier versions of the bomber carried more than twice the bomb loads of
the "G" models that are now attacking in the Persian Gulf. In the newest
reconfiguration much of the space that was once used to hold bombs now
accommodates banks of computers that have increased bombing precision.

A Terrifying Wallop

Even with half their old bomb capacity, the surviving B-52's deliver the biggest
and perhaps most terrifying wallop in the American air arsenal. They operate
equally well during the day or night, the Air Force says, and are immune to most
variations in weather.

Even the Vietnam era B-52's were renowned for the accuracy of their bomb
attacks. Miles above the targets and barely able to distinguish the flash of
their exploding bombs, the crews had no sensation of the havoc erupting on the
ground. Modern computers, the Air Force says, have only reinforced the accuracy.

A B-52G can carry 51 bombs of either 500 or 750 pounds. Using the 500-pound
bomb, the total payload is only 1,000 pounds more than the F15-E fighter-bomber.

But tactics play a big part in the effectiveness of the B-52. The F15-E and
other fighter-bombers are designed to peel off one at a time and dive at their
targets, while B-52's typically attack in formations of three, unleashing all
their bombs at once from altitudes of six or seven miles and blasting a swath of
up to a half mile wide and perhaps a mile long.

Enemy Can't See or Hear It

"You turn the target into something that looks like a moonscape," said Major
Cole, a former B-52 crew member.

Flying at high altitude, he said, the B-52's "can't be seen or heard until the
bombs start falling and then it's like rolling thunder.

"It's a great psychological effect," Major Cole said. "You scare the hell out of
them."

The B-52, "has got a mystique about it," said Maj. Gen. John L. Borling, deputy
chief of operations at the United States Strategic Air Command Headquarters in
Omaha. "Because of its destructive power it has an ethos, a sense of
awesomeness."

Prehistoric-Looking Creature

The plane carries a crew of six and is three or four times bigger than other
American fighting aircraft. Its huge wings, spanning more than 60 yards, have
wheels near the tips to prevent them from scraping the ground. They droop under
the weight of eight jet engines and literally seem to flap slowly as the
prehistoric-looking creature bounds down the runway, struggling to fly.

The B-52's operating in the current crisis are based several hours away from the
combat zone, as they were during the Vietnam War, to protect them and their
ground crews from hostile fire on the ground.

In the Christmas bombing of Hanoi, great sections of the city were demolished.
At that time General Borling, whose fighter had been shot down, was a prisoner
of war in North Vietnam. He recalls the earth shuddering as the B-52's delivered
their bombs.

In South Vietnam, B-52's were often dispatched against concentrations of North
Vietnamese and Vietcong troops. Survivors were sometimes found dazed, staggering
and bloody. Many defectors said fear of the B-52's had caused them to give up.

The B-52 Bomber: Still Potent

HISTORY

The heavy bomber was initially planned as a turboprop plan in 1948, but was
built as a turbo jet after improvements in jet engines' fuel economy. By 1951,
the plane was being designed to carry up to four nuclear bombs at high altitudes
for a range of 7,000 miles, or long enough to fly from the continental U.S. to
the Soviet Union without refueling.

The first B-52 was delivered on June 29, 1955, the last was delivered on Oct.
23, 1963; the U.S. never sold the plane to other nations.

The 744 B-52's purchased from Boeing between 1955 and 1963 averaged a little
more than $8 million per plane ($35.3 million in 1990 dollars).

The price of improvement made since the 1960's has cost several times the
original price of the planes.

PAYLOAD

The B-52G, themodel being used in the Gulf War, can carry up to 51 gravity
(dumb) bombs of 500 or 750 pounds apiece internally and 12 smart missiles
externally.

IMPROVEMENTS SINCE ORIGINAL DESIGN

Originally designed to fly 5,000 hours before structural fatigue, most B-52's
are now expected to achieve at least 15,000 hours. It is estimated that the
planes could be used in active duty until 2035, 80 years after the first
delivery.

In the mid 1960's the wings and fuselages were reinforced and corroding metals
were replaced with new alloys. The reinforced plane can now fly at lower
altitudes. The range of the B-52G was increased to 7,500 miles without
refueling.

The electronics on the B-52 have beenupdated numerous times. Recent improvement
include equipment enabling the planes to communicate with Air Force satellites,
electro-optical systems to provide quidance inlow-level flights at night or in
bad weather and radar-jammers and lasers used to guide smart weapons to targets.


Sources: "Modern Bombers", "Boeing B-52 G/H Stratofortress", Aeroflax Datagraph,
Jane's All the World's Aricraft, Periscope date base.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  's
Drawings.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 22, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Rescue;
Navy Pilot Is Plucked From Iraqi Desert

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 992 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Jan. 21


A downed American Navy pilot was rescued in the Iraqi desert this afternoon by
an Air Force team in what military officials said was the first successful such
mission over hostile territory in the war with Iraq.

Members of the rescue party indicated that at one point their efforts were
jeopardized when an Iraqi truck suddenly appeared and began driving straight
toward the stranded pilot.

They said they destroyed the truck with a blast of Gatling gunfire from an A-10
attack plane overhead, then plucked the relieved pilot from the desert minutes
later.

The operation lasted eight hours, four of which were spent in Iraqi airspace or
on Iraqi territory.

'The Adrenaline Was Pumping'

"He's real pleased," Capt. Paul Johnson, 32 years old, the leader of operation,
said of the pilot, who was unharmed. "It was a rather indescribable feeling to
know that he was now on the helicopter and we were coming out of enemy
territory, that we were about to pull this off."

Captain Johnson, of Dresden, Tenn., described the mission as complicated and the
time spent in Iraqi airspace as almost unbearably tense.

"The adrenaline was pumping for two hours after the pickup," he said late this
evening. "It's still pumping now."

Captain Johnson and other members of the rescue team spoke to reporters at an
Air Force installation in Saudi Arabia whose location cannot be disclosed under
Pentagon press rules. The reporters, members of a press "pool" organized under
the Pentagon's rules, filed a report cleared by military censors that was
distributed here.

Military officials in Saudi Arabia did not release the name of the pilot, nor
would they identify the type of plane he had been flying or say where the
plane's flight had originated. They also did not say when the plane went down.

Air Force spokesmen said tonight that the Navy pilot had ejected after being hit
by Iraqi ground fire, and had parachuted into a bleak, empty stretch of the
Iraqi desert.

4 Midair Refuelings

They said pilots are provided with smoke grenades, flares and a small radio so
they can signal rescue parties in the event they are shot down.

The Navy pilot rescued today had communicated with his rescuers by radio, the
spokesman said.

The rescue party included two A-10 fighter jets and at least one rescue
helicopter.

Captain Johnson and another member of the rescue party, Capt. Randy Goff, 26, of
Jackson, Ohio, said they had to refuel in the air four times for a mission that
lasted eight hours and 18 minutes.

While they refused to say how far into Iraq they traveled, they said that nearly
half of today's rescue mission was spent over Iraq.

Benign Mission for Attack Plane

The two pilots are assigned to so-called Sandy Alert duty for their fighter
wing. "Sandy" is a term used in the Vietnam War to refer to the planes
designated for search and rescue missions.

The mission began before 8 A.M. when the two A-10 pilots were told to begin
searching for the downed Navy pilot.

The A-10, the snub-nosed jet known as the Warthog, is designed to track down and
destroy tanks and other armored vehicles. Despite its reputation as an attack
plane, Captain Johnson said, some A-10's are assigned to more benign duties,
including rescue missions.

After learning their orders early this morning, the A-10 pilots scrambled into
the desert sky heading north, toward the Saudi border with Iraq.

They radioed to flying Air Force tankers to be ready for refueling for the
mission and alerted helicopters in the region to prepare for a pickup.

As they began the search near the Iraqi border, "we built our plan," Captain
Johnson said.

It was not until midday, after conversations by radio with the downed pilot,
that they finally determined where the plane had been shot down, and where in
Iraq the Navy flier might be.

The two fighter pilots then began to circle the area, their mission to protect
the pilot on the ground until a rescue helicopter arrived at the scene to pick
him up.

As they waited for the helicopter, the pilots later recalled, a large Iraqi
pickup truck suddenly appeared on a nearby dirt road and began moving toward the
pilot.

"Unfortunately the truck was in the wrong place at the wrong time," Captain Goff
said. "We couldn't afford to have him be there."

The two pilots said they then attacked the truck with 30-millimeter Gatling
guns, which left the truck in flames. Pressed to describe the truck further and
to guess whether the driver had survived the attack, the pilots would not
comment.

Captain Johnson said he regretted the attack on the truck, seeming to
acknowledge that the driver may have been a Iraqi civilian. "Things are
happening rapidly," he said. "We have other things to worry about."

The truck, Captain Johnson said, came within 200 yards of the rescue site and
"looked to be driving toward my survivor."

'My Heart Was Pumping'

Minutes later, rescuers said, the helicopter appeared and swooped down for the
rescue as the fighters circled overhead, searching for Iraqi jets that might try
to scuttle the pickup.

The downed Navy pilot jumped from his desert hiding place and ran toward the
helicopter, climbing aboard hurriedly.

"Basically my heart was pumping pretty quickly," Captain Goff said. "It is
really exciting, the fact that you think the guy is going to get rescued. My
mind was just rushing." Then began the long trip south across enemy territory,
back to Saudi Arabia and safety.

Ervin C. Sharpe, the wing commander of the 354th Tactical Fighter Wing, of
Myrtle Beach, S.C., which led today's mission, said the rescue came after
several days of bad weather that had frustrated American flight operations in
the Persian Gulf.

"It really galvanized us," he said of the rescue mission, noting that it came on
a day when captured American, British and Kuwaiti fliers were paraded on Iraqi
television. "These are the ones that really count."

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 22, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The Overview;
IRAQ'S MILITARY REPORTED HURT BUT NOT HALTED IN 5 DAYS' RAIDS; VOWS CAPTIVES
WILL BE SHIELDS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1306 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 21


Five days of air war against Iraq, one of the most intensive air campaigns in
the history of warfare, has weakened Iraq but has not eliminated its capacity to
wage war or Saddam Hussein's ability to command his forces, Administration
officials and private military experts said today.

It has not knocked out television broadcasts within Iraq, allowing President
Hussein to transmit pictures of captured American servicemen.

In five days, the air campaign has far surpassed the number of missions by
American warplanes in 11 days of bombing against Hanoi and Haiphong in December
1972. But officials said it has had an uncertain impact on Iraq's ground forces
in Kuwait and southern Iraq, the core of Iraqi military strength.

Clouds Hamper Observation

Rear Adm. John M. McConnell, director of intelligence for the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, said at a Pentagon briefing that Iraqi commanders were still exercising
central control. "The command element is still in control of military activity
in the country," he said.

The Pentagon said it could not fully evaluate its day and night bombing assaults
on Iraq's elite Republican Guard divisions because cloud cover had slowed the
gathering of information about the bombing.

Pentagon officials continued to describe the air campaign as largely successful
in weakening Iraq, reporting that the number of sorties had reached 8,100,
although not all are combat missions against targets in Iraq and Kuwait. In
December 1972, American forces carried out 2,700 sorties in the campaign against
North Vietnam.

14 Allied Planes Lost

Allied air raids on Scud bases or other targets in Iraq, with American, British
and Saudi pilots flying the lion's share of combat sorties, continued around the
clock on the fifth day of the gulf war. The allies reported they had brought
down two more Iraqi planes, for a total of 17, and conceded the loss of three
more aircraft of their own -- a United States Navy F-14 Tomcat fighter, a United
States Army AH-64A Apache helicopter and a Royal Air Force Tornado bomber, the
last two in non-combat accidents. This brought to 14 the number of allied planes
lost since the war began.

Pentagon officials said they were confident that the bombing had crippled Iraq's
network of antiaircraft missiles, reduced military communications, limited
electric power production and decisively set back Iraq's ability to develop
nuclear weapons. Further, the Pentagon argued that the recent bombing attacks
were just the beginning of a sustained bombardment that would take an
ever-expanding toll on Iraq.

This picture of the initial days of the air war, provided by Government
officials and private military experts, probably only hints at the extent of
destruction in Iraq, and has left unclear whether the sustained assault has been
as successful as Pentagon officials have suggested.

The officials said that cloud cover over Iraq was restricting some combat
operations. One Government official said that more than 200 missions had been
canceled in the last 24 hours because of bad weather. Additionally, an
Administration official said, some American planes have been diverted from other
combat missions to join the effort to hunt and destroy mobile Scud missile
launchers.

Scud Threat Played Down

Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said the allied forces had been unable to locate
and destroy all Iraq's mobile launchers, and reported that Iraq still had
hundreds of missiles. But he said the Scuds did not represent a significant
military threat.

The continuing missile threat was underscored by renewed air raid warnings in
northeastern Saudi Arabia today, and one Scud missile launched from Iraq landed
harmlessly in the Persian Gulf. Later, after midnight Saudi time, at least two
Scud missiles were reportedly destroyed in the Riyadh area by Patriot air
defense missiles.

Since the war began, the Administration has made public only the sketchiest of
reports about the impact of the air attacks, contending that weather has impeded
bomb damage assessments and that detailed information might assist Iraq in
responding to the attacks.

Lieut. Gen. Thomas Kelly, the director of operations for the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, reiterated that position today at a Pentagon briefing.

'We're in a War'

"We feel that we are releasing as much information as we can that is
reasonable," General Kelly said. "You've got to remember that we're in a war.
You have to remember there's another side in this war."

Pressed by reporters later in the same briefing, the Pentagon spokesman, Pete
Williams, acknowledged that the flow of information was "agonizingly slow" and
promised to provide more details in the days ahead.

The American and allied air campaign against Iraq is a classic test of the Air
Force's contention that air power can be used to deliver a decisive blow to the
enemy. Army and Marine Corps officials have long viewed that argument with
skepticism.

Top Pentagon officials have publicly held out the hope that air power will be
sufficient to force the Iraqis to give up, even as Army officials prepare for
what they believe will be an inevitable ground war.

Some American military officials say that the United States would like to
achieve at least a 50 percent "degradation" in Iraqi ground forces before any
American and allied ground attack is launched.

Iraqi Planes Survive

The American Air Force, by and large, still has virtual command of the skies,
but the vast majority of the Iraqi Air Force survived attack.

Most of the Iraqi Air Force appears to be in hiding. According to one Government
official, the Iraqi pilots have flown fewer than 300 missions compared with the
8,100 combat and support missions flown by the United States and its allies.

Still, some Iraqi planes challenged the Americans today. Two additional Iraqi
planes were shot down, bringing the total of Iraqi losses in air combat to 17
aircraft. The Pentagon has officially disclosed the loss of 14 American and
allied planes in combat. The Pentatgon said all but one of the 9 American planes
lost were brought down by ground fire, but one military official said that the
he had received information that the F-14 lost was shot down in air-to-air
combat.

American officials said that Iraq's network of surface-to-air missiles has been
disrupted, but that Iraqi gunners appeared to be improving their ability to
operate antiaircraft guns, which have accounted for most allied loses.

Communications Still Open

An American official said that military communications had been reduced by the
bombing raids. But Iraqi commanders, intelligence reports indicate, are still
able to communicate with Basra and troops in Kuwait.

An American official acknowedged that knocking out Iraq's television
broadcasting capabilities was a goal of the American military operation. But one
official said that the reduction in power in Baghdad would make it impossible
for many Iraqis to listen to the broadcasts.

Iraq's firing of Scud surface-to-surface missiles has dominated headlines in
recent days. But military officials say that that so far the weapons have been
militarily insignificant. The missiles are relatively inaccurate and have not
been used with chemical warheads.

$35 Million Worth Fired

On Sunday, 10 Scud missiles were fired at Dhahran and Riyadh in Saudi Arabia.
The Pentagon initially said that nine were successfully intercepted, and that
one fell harmlessly into the Persian Gulf. But an American official said tonight
that one Scud may have hit Riyadh.

Defense Secretary Cheney has said that Iraq has about 30 to 40 mobile Scud
launchers. But the actual number, some American officials caution, may vary
since Iraq has the abilty to make its own Scud launchers and some of these may
be hidden.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: U.S. Patriot missiles intercepted and destroyed Iraqi Scud
missiles fired on Sunday at Saudi Arabia. U.S. military police officers stood
near a building in Riyadh that was damaged either by debris from a demolished
Scud or a Patriot that veered off course. (Agence France-Presse) (pg.A9)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 22, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

In Gulf War, Many Wounds Will Be Mental

BYLINE: By DANIEL GOLEMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1314 words


DRAWING on lessons learned in World War II, the Vietnam War and other battles in
the Middle East, military psychiatrists are refining the way they treat battle
fatigue.

Concern about the problem is especially great since the need to fight in
chemical warfare garb in the Persian Gulf war is expected to increase the rate
of psychiatric casualties.

Efforts to minimize psychiatric casualties there will concentrate on treating
soldiers near the battlefield and returning them to their units quickly, perhaps
after only a few hours of rest. Even the use of the term "battle fatigue" is
meant to help reduce both the immediate symptoms and the long-term anguish that
can result when soldiers begin to think of themselves as mentally disabled.

In the new view, military psychiatrists say, men and women with battle fatigue
are not suffering a psychological disorder but are simply showing a natural
response to a traumatic situation. Like physical endurance, emotional endurance
has its limits, these doctors say. And just as rest helps people recover from
physical exhaustion, time out from combat helps people recover from battle
fatigue.

"People are not told they have some psychiatric disorder but that they need a
respite," said Dr. Matthew Friedman, a Veterans Administration psychiatrist who
is among those coordinating Defense Department plans for handling casualties in
the Persian Gulf.

Battle fatigue can be triggered by a single trauma, such as seeing a buddy
killed, or can come on gradually as combat drags on. "The more terrifying the
weapons, the greater the number of rounds fired and the more troops wounded, the
greater the psychiatric casualties," said Dr. Shlomo Breznitz, a psychologist at
the New School for Social Research who has studied combat stress in Israeli
soldiers.

Among the first signs is sloppiness or apathy, leading to the failure to do the
most basic things to protect oneself or others. Such apathy is a more common
symptom than panic or high anxiety.

Officers in the Persian Gulf theater have been primed to recognize quiet signs
of battle fatigue, psychiatrists say, and to give personnel who show them a few
hours' or a day's respite from battle. Besides signs of apathy, they have been
told to watch for men and women who complain that their hands will not do what
they want them to, who stare vacantly into space or make repeated mistakes in
easy routines.

Having to wear chemical warfare gear may increase psychiatric casualties by as
much as 20 percent, said Dr. Robert Ursano, chief psychiatrist at the medical
school of the Uniformed Services University in Bethesda, Md.

"All new weapons induce terror," said Dr. Ursano, an Air Force colonel. "The
antidote is making the unexpected routine." American troops have not only
trained in the suits, but have also had the chance, in a simulation of a
chemical attack, to see that they will protect them from tear gas.

"But the gear itself makes it harder to do any job well," Dr. Ursano said. "It's
an effort to talk, let alone offer words of encouragement. You can't reach over
and give a buddy a reassuring pat. It cuts troops off from each other. It makes
you feel miserable."

Beyond that, Dr. Urasano said, "chemical agents are agents of terror, adding,
"They're like the monster in 'The Alien.' They can't be seen, but can get inside
you and take you by surprise."

The standard treatment for military personnel who suffer battle fatigue is to
let them rest in a protected place near the front where they can shower and have
a hot meal, and, in a day or so, return to combat.

The decision will be made by a psychiatrist; every division on the battlefield
is assigned one.

As in the Korean War and Vietnam, treatment will be given within the combat
zone, a change from the policy during World War II, when sufferers were
evacuated to distant military hospitals and few ever returned to battle, Dr.
Friedman said.

And in a new post-battle emphasis, commanders "will encourage men to talk over
what happened, to sort their feelings out," said Dr. Ursano. This could happen
either in formal "debriefing groups" or spontaneously. Either way, the
psychiatrists hope these discussions will act as a kind of informal therapy.

Where possible, military psychiatrists will avoid using psychiatric medication
such as tranquilizers in treating battle fatigue, since "that creates the
expectation that the person has an illness," said Dr. Friedman. "But if the
person has a continuing panic or is psychotic, then you quickly triage them to a
hospital."

"The benefits of this approach," said Dr. Friedman, are "not only that you
return people to the front, but, according to Israeli studies, it reduces later
post-traumatic stress by about 50 percent."

Symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder begin a half year or more after the
trauma, and include intense nightmares, debilitating rage and depression, apathy
and vivid flashbacks of traumatic war scenes. Without immediate care, men who
break down on the battlefield are four times more likely than other soldiers to
suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder three years later, according to
findings in studies of Israeli soldiers by Dr. Zehava Solomon, a psychologist at
Tel Aviv University.

Danger of Quick Turnaround

"Treating those with battle fatigue as close to the front as possible and
sending them back to their unit quickly is good emotionally, since they don't
loose their self-esteem and can fulfill their loyalty to their unit," said Dr.
Mardi Horowitz, a psychiatrist at the University of California Medical School at
San Francisco.

Israeli military psychologists say about half of soldiers with battle fatigue
are "chicken soup casualities" who can return to combat after only about 12
hours' respite. Overall, they say, 80 to 90 percent will be fit within 72 hours.

The danger of the quick turnaround may be too little "chance to work through the
fear or guilt," said Dr. Horowitz, who added: "That approach may not prevent
long-term psychiatric casualties."

The rapid return to combat of those with battle fatigue, when it was used in the
Vietnam War, made for a ratio of one psychiatric casualty for every four medical
ones in that war, a rate considered low. But, Dr. Horowitz pointed out, the rate
of those with long-term psychiatric impairment from the Vietnam War was quite
high.

Depending on the intensity of fighting experienced by soldiers and the morale of
their unit, rates for post-traumatic stress disorder among Vietnam veterans who
saw combat was between 15 and 50 percent, according to Dr. Jacob Lindy,
co-director of the Traumatic Stress Study Center at the University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine.

Among the traumas that can lead to the disorder are seeing grotesquely mutilated
bodies, witnessing or participating in atrocities or going on a particularly
dangerous mission, according to a study of 200 Vietnam vetarans. The study was
reported by Dr. Lindy and Dr. Bonnie Green in the June issue of The Archives of
General Psychiatry.

Because those who suffer battle fatigue are at the highest risk for developing
the stress disorder years later, some psychiatrists have expressed concern about
the long-term welfare of military personnel in the Persian Gulf. "So far as I
know, there are no plans to follow up those who suffer from battle fatigue,"
said Dr. Friedman. "We should monitor these people for signs of post-traumatic
stress after their discharge. The problem was ignored for far too long among
Vietnam veterans."

One factor that can lessen such long-term psychiatric problems is how military
personnel feel about their efforts in the Persian Gulf afterward. "If they see
themselves as doing a necessary job for their country, and are received that way
when they return, it will help buffer them against long-term psychological
scars," said Dr. Friedman.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Shlomo Breznitz of the New School for Social Research said,
"The more terrifying the weapons, the greater number of rounds fired and the
more troops wounded, the greater the psychiatric casualties." (Dith Pran/The New
York Times) (pg. C8)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 22, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Inhuman Shields

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 424 words


Over centuries, the behavior of nations at war has come under certain limits of
civility -- limits that are now being trampled by Saddam Hussein.  His regime's
mistreatment of captured allied airmen is cruelly consistent with Iraq's
repeated, barbarous attacks on civilian targets in Israel.

There can only be revulsion at the use of prisoners as so-called human shields
-- a variation of Saddam Hussein's earlier, equally repellent deployment of
hostages at strategic sites. And there can only be sympathy for allied captives
coerced into parroting propaganda on Iraqi television.

Saddam Hussein may not care that he is blatantly violating the laws of war. But
President Bush properly gave fair warning yesterday that the Iraqi warlord and
his subordinates can be held accountable. Mr. Bush, who narrowly escaped capture
in World War II, was blunt: "You can count on it."

The rules for prisoners of war are time-honored and explicit. Prisoners may not
be threatened or insulted; they must at all times be humanely treated. This is
stipulated in Article 13 of a Geneva Convention signed by Iraq in 1956. Article
17 states that prisoners are bound only to disclose name, date of birth, serial
number or "equivalent information." Article 23 asserts that no prisoner may at
any time "be exposed to the fire of the combat zone, nor may his presence be
used to render certain points or areas immune from military operations."

An Iraqi diplomat in France offered this bizarre justification for refusing to
turn over prisoners to the Red Cross: "There are 28 countries in the alliance,
so how do we know which pilots are from which country if his country or his
government cannot claim it?" Iraq claims it has felled more than 150 aircraft,
10 times the total acknowledged by the coalition, and is using the prisoners to
try to document its own propaganda.

The excuse is shameless and the abuse of captured airmen is odious. Under the
U.S. military code of conduct, prisoners of war are instructed to give only
their name, age, rank and serial number to their captors. In its current form,
the code requires prisoners to resist giving more information only "to the best
of their ability."

Americans have learned in Korea and Vietnam that under torture, prisoners can be
forced to utter anything. Those who utter implausible confessions under duress
deserve to be judged humanly. Iraqis who coerce them, and use them as hostages,
invite being judged harshly, for war crimes. There's nothing human about using
prisoners as shields.


LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

GREENSPAN DOUBTS NEED FOR TAX RISE TO MEET WAR COST

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1246 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 22


Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, urged Congress today
not to raise taxes to pay for the war in the Persian Gulf.

The Bush Administration has said it does not plan to ask for a tax increase. But
some lawmakers and economists disagree with that judgment, and the issue is
likely to dominate Congressional hearings and colloquies on economics in the
months ahead.

Since no one knows how much the war will ultimately cost, Mr. Greenspan said, it
is better to borrow the money at least for the time being, even though that
would mean a substantial rise in the deficit.

But Mr. Greenspan, the Government's most influential economic policy maker and
its leading forecaster, also insisted that taxes should not be cut or spending
increased to stimulate the economy and counter the recession.

Risk of Mistakes

"Assessing the economic outlook is especially daunting at the present time," Mr.
Greenspan asserted in testimony before the House Budget Committee. He said it
might be months before the proper course of action regarding taxes, spending and
interest rates became clear, and he noted, "The risks of making policy mistakes
are high."

Speaking in his customary oblique style, he refused to say whether he expected
the Federal Reserve to drive interest rates lower. "Decisions on that score will
depend on developing trends in financial markets and the economy," he said.

But under especially sharp questioning by Representative Barney Frank, a
Democrat from Massachusetts, Mr. Greenspan conceded that if the nation's money
supply did not start growing in response to the Fed's cutting of short-term
rates over the last three months, further steps would be needed to get banks to
lend more money.

Remembering Vietnam

Remembering the Vietnam experience, many politicians and economists here have
begun discussing how to pay for the war in the gulf, which Mr. Greenspan said
was costing hundreds of millions of dollars a day. In the late 1960's, the
Johnson Administration imposed a surtax to finance the war in Vietnam, but most
economists now agree that it came too late and that the inflation that resulted
from trying to fight the war without paying for it inflicted serious damage on
the economy for many years thereafter.

Mr. Greenspan maintained that today's circumstances were potentially different
from those that existed at the outset of the Vietnam War. Then, he said, the
military's inventory of planes, tanks, ships and other equipment was deemed
inadequate, and the result was a rapid expansion of Pentagon spending and
Government borrowing to finance it. Now, Mr. Greenspan said, with the military
buildup of the 1980's and the end of the cold war, military stocks are ample.

Assuming the war is relatively short and the lost equipment does not need to be
replaced, he continued, "the economic impact is quite materially different
fromthat which occurred during the Vietnam War."

Mr. Greenspan acknowledged that the war in the gulf would vastly increase the
budget deficit, but he said that might not be consequential. The war, he said,
was a one-time cost and was not "the same thing as introducing a new ongoing
program that commits the Government into expenditures for the indefinite
future."

Representative John Bryant, a Texas Democrat, said the United States might have
to maintain a military presence in the Middle East for years to come. "This cost
isn't going to end when the war ends," Mr. Bryant said.

That, Mr. Greenspan said, raised the question of whether America's allies like
Germany and Japan should not bear a portion of the long-term cost.

Official Economic Estimate

Robert D. Reischauer, director of the Congressional Budget Office and Congress's
chief economist, plans to release an official estimate on Wednesday that the
gross national product fell by 2.6 percent in the last three months of 1990 and
will fall by another 1.7 percent in the first three months of this year. At the
same time, Mr. Reischauer will release a letter from Richard G. Darman, director
of the Office of Management and Budget, saying the Bush Administration is
estimating an economic slide of 3.4 percent in the fourth quarter of 1990 and
1.3 percent in the first quarter of 1991.

Under the law, the estimates of two consecutive quarters of negative growth, the
popular definition of recession, prompt an automatic vote in the Senate and a
possible vote in the House of Representatives to undo the spending cuts and tax
increases that were enacted last year to lower the budget deficit.

The leadership in both houses opposes such changes, and President Bush has said
he will veto the changes if Congress approves them. Thus, the spending and tax
levels and the rules enforcing them are unlikely to be altered.

Policy Balance Needed

Mr. Greenspan clearly agreed with that judgment. "Concerns about the
appropriateness of a policy of fiscal restraint in a period of weak economic
performance are understandable," he said. "However, they must be balanced
against the benefits that will flow from adhering to a budget strategy that is
geared to the longer-run needs of the economy."

Thus far, Mr. Greenspan said, he has seen "some hints" in economic data
indicating that the worst of the recession may be over but he quickly added, "We
must also recognize the possibility that overall activity may decline further
before an upturn takes hold."

He said the Fed was concerned that the country's money supply had remained flat
all fall despite sharp reductions in interest rates. One school of economics,
called monetarism, holds that the money supply is the best measurement of how
the economy is performing, and in the late 1970's and early 1980's that was the
dominant view of the Federal Reserve. In recent years, however, the Fed has paid
relatively little attention to the money supply and has concentrated on
manipulating interest rates.

Mr. Greenspan's statement represents something of a reversal of the recent
course. "I would think that the money supply in this particular environment will
give us reasonably good signals relevant to how the economy is emerging," Mr.
Greenspan said. "This is something which I would not have said two years ago,
but I think we're beginning to see the money supply as being useful as a
reflective force."


Pace of Lending Slows

The money supply depends mostly on lending by banks and other financial
institutions, and Mr. Greenspan said the unexpectedly slow pace of bank lending
this fall had led money supplies to be inadequate. He suggested that if the
situation did not improve, "further actions will be required."

Presumably, that would mean lower interest rates, but the chairman did not say
so.

Mr. Greenspan said he thought the chances were better than "50-50" that an
actual recession would not have occurred had it not been for the higher oil
prices and uncertainty that followed the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2. But
he agreed that economic growth had been extremely slow all year, and he offered
a somewhat new explanation for that.

The strong growth in the late 1980's, he said, caused Americans to buy so many
cars and houses and office buildings that there was "a glut on the market." When
people and companies no longer needed those things, a slowdown resulted from the
fall in demand.

"I'm not sure the Administration or Congress or we could have materially altered
that or should have," Mr. Greenspan said.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Testifying before the House Budget Committee yesterday, Alan
Greenspan suggested that Congress neither cut nor raise taxes at this time.
(Paul Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg. D5)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

What Should Be Taught About War in the Gulf?

BYLINE: By WILLIAM CELIS 3d

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; National Desk; Education Page

LENGTH: 1098 words


In high schools around the country, the Persian Gulf War has unleashed a
conflict in the classroom: Should the war be discussed? If so, in what context
and to what extent?

The questions are weighty ones for administrators and social studies teachers
who have incurred the wrath of both students and parents no matter which course
they have taken. At Hempfield Area High School outside of Pittsburgh, 150
students were suspended last week after walking out of classes to protest what
they said was a lack of attention to the war.

But in Albuquerque, N.M., a woman called La Cueva High School contending that
instructors were devoting too much attention to the war. In protest, the woman
kept her daughter at home last Friday.

In addition to debating how much classroom time should be spent discussing the
war, teachers and administrators must consider what to teach. If they raise the
issue of the international oil supply as a factor in the United States
involvement in the war, some parents object. If they teach that the war is being
waged solely to liberate Kuwait from Iraqi control, other parents object.

Emotions Are Involved, Too

Most school systems are trying to take an even-handed approach and add a
historical context to the events being played out on television.

"The difficulties in talking about the war lie in different areas for different
reasons," said Joyce Briscoe, a world history teacher at La Cueva High School.
As was the case with the Vietnam War, she said, "Some teachers are reluctant to
talk about controversial issues."

Some curriculum directors added that it is emotionally difficult to discuss a
current event when teachers and students have spouses, parents or other
relatives in the gulf.

There is also a shortage of texts dealing concisely with the tinder-box history
of the Middle East, teachers said, and since the outbreak of war, many texts
have become obsolete. This has forced instructors to glean teaching aids from
newspapers, news magazines, television and various classroom magazines.

Teachers Turn to Study

As the conflict unfolded, Mrs. Briscoe became a regular at the public library,
educating herself about the gulf region. Mrs. Briscoe was upset by the mother
who called the school to complain that there were too many classroom discussions
on the war. Mrs. Briscoe said it is her duty to teach about the war as part of a
broad education.

"Students expect some kind of information," Mrs. Briscoe said. Partly because of
fear over parental objections, she said, "I think most teachers have been taking
a safe middle position by letting the kids air their feelings. I don't have much
respect for that. I am not one of those teachers."

Mrs. Briscoe said she has given her students crash lessons on the long-standing
hostilities between Arabs and Jews and why they exist.

Students and parents, many of whom said they were poorly informed about the
region before Mrs. Briscoe's extensive lectures, have generally welcomed the
discussions.

Parents Gaining Knowledge

"Mrs. Briscoe explained to us why Israel and Iraq do the things that they do,
instead of just saying 'Oh, I'm sorry your family is there,' " said Anna Park,
who said her parents had been reading her world history class notes to get a
better understanding of the conflict.

Jared Morrison, a 17-year-old senior in Mrs. Briscoe's class, said: "Everyone is
interested in getting as much information as possible. Most of the teachers are
being real open about it."

Although Dennis Morrison, the student's father, said he sometimes wondered about
the relevance of war discussions over other academic topics, he nonetheless
conceded, "It would be wrong to not address it."

That was the issue last week at Hempfield Area High School outside of
Pittsburgh. Complaining that teachers were not talking enough about the war, 150
students who walked out of classes were suspended when they refused to return.
They were barred from school not for expressing their views, school officials
said, but for leaving classes without permission.

"It's good to talk about the war and not to ignore the fact that it's there,"
said James E. Miller, an 18-year-old senior who received the longest suspension,
five days, for his role as the spokesman for the students. Most students got
three-day suspensions.

'Wanted More Informaion'

Mr. Miller, who has a brother and other relatives serving in the gulf, said that
when he wanted to talk about the war he was told by several teachers that now
was not the time. "I just think that if the schools can teach the kids, then it
would help out a lot in kids' emotional feelings," said Mr. Miller, who is
scheduled to return to school Thursday.

Kate Boggs, Mr. Miller's mother, said teachers at the school could have shown
more sensitivity to discussion of the war. "They didn't give the kids a fair
shake," she said. "All the kids wanted was more information."

Those arguments were disputed by school officials, who cited several efforts
dedicated to the war. World culture courses have a component devoted to Islam,
they said. And since the walkout, the school has set up a television in the
cafeteria so that students can watch newscasts, and the social studies
department has begun morning discussion groups on the war before classes start.

'Arguments Without Merit'

"You are talking to a school that has made a general attempt to include that
part of the world," said James Steeley, chairman of the high school's social
studies department. "I personally feel that their arguments are without merit."

In other places, the soul-searching began well in advance of the war and has
been more deliberate.

Administrators and teachers in Fairfax County, Va., for example, began holding
meetings several weeks ago on how to teach about the Persian Gulf, and have
repeatedly discussed the matter since then. The area, because it is near
Washington, draws a diverse population that includes many students from the
Middle East.

Given the enrollment in some classes at Annandale High School, where Jewish and
Arab students sit side by side, teachers were asked to exhibit sensitivity and
restraint in discussing each side's position in the war.

Chris Eanes, a social studies teacher at Centreville High School, in Clifton,
Va., said he maintains a distance from both sides by playing the devil's
advocate. It is an approach, he said, that not only keeps him on safe ground,
but also forces students to think about Iraq's position as well as that of the
United States and its allies.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: At Hempfield Area High School, about 30 miles south of
Pittsburgh, 150 students walked out of classes last week, protesting what they
said was a lack of attention to the war. Students yesterday watched war reports
on a newly installed television in the school cafeteria.; James E. Miller was
suspended for five days for his role as spokesman for the students who walked
out. Mr. Miller has a brother, Larry, whose photograph is at right rear, and
other relatives serving in the gulf. (Photographs by Terry Clark for The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: IRAQ;
Refugees From Baghdad Report Some Casualties Among Civilians

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 874 words

DATELINE: RUWEISHID, Jordan, Jan. 22


Refugees from the Persian Gulf war at this ramshackle town on the desert border
between Jordan and Iraq said today that the allied bombing of Baghdad had caused
some civilian casualties and had damaged civilian buildings.

The refugees -- including American peace campaigners, Indian businessmen and
Egyptian store-keepers -- offered differing assessments of the damage. But many
said civilian casualties had been concentrated in areas near military targets.

The refugees, whose mood ranged from relief at leaving Iraq to rage at the
United States and the West for bombing Baghdad. painted a dire portrait of
Baghdad as a city without light or food, whose 4.5 million people had either
fled or taken refuge in mosques and bomb shelters.

$20,000 Offered for a Pilot

The Egyptians, in particular, seemed incensed by the allied bombing. The Iraqi
authorities, said Majid Mohammed, an auto mechanic, had offered $20,000 rewards
for "anyone who delivers a pilot."

"I am in need of even one dollar, but if I see one of them, I will drink his
blood," he declared to several American and other Western reporters at Transit
Camp One, a Red Cross camp in the no man's land between Jordan and Iraq just
east of here.

Since the war began last week, the flow of fugitives has gathered pace, although
not in the same proportions as the exodus into Jordan that followed Iraq's Aug.
2 invasion of Kuwait. Today, at least 20 buses packed with people and laden with
suitcases arrived at Transit Camp One, where refugees awaiting repatriation
switch from Iraqi to Jordanian buses for the final 100-mile ride to the Azraq
refugee camp southwest of here.

As the Iraqi buses rolled in from the 500-mile run across the desert highway
from Baghdad, their occupants scrambled to the roof to unload old, bulging
suitcases lashed with rope, then reload their cargo onto Jordanian buses.

Others, with money and airline tickets to assure their passage out of the
country, arrived in Kuwait-registered American sedans carrying air-conditioners,
television sets, vacuum cleaners and children's tricycles in addition to their
passengers, families of children and veiled women.

"The rush has increased," said an Indian businessman, P. D. Mittal, 40 years
old, who had arrived from Baghdad. Most of the fugitives who arrived here today
had left the Iraqi capital Sunday or Monday, sensing that there was no point in
staying, he said.

"Food and water are no longer available," B. Singh, head of an Indian
construction company, said of Baghdad. "Many Iraqis have gone to other parts of
the country to be with relatives away from Baghdad. There is no diesel for pumps
or generators. The oil refinery is finished. Everybody is afraid. Everybody was
saying there would be no war. Nobody knows now what will happen. The people have
no morale."

Bruce Wolcott, a 41-year-old Vietnam veteran from Seattle who joined other peace
campaigners in Iraq in a vain effort to avert war, said he had seen "an
apartment building collapsed in downtown Baghdad" and other evidence of damage
to civilian property. Other peace campaigners said they had also seen the
collapsed six-story building and other damage on Saadoun Street, a Baghdad
thoroughfare.

B-52's in Vietnam Recalled

Mr. Wolcott said the sound of the most recent bombing resembled the B-52 bomber
strikes he said he had heard in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War.

He was one of four Americans in a group of 14 peace campaigners from the United
States, Italy, Australia, Britain and Indonesia who arrived in Jordan by bus
today. They said about 50 campaigners remained somewhere inside Iraq.

Mr. Mittal and Mr. Singh said they had seen a collapsed Iraqi house close to an
Iraqi Air Force installation in which survivors said six people had died. But
they said their observations indicated that allied attacks, which military
spokesmen said have been aimed only at military targets, had generally seemed
accurate.

Baghdad television had shown footage of a church in the northern city of Mosul
that had purportedly been damaged by allied air strikes, the two men said.

No Room in Bomb Shelter

Hamed Sayeed, a 31-year-old Egyptian, said: "The shelling was so bad that we
would leave our houses and go into the street. We ran to the bomb shelter, but
there was no room at the shelter, so we sat beside the door."

"All the raids were concentrated on military targets, but there were civilian
casualties," he said. "There were ambulances all day long. In the five days the
bombing was concentrated on the installations, but there are residential areas
near these installations." He referred specifically to an area of Baghdad called
Doura, and said it was close to an oil refinery.

The group of weary and emotional Egyptians met with reporters at Transit Camp
One, where rows of white and olive-green tents await a further influx of
refugees. As the conversation progressed, passions rose, too.

"They are bombing; people are dying in the street," said Mr. Mohammed, the auto
mechanic. "This is not war. It is the annihilation of a people, an entire Muslim
people. People are sleeping in the mosques. Soldiers are dead in the street with
no one to evacuate them. This is a black day."

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Fugitives from the war in Iraq described Baghdad as a city
without light, power or food whose citizens had either fled or taken refuge in
bomb shelters. A truck loaded with Egyptian refugees from Iraq was checked at a
border crossing yesterday by a Jordanian military officer. (Agence
France-Presse) (pg. A9)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: WAR POLICY - BUSH'S TIGHT CONTROL;
White House Strains to Wage War In Gulf as Congress Seeks Information

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1134 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 22


In Saudi Arabia, the military briefing officer was so careful about sensitive
information that he would not say whether it had been good flying weather today.

At the White House, Marlin Fitzwater, the President's spokesman, got as many
questions about American policy on news from the Persian Gulf as about the
progress of the war.

After six days of conducting the most intensive bombardment in history, with
inconclusive results, the Administration is confronting the political problems
created by war news as it affects political debate, journalistic analysis and,
potentially, public support or opposition.

Every wartime President has had to find the balance between the need to wage war
in an effective and secure way and the need to inform a public and Congress who
ultimately judge whether the bloodshed was justified. It is particularly hard to
conduct a war that is showing little progress, or producing high casualties.

A Future Political Problem

But for President Bush, news from the war front has become a contentious issue
at military briefings and among some in Congress even before the public has had
a chance to judge the progress of the war, or debate the efficacy of the
Pentagon's tactics and strategy. It underscores the risks of a policy that has
appeared to succeed at keeping down information so far but may yet become a
political problem.

There is no way to say now whether the information withheld by the military
would provide a different view of the war than Americans have seen through vague
briefings, controlled interviews and a half-dozen videotapes of successful
attacks by high-technology rocketry.

Those have provided snapshots of the action, but the Government has so far not
revealed a comprehensive picture of the results of a bombing campaign that has
surpassed that launched on Hanoi and Haiphong in 1972.

The Pentagon blames clouds for obscuring its view of bomb damage, but almost one
week into battle, most analysts agree that Iraq still has 450 of its 500
warplanes, an army capable of fighting and worrisome surface-to-air missiles
like the one that struck Israel this evening.

Support for Bush's Policy

President Bush so far appears to be enjoying wide support for his gulf policy.
Today, with spokesmen coming under intensified questioning, Administration
officials promised repeatedly that they would be more forthcoming. The Pentagon
said the Secretary of Defense, Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin L. Powell, chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, would hold a news conference on Wednesday to discuss
the war "as graphically as possible."

Pete Williams, Mr. Cheney's spokesman, said, "There's some feeling that we know
a lot more about battle damage then we're saying, and we're trying to convey to
you that that is not the case."

Mr. Fitzwater said today that Mr. Bush had little more information about bombing
runs and casualties than the public and was "frustrated" by it.

Some Concern in Congress

The White House has minimized discontent on Capitol Hill by providing daily
briefings on the war. Many lawmakers, including some who opposed the war, said
they were inclined to give the Administration the benefit of the doubt for now.

But some members of Congress and military analysts have started to express
concern that the tight control of information is -- deliberately or
inadvertently -- delaying the moment when Mr. Bush will have to face public
accountability for his conduct of the war.

"I don't object in the early stages, because they are trying to get their feet
on the ground," said Senator Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska, who opposed the
war. "But in the longer run, people like myself in Congress need to have
information so we can make judgments about what the policy ought to be. It's not
healthy to have so much silence."

Representative Les Aspin, the Wisconsin Democrat who heads the House Armed
Services Committee, said in an interview today with NBC News, "We haven't got
the specifics and that's causing heartburn in Congress, as well as it has in the
press corps."

Bush's Operating Style

The tight information policy may have been militarily effective so far. The risk
the White House faces, as demonstrated in recent days, is that public opinion
can swing from optimism to pessimism as the current of good news is punctuated
by more sobering information, like the sight of American prisoners in Iraq or
the Pentagon's acknowledgement that raids on Iraqi airfields have left the vast
majority of Baghdad's warplanes intact.

There are several apparent reasons for the Administration's attempt to hold down
news coverage. For one thing, it suits the operating style of Mr. Bush -- to
make a decision with a small circle of advisers, let it play out with minimal
information and then ask to be judged on the results.

The Pentagon also has long grappled with the belief among many officers that the
press "lost the war" in Vietnam.

And there are universally recognized security reasons for not revealing details
about things like troop movements and bombing targets, since that would aid the
Iraqis.

Civilian Casualty Estimates

But the Pentagon has revealed some obvious operational details, including
accounts of attacks by allied bombers on Scud missiles in Iraq that circulated
when Washington was trying to assure Israel and its domestic lobby that the
Israelis were being protected and thus keep them out of the war.

That has raised questions about whether the Administration is using its security
concerns as an umbrella to restrict information that not only would affect
operations but also could inflame the domestic political situation.

The withholding of civilian casualty estimates and bomb damage could be the
result of inadequate information, as the Pentagon has repeatedly said. Or, it
could be an effort to avoid focusing on issues that could prove divisive at home
and within the Arab alliance.

Mr. Kerrey, who won the Medal of Honor during the Vietnam War, said he was
particularly concerned about the Administration's refusal to estimate civilian
casualties, a figure that Washington also withheld during the invasion of Panama
in December 1989.

"The American people need to feel that price," he said. "They need to know that
people are dying right now and that force is being applied in a major way and
they need to accept the responsibility at the beginning."

Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, a Vietnam veteran, said:
"There is a general sense left over from Vietnam that they don't want the media
telling an independent story for fear of what the repercussions might be. No one
is talking about writing about battles yet to come or deployment of troops, but
in a democracy you need more information than has been forthcoming."

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thw wisdom of a ground assault against Iraqi forces entrenched
in Kuwait is being debated in Washington even as U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia
prepare for it. A Bradely armored vehicle of the Second Armored Cavalry led a
convoy on Monday through the Saudi desert. (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK;
Hueys and Scuds: Vietnam And Gulf Are Wars Apart

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1077 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Jan. 22


High technology is one thing the biggest thing, perhaps -- that sets this war
apart from Vietnam.

Technology in aerial combat between attack and defensive missiles, guiding
Patriots to their deadly rendezvous with Scuds. Technology for pilots, enabling
them to skim the ground, juke to avoid ack-ack and perform other jazzy
maneuvers, all at night or in the clouds. Technology that guides cruise missiles
so precisely that one fired from a battleship in the Persian Gulf clipped a
communications tower in Baghdad neatly in two, according to witnesses in the
Iraqi capital.

Technology that makes this a real-time war, with a speech by Saddam Hussein or a
briefing at the Pentagon or even a Scud vs. Patriot duel over Saudi Arabia
visible in Baghdad and Washington and London at the same time. Technology that
links reporters in Dhahran instantly with editors in New York or Los Angeles,
commanders and staff officers in Riyadh continuously with the Pentagon and the
White House.

The Upper Hand in the Dark

Pilots in Vietnam could do little more than find their way from one airstrip to
another after sunset, worrying all the while about running into a mountain. For
the most part, the enemy owned the night.

This time, if the new-fangled scopes and gadgets work as they're supposed to
work -- and that's still a large "if," though early evidence is highly
encouraging -- allied infantrymen and tank crews will have the upper hand in the
dark, as the allied pilots already do.

Comparing the endearing little UH-1 Huey helicopter, which saved so many lives
and seemed like such a piece of technical wizardry, to the fearsome Apache
attack helicopters here is like comparing a Model T to a Lamborghini.

Sunspots to Glitches

Only 25 years ago, well within the working lifetimes of many of the combatants
and some of the correspondents in the war in the Persian Gulf, reporters sent
their dispatches from Vietnam by radio telegraph, which was sometimes
interrupted by sunspots, and television cameramen had to ship combat footage to
Hong Kong or Tokyo, and then on to the United States, by plane.

A newspaper reporter who spent almost three years in Saigon talked more times to
his editors on his first day in Saudi Arabia than he did in the entire time he
was in Vietnam. Stories are written on computers now, of course, and not on
typewriters, and they are transmitted by satellite.

There are problems with all of this, of course. Greater and greater complexity
means more and more glitches and more and more repairs. Modems and lasers are a
lot more temperamental than notebooks and hand grenades.

Then there is the tendency to believe, after a time, that the machines are
somehow magical and final, when of course they are not.

A runway cratered or a bridge dropped or a transmitter damaged by a
sophisticated missile is no more and no less replaceable or reparable than a
similar target damaged by an old iron bomb.

Finally, the effect of the communications revolution is to speed things up so
much that time for decision-making is minimized and time for reflection is often
eliminated.

In With the New

But the lasers and the heat seekers, the computers and the satellites, are here
to stay, along with a new whole lexicon of slang and acronyms.

For example, Lantirn, which stands for Low Altitude Navigation and Targeting for
Infrared Night, is an advanced guidance system, carried in pods slung under the
wings of some F-16 fighters, that enables pilots to deliver bombs with great
precision. Then there is the SLAM, or Stand-off Land Attack Missile, launched
from a carrier-based attack plane.

A few Vietnam-era favorites are back -- infantrymen and Marines still call
themselves "grunts" -- but instead of "boondocks," privates and sergeants tramp
hereabouts across "beaches" (deserts) and wadis (dry river beds). Pilots talk
about "fur balls," or particularly tangled dogfights, and about "the golden BB,"
which is the antiaircraft doctrine, supposedly Soviet in origin, holding that if
enough metal of some kind is thrown up -- missiles, shells, bullets -- planes
will come down.

To some sentimental old soldiers and camp followers, one big loss is the World
War II-era United States Army helmet, a fine, deep sort of thing, as useful for
shaving and cooking as for deflecting bullets. It has been discarded for a
flatter model that looks as if Rommel ought to be wearing it. Also sorely missed
is the Jeep, replaced by something the grunts call the Humvee, which carries
more. It's less fun to drive and looks like a panel truck that something fell
on.

The M-16 rifle is back, no great favorite two decades ago, so a new generation
will discover whether it works better in the sand of Arabia than it did in the
paddies of Vietnam.

A hundred stories and a thousand pictures have testified already to the presence
of women in the ranks in unprecedented numbers, but there has been less comment
about another major change: the much larger numbers of black officers involved
here, starting at the top with Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, and spreading down through the ranks.

Col. Daniel James, an air ace in Vietnam, was one of relatively few black pilots
then. Black naval officers were even more unusual. That has all changed, a
result, like the presence of so many women so close to the front, of the social
revolution that followed and was partly caused by the Vietnam War.

Evolution of Shopping

For all the veterans of Vietnam brought here by Saddam Hussein's invasion of
Kuwait, another stunning surprise is the local stores.

Except for those with access to an American commissary or post exchange,
Americans in wartime Saigon had to do without things like milk, celery, tape
recordings, and a hundred other items. A pint of strawberries, lovingly
hand-carried from Da Lat or another town in the highlands on an Air America
flight, was a gift as exotic as frankincense or myrrh.

Shopping in Dhahran is not all that different from shopping in Larchmont, N.Y.,
or Phoenix. Radio Shack is here (though the troops have pretty well cleared out
its stock for the moment), as is Baskin-Robbins.

You can pick up a shirt or a skirt at Benetton, rent a Chevrolet from Avis, buy
a new Volvo or Fiat. Commerce has slowed since war began, but it hasn't stalled.

At the Jamir Bookstore today, three airborne troopers of the new breed were
buying reams of computer paper. Around the corner, a selection of compact-disk
players was for sale. And the Safeway in nearby Al Khobar -- yes, that Safeway,
the one with the big red "S" -- was featuring, in addition to eight brands of
mayonnaise, 12 brands of hairspray, Weber barbecue grills and 30-minute film
processing, Roquefort and Brie and Gruyere from France, Gulf of Mexico shrimp,
Holland veal, Irish lamb and Australian beef.

But no wine, of course, no beer, no gin and no whiskey, and no nuoc mam, the
pungent Vietnamese fish sauce that so many Americans grew to love in their
Southeast Asian years.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Advances in technology have set the war in the Persian Gulf, and
its coverage by reporters, apart from other wars. A foreign television crew set
up a satellite telephone in Baghdad last week to report on bombing. (Associated
Press) (pg. A6)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1106 words



WAR IN THE GULF A6-10

Iraqi forces set fire to oil refineries in southern Kuwait and to an oilfield
close to the Saudi border, American military officials said. American-led forces
stepped up their air assault and expanded their ground and sea efforts. Page A1

An Iraqi missile struck Tel Aviv, and Israeli officials said that at least 3
people died and more than 70 others were wounded. A1

Israel asks U.S. for extra $13 billion A7

Saudis importing fuel to fight war A6

War refugees said that the bombing of Baghdad had left the city without light,
power or food, and had caused some civilian casualties as well as damages to
civilian buildings. A1

Hussein's nuclear-proof, buried fortress A9

Two more captured U.S. airmen, identified as such by Iraq, were shown on Baghdad
television. Iraq sought to link its handling of American captives to Israeli
treatment of Palestinian detainees in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. A10
Pilots' relatives are captives of fear A10

Reporter's Notebook: Technology is perhaps the biggest element that sets this
war apart from Vietnam. It affects combatants, reporters and machinery, and has
made the crisis a real-time war. A1

Complacency about chemical attack grows A7

News analysis: The news from the front has thus far been kept to a minimum by
the Government, a policy that may become a political problem in the future as
demand grows for more comprehensive reports. A8

Bush style: Not too detached, but not too obsessed A8

The air or the ground: A debate over strategyA8

Congress should not raise taxes to pay for the war, according to Alan Greenspan,
the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. He said it is better to borrow the
money, at least for the time being. A1

Oil prices rise with news from Kuwait and Israel D1

INTERNATIONAL A2-5, A11-12

An aid package for the Soviet Union was blocked by the European Community to
protest the crackdown by Moscow against pro-independence groups in the Baltic
states. A1

Soviet Government takes a drastic step to rescue its economy A3

The confrontations in the Baltics did not mark any change in President
Gorbachev's policies, he said, rejecting accusations that he had abandoned his
reformist course. A12

Lithuania feels betrayed by "bad king" Gorbachev A12

Baltic officials meet with Baker A12

The Pope issue a new encyclical calling for Catholics to go out and spread
Christianity. He emphasized the need to evangelize in all parts of the world,
including those areas where Islamic laws forbid proselytizing. A2

Panama Canal is a worry to shippers A3

Mexico revises voting rolls to counter charges of fraud A5

Mexico City Journal: A father hunts for his stolen son A4

Rural China learns how to earn extra yen A11

NATIONAL A14-16

A new rate for a first-class letter, 29 cents, was approved by the Postal
Service. The new first-class stamp will bear the legend "F Flower," and feature
a red tulip on a yellow background. A14

A fiscal dilemma in Michigan is confronting lawmakers who have to choose between
eliminating a state-financed welfare program or making smaller cuts in a wide
array of social service programs. A14

Abortion protesters were addressed by President Bush at a rally before the White
House. He encouraged them to keep the issue alive in the Congress, the courts
and the minds of the American people. A16 Many nursing home residents are
tethered to their beds or wheelchairs or given tranquilizing drugs without
documentation that they are needed, two new studies have found.  A16

A ruling in a sexual harassment case broke new ground, finding that posting
pictures of nude women is a form of sexual harassment. Previous rulings in
related cases have found that that pornographic pictures encourage sexual
harassment. A14

Souter joins liberals in reversing a death sentence A16

Some say the band played on as three fans died A16

REGIONAL B1-4

Course requirements at CUNY may be made stiffer. The change would keep students
from graduating unless they demonstrate that they have met standards like those
the state sets for its best high school graduates. A1

Fernandez rebuffed in bid to veto local school heads B2

Mayor Dinkins's tax plan to pay for thousands more police officers would raise
hundreds of millions more in taxes than his police hiring would require, the
Mayor admitted.  B1

Dinkins to press for election law reform B3

Variations on the game of "chicken" are being played by a growing number of New
York City youths in the subways. Last week, a Brooklyn teen-ager was killed by a
subway train he was trying to outrun, transit officials said. B1 John Gotti's
lawyer, Bruce Cutler, could be disqualified from representing Mr. Gotti under a
prosecution motion in the latest case against the reputed organized-crime
leader.  B1

Slaying defendant shot at Bronx court B3

Health-care reform in New Jersey is being pressed by the Florio administration
to address the problem of uninsured patients. Business and labor groups and a
key legislator are resisting the effort.  B1

Weicker asks agency heads to trim costs B2

New Planned Parenthood head is Margaret Sanger's grandson B2

Neediest Cases B4

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

The Living Section

Food

Weighing the present in menus of old C1

De Gustibus C1

Living

. . . And in this corner, all kinds of "Gladiators" C1

Arts/Entertainment

Opera on the march in Boston C11

Real war and the movies C11

John Leguizamo and characters C11

Music: Little Orchestra Society C9

The Pop Life C10

Word and Image: TV tries to help children deal with war C11

Poems of Yevtushenko and Hughes C16

Networks differ on prisoner tapes C18

Education Page B6

What should be taught about the war in the gulf?

Two-year colleges flourished in the 1980's

Tribal network is nurturing minds

Sports

Basketball: St. John's beats Connecticut B11

Column: Berkow on Bills' Levy B7

Football: Giants are low-key B7

Bills speak loudly B7

A wise old coach speaks his mind B7

Super Bowl Notebook B8

Tennis: Edberg looks like No. 1 again B7

Obituaries A17

Bill Riordan, a tennis promoter

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A18

Soviet repression, and courage

Back up the bombing boasts

John P. MacKenzie: Buffalo

Letters A18

Tom Wicker: The war on the tube A19

Leslie H. Gelb: Postwar Mideast dreams A19

Roman Szporluk: The Soviet Union has ceased to exist A19

R. Michael Schiffer, Michael F. Rinzler: No news is no news A19

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: FAMILIES;
Pilots' Relatives Are Captives of Fear

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1477 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Jan. 22


For the families of American combat fliers, it was one of the tensest days they
have endured since the military buildup in the Persian Gulf and the onset of
war.

Over the past weeks and months they had been forced to come to grips with the
possibility that their loved ones could be wounded or killed. And support groups
sprang up around the country to help them deal with those anxieties.

But on Monday the families were confronted with something that had not been
talked about much: the possibility that their loved ones could become prisoners
of war. As they watched videotapes of Americans captured in Iraq, they also came
face to face with the fear of seeing their loved ones threatened and broken, no
longer masters of their fates.

But among other Americans the videotapes fostered an anger at Iraq's President,
Saddam Hussein, and an understanding of the prisoners' plight.

'Nobody Tipped Us Off'

Barbara Wilkins of Shrewsbury, Mo., whose son, Lieut. William T. Costen of the
Navy, has been listed as missing in action since Friday, said military officials
had briefed her and other family members about what to expect from the news
media. But, she said, the officials had given little guidance on the possible
use of prisoners of war in propaganda tapes.

Lieutenant Costen's father, Dr. William S. Costen, agreed. "We didn't discuss
the psychological war," he said, "and nobody tipped us off to that."

Rebecca Anderson, whose husband served in Vietnam and whose son is an Air Force
pilot in the gulf, said: "It's probably true that most of us as military
families don't think about capture. But you steel yourself, build walls, put up
barriers because you know that you will have to face something unpleasant
eventually."

In Cherry Hill, N.J., reporters gathered outside the home of the parents of
Lieut. Jeffrey N. Zaun, a captured Navy flier who was shown on an Iraqi
videotape on Monday. But Comdr. Dennis J. Hessler, director of the Navy Office
of Information East, said the Navy had asked the Zauns not to grant interviews
because "anything is potentially detrimental or could impact on the safety" of
their son.

Relatives of other captured Americans said they were relieved to see their loved
ones alive even as they were displayed for Iraqi propaganda purposes.

Billy Hunter, a brother of Chief Warrant Officer Guy L. Hunter of the Marine
Corps, who was shown on an Iraqi broadcast, said, "It's extremely important that
we keep the names of all the American POW's in front of the American people,"

Wives 'Really Down'

Lyn Cain, the linchpin of a support group for the wives of pilots with the 157th
Tactical Fighter Squadron of the South Carolina Air National Guard, said her
telephone was ringing constantly yesterday as wives of other pilots called to
talk about a vague feeling of unease.

"They would say that they were really down," said Mrs. Cain, who lives in
Columbia, S.C., "and that they just didn't know why.

"Well, I know why. It was because of those captured pilots we were all seeing on
television."

Mrs. Cain said that before her husband, Lieut. Col. Scott Cain, a career Air
Force officer assigned to the Air National Guard unit at McEntire Air Base, left
for duty in the gulf they had talked about the possibility of his capture. They
did not discuss any coded communications he might try if he was then paraded
before cameras. But, she said, he did tell her what he would do, though she
declined to be specific.

Statements of Support

In general, people who were interviewed, whether military personnel or
civilians, did not harshly judge the downed fliers who were shown on Iraqi
broadcasts making statements critical of American policy in the gulf.

"I think the pilots most likely have been tortured and drugged," said Vincent
Cook, a 32-year-old accountant in Houston. "I feel disgusted that Saddam Hussein
is using them this way, but it is predictable based on his past offenses."

A few people criticized the American media for showing the videotapes, but most
agreed with Rick Sarkisian, owner of a record store in Oceanside, Calif., that
the tapes stiffened the country's resolve. "It just shows that Saddam Hussein is
not a civilized person and Iraq is not a civilized country," Mr. Sarkisian said.

Bob Marshall, a systems engineer in Houston, was one of several people who said
they believed that President Hussein was using the videotapes as propaganda for
Iraqi consumption, not American. "He's trying to pump up his own people," Mr.
Marshall said. "He's worried that he'll lose control."

In Dallas, Janie Douglass, whose husband, Lieut. Col. Robert Douglass, is
stationed in the gulf, said she did not believe for a minute that the captured
pilots meant what they had said in the videotapes.

"We know they don't mean it," Mrs. Douglass said, "and if it is the alternative
to physical torture, it's fine for them to do that. I feel no bitterness toward
them and am, in fact, glad to see that they are alive."

Dr. Costen said he was ambivalent about the possibility of seeing his son on a
videotape like the ones Iraq has already shown, but he acknowledged, "It would
be nice to see him standing up and alive."

The St. Louis physician said he thought his son would adapt to being a prisoner
of war. "When you're under duress, you do what you have to to survive," Dr.
Costen said.

As for the video, he said: "I saw it played last night. I stared at it, and none
of them were Tom. That's all you think."

Change in Military Code

The American military code of conduct once strictly required that captured
personnel give nothing more than their name, rank and serial number, but in the
years since the Vietnam War it has been softened a bit. The code now simply
requires captured soldiers to resist cooperating with the enemy "to the best of
their ability."

How to cope with captivity is among the techniques in which all military
personnel are trained, said Maj. Scott Fairchild, chief of psychology at Womack
Army Community Hospital at Fort Bragg, N.C.

Mrs. Douglass, whose husband is a navigator on a C-130 transport with the 136th
Tactical Airlift Wing of the Texas Air National Guard, said he had talked about
his training, which included counseling from psychologists on the possibility of
capture.

"He said that they told them to be prepared for the worst if they go down and
said that they would not be in very friendly hands," Mrs. Douglass said. "My
husband is a pretty upbeat man, and even he got a little downbeat when he talked
about this."

Mrs. Anderson said her son, Capt. Jeffery Anderson, who is flying C-130's in the
gulf, told his family about having had rigorous survival training while a
student at the United States Air Force Academy.

"They simulated brainwashing techniques," said Mrs. Anderson, who lives in
Warner Robins, Ga. "And it was pretty real because it went on for about a week
and he lost 15 pounds. He said it was not a fun experience."

Much of the counseling for the families of soldiers has come from the quickly
improvised support groups. But Major Fairchild, of the Fort Bragg hospital, said
some of the groups were beginning to fray under the intense pressure. As a
result, he said, Fort Bragg had begun to establish teams of professionals to
"support and take care of the caregivers."

He said: "Even before the prisoner of war videotapes, we found that through the
long months of the deployment, the stress of the holidays and the onset of war
many of the support groups just ran out of steam. We had a call from one of the
women who asked if we could come over and surgically remove the telephone from
her ear. The coping mechanisms are bound to wear thin."

'A Real Sinking Feeling'

Colleen Jackson, whose husband, Lieut. Comdr. Kevin Jackson, flies Hawkeye Navy
electronic planes, said the combination of fatigue and seeing the captured
pilots on television made today the worst day of the war for her.

"I had a real sinking feeling, like a terrible realization that the war most
definitely had hit home," Mrs. Jackson said from her residence in Norfolk, Va.,
a city that is home to scores of Navy and Air Force pilots now serving in the
gulf.

But Phyllis Pope, wife of Lieut. Col. Howard Pope, who commands an Air Force
F-15 fighter squadron in the gulf, said she and other wives in the Norfolk area
were determined to get back to "a more stable routine." To that end, she said,
she did not watch television today and tried to return to her normal activities.

"For the first few days, all of us wives were glued to the television, holding
on to each other for mutual support," Mrs. Pope said, refusing to comment on the
videotapes of the captured pilots. "But life goes on.

"We're going to see this through in good shape and keep things going back here
on the homefront. We're fine."

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: While many families have tried to prepare themselves for war
casualties and deaths, many had not thought about loved ones being captured by
theenemy. A Vietnam Veterans of America chapter in Virginia Beach held a
ceremony yesterday to raise the missing in action/prisoner of war flag. (Bill
Tiernan/The Virginian-Pilot); "I had a real sinking feeling, like a terrible
realization that the war most definitely had hit home," said Colleen Jackson,
wife of Lieut. Comdr. Kevin Jackson, who is in the Persian Gulf. (George Tames
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Weighing The Present In Menus of Old

BYLINE: By MOLLY O'NEILL

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 2353 words


MENUS of restaurants past can cause a certain kind of vertigo. They're artifacts
of people who could afford to dine out, elegant footprints in the march toward
modernity. Old menus lead the culinary cartographer through Edens of plenty and
down cul-de-sacs of extinct provisions, up Everests of exuberant cooking and
across deserts of culinary humdrum. After a while, there is a certain
circularity in the path from a 1776 Tavern Bill of Fare to Le Menu du Bistro
today.

A sampling of 25,000 historical menus at the New York Public Library and the
15,000 menus at the New-York Historical Society show a progression of available
ingredients, the incorporation of immigrant cooking and the flashes of
individual genius that have shaped the tastes of New York -- and often America.
But these influences bow to the psycho-social pendulum that sweeps back and
forth across the bills of fare.

"The cycle goes simple to fancy and back again," said Reynaldo Alejandro, author
of "Classic Menu Design," ( PBC International , 1988). The shift is as rhythmic
as the tide. When there is peace and public confidence and the money rushes in,
it usually carries a gilded age of cuisine. When prosperity ebbs, it leaves a
hankering for the simple good old days in its wake.

Consider the duck. In the earliest New York City menus, it was roasted,
canvas-back duck, a no-nonsense preparation that endured from Colonial times
until the robber barons invaded the city and "aiguillette de canards," sculpted
slivers of sauteed duck, reigned. Then along came Long Island Duckling, often a
l'orange, always crisp-baked and served without question -- until duck breast,
sauteed rare and sliced in a fan, appeared in the 1980's.

Since the recent days of duck breasts and berries, there has been a moment of
duck carpaccio, a whisper of duck sausage, but neither fussy dish could
forestall the inevitable. On the current menu of the Four Seasons in New York
City, duck is roasted again, with apples. Le Cirque is serving stewed duck
again.

"When people are comfortable, they experiment and indulge," Sirio Maccioni,
owner of Le Cirque said. "When people have something on their mind, like now,
they order more conservatively."

Colonial New Yorkers had a lot on their minds and their tavern menus showed it.
The native canvas-back ducks, shad, herring and game were usually subject to a
stolid Dutch or British hand. Dutch pea porridge, plain oyster stew and turtle
soup appeared; venison or beef were roasted until they slid from the bone.

"Don't fall for the romance of early New York life," said Michael Batterberry,
who, along with Ariane Batterberry, wrote "On the Town in New York" (Charles
Scribner's Sons, 1973). "Those were rough times. People wanted comfort, not
challenge."

The culinary status quo wasn't really shaken until the mid-1800's. Until then,
menus from hotels and short-order houses showed a slight shift in ingredients.
Grouse, venison and bear are pushed aside by pork, capon and beef, but the
cooking techniques remained the same.

Dr. Nan Rothschild, an urban archeologist at Barnard College, and author of "New
York Neighborhoods" (Academic Press, 1990), said archeological evidence she has
found in local digs show that the change in the pantry was a barometer of the
city's evolution.

"As the village became a city there was less backyard farming, hunting and
fishing and a rise of professional food purveyors," she said. By the mid-1800's,
professionalism had spread to food preparation. And the pendulum started to
swing.

Delmonico's beamed a haute valence, and pulled tout New York (at least tout male
New York; nice ladies still only dined in hotel dining rooms) to Williams
Street, the first of the restaurant's four locations. The earliest Delmonico's
menu at the New-York Historical Society, a sample from 1838, is 11 pages long.
There are 12 soups, including "potage tortue verte l'Anglaise," thank you.

"Delmonico's is credited with introducing haute cusine to America," said Mr.
Batterberry. "They certainly introduced socio-gustatorial snobbery." By the
1890's, when money was easy, fussy saute dishes had eclipsed roasts and stews on
the menu at Delmonico's. Pricey food art reached its apogee in "Pieces
Monteses," ornate confections.

The restaurant pendulum hovered on the high side for nearly 50 years. There were
occasional quivers toward the plain and simple. The Civil War brought a spate of
conservatism and nostalgia, said Jean Ashton, director of the library at the
New-York Historical Society.

"Dutch kitchens were the thing," she said. The reincarnations of the ovens,
hearths and half-doors of New Amsterdam were "a way of hearkening back to
simpler times."

"In less prosperous times, immigrant populations remain in enclaves," Mrs.
Ashton said. "During the show-off years, we see ethnic dishes being assimilated
on mainstream menus."

But mostly, the New York of Diamond Jim Brady was the epicenter of conspicuous
consumption; it also opened its arms to ethnic exotica.

German cooking moved from beer gardens and sauerbraten; schnitzel popped up on
hotel menus. Cantonese cooking made the leap from Chinatown to banquette menus
at the Waldorf. A magnanimous nod from the elite also seems to clear a path
toward foreign fare in less prosperous times. After World War I and Prohibition,
"haute cuisine lay in tatters," Charles Ranhofer, then the Delmonico chef, told
a journalist in the early 1930's. Speakeasies like the 21 Club and Sardi's
appeared, but Robert Kriendler, a founder of 21, described the style they set as
"luxury dining, not gourmet dining."

After the boom years, fancy restaurants served old-fashioned French and American
food. Meanwhile, tiny hole-in-the-wall restaurants -- Hungarian, Ukranian,
Italian and French dives -- became the darlings. By 1939, an appetite for fancy
food returned, a wide range of ethnic restaurants had become mainstream, and the
French Pavilion at the World's Fair brought 80 cooks and chefs to the city.

Many of the pavilion's chefs returned two years later to work at Le Pavillon.
The restaurant set a style that still echoes in dishes like pike quenelles with
lobster sauce, and it embraced ethnic dishes like Russian "coulibiac of salmon"
and Greek moussaka. Good times in dining were rolling again.

They rolled into the 60's. Local menus didn't vary from Le Pavillon-esque haute.
But the restaurant's showy service took off like an out-of-control silver-domed
roast trolley through fancy New York restaurants. There was carving and flaming
at every table. Tableside Caesar salads were rampant.

In the ebullient post-war city, Shanghai, Hunan and Peking restaurants opened.
The dining pendulum took a swing to the right in the early winds of the Vietnam
War in an "epidemic of these reactionary British pubs," Mr. Batterberry said.

In historical perspective, the ensuing dining doldrums of the 60's and 70's may
end up being a waver of the pendulum and not a sweep. By the mid-70's,
restaurants like the Quilted Giraffe and Huberts ushered in the gilded age of
nouvelle cooking that flaunted decorative Japanese presentation and
Indo-Chinese, African and Caribbean ingredients.

For all its innovative dishes, like the omnipresent duck breast with
raspberries, nouvelle cooking looped back in time. A 1982 menu from An American
Place describes a salad of "wild greens, cress, herbs and flowers." In
17th-century New Amsterdam, writes Peter Rose in "Sensible Cook" (Syracuse
University Press, 1989), "Salads fragrant with fresh herbs and sprinkled
enticingly with blue borage and orange calendula flowers" were often served at
the beginning of the meal.

The dining pendulum began to tremble even before Wall Street did in 1987. By the
mid-80's, stars of the New York restaurant scene became obsessed with Americana.
There were no Dutch kitchens, but there were Johnnycakes at An American Place,
and baked alaska was flamed at the Rainbow Room again.

The cheap "darling little holes in the wall" have returned in the form of the
ubiquitous bistro and moderne trattoria. Boom-year restaurants like Huberts and
Jams closed. Other restaurants are chasing the pendulum, again.

Most of the menus of the top dining rooms in New York City today could be
photocopies of each other. Innovators are playing it safe and predictable, at
least for the duration. Caesar salads are being tossed tableside all over town.
At Nicola Paone, the salad show is sometimes even accompanied by a little live
opera. There are shanks and mashed potatoes everywhere. People who know menus
are not surprised.

"Like an old club member at the bar, New York restaurants keep repeating
themselves," said Mr. Batterberry, who is currently updating "On the Town in New
York." He is philosophical about dining days to come.

"Any country that goes from Carter to Reagan to Bush is going to have some manic
mood swings in the kitchen," he said. If current menu trends proceed in a proper
historical pattern, he expects to achieve a longtime goal.

"I have every reason to believe that I will eventually, possibly in the very
near future, taste canvas-back duck," he said.

New Amsterdam Pea Soup (Adapted from the Netherlands Club)

Total time: 3 hours

 1 pound split peas, washed
 3 quarts water
 2 large ham hocks
 1/4 pound smoked bacon, diced
 3 leeks, washed and chopped
 1 large onion, coarsely chopped
 1 medium-size carrot, peeled and cut into large chunks
 1 medium-size celery root, peeled and cut in half
 2 cloves
 1 bay leaf
 6 peppercorns
 1/8 teaspoon ground mace
 1 rib celery with leaves, diced
 1 pound kielbasa or other smoked cooked sausage, cut into 1/4-inch rounds
 Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
 1/2 cup chopped parsley.

1. In large heavy pot over medium heat, combine the peas, water, ham hocks,
bacon, leeks, onion and carrot. Cut one half of celery root into large chunks
and add along with cloves, bay leaf, peppercorns and mace. Bring to boil and
simmer, partly covered, until peas are very soft, about 2 hours, stirring
occasionally.

2. Remove and discard ham hocks. Mince remaining celery root and add along with
diced celery to the pot. Continue to simmer until vegetables are soft, about 30
minutes, stirring occasionally.

3. Add sliced sausage and cook about 5 minutes. Season with salt and pepper and
garnish with parsley.

Yield: 8 servings.

Beef a la Mode (Adapted from "The Colony: Portrait of a Restaurant and Its
Famous Recipes," Greenberg, 1945)

Total time: 20 minutes, plus 4 hours for marinating and 2 hours and 45 minutes
for braising.

 1 pound sliced bacon
 1 1/2 cups brandy
 1 top beef round, about 5 pounds
 1 teaspoon salt
 1/2 teaspoon ground pepper
 1/2 teaspoon nutmeg
 2 tablespoons minced parsley
 1 bottle dry red wine
 3 tablespoons butter
 12 pearl onions, peeled
 3 medium-size carrots, peeled and carved into olive-shaped pieces
 12 small boiled potatoes.

1. In ceramic bowl, soak bacon slices in 1/2 cup of brandy for 30 minutes. Place
roast in large, heavy oven-proof pot and rub with the salt, pepper and nutmeg.
Cover roast with brandied bacon and tie with butcher's twine to secure. Add red
wine and remaining brandy to pot. Place a plate over meat and weight it lightly
to keep roast completely submerged. Refrigerate for four hours.

2. Preheat oven to 220 degrees.

3. Remove roast from refrigerator and place in oven. Braise, covered, for 2
hours. In a skillet over medium heat, melt butter. Add onions and saute until
lightly brown. Add carrots and saute for 5 more minutes. Using a slotted spoon,
add carrots and onions to roast and continue braising for 40 more minutes, until
meat registers 140 degrees on a meat thermometer. Serve on a platter, surrounded
by vegetables, with potatoes on side.

Yield: 6 servings.

Caesar Salad (Adapted from Nicola Paone)

Total time: 10 minutes

 1/4 teaspoon salt
 1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
 2 tablespoons white-wine vinegar
 2 tablespoons lemon juice
 1 clove garlic, peeled and smashed
 1/2 teaspoon mustard
 1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
 2 anchovies, minced
 1 egg yolk
 1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil
 1 head romaine lettuce, washed, dried and cut into 1/2-inch slices
 1/2 cup crisply fried bacon pieces
 1/2 cup homemade croutons
 1/2 cup grated Parmesan.

1. In large bowl, combine salt, pepper, vinegar, lemon juice, garlic, mustard,
Worcestershire sauce, anchovies and egg yolk and whisk until frothy. Continue
whisking and drizzle in olive oil.

2. Add lettuce, bacon, croutons and cheese, toss quickly and serve.

Yield: 4 servings.

Creme Brulee (Adapted from Le Cirque)

Total time: 15 minutes, plus 1 hour and 25 minutes cooking time and 3 hours
resting

 4 cups heavy cream
 1 vanilla bean
 1/4 teaspoon salt
 8 egg yolks
 3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons granulated sugar
 1 cup light brown sugar, approximately.

1. In a saucepan over low heat, combine cream, vanilla bean and salt and simmer
for 5 minutes. Remove vanilla bean.

2. In large bowl, combine egg yolks and granulated sugar. Pour in hot cream and
stir mixture gently to combine. Strain custard into a pitcher and skim off any
bubbles.

3. Preheat oven to 300 degrees.

4. Place 8 three-quarter-cup ramekins or ceramic custard cups in roasting pan.
Pour custard into ramekins, filling to the rim. Place roasting pan in oven and
carefully pour warm water into pan until it reaches halfway up sides of
ramekins. Cover pan loosely with foil and bake 1 hour and 15 minutes. Remove
ramekins from water bath and cool. Cover each and refrigerate for at least 3
hours, or as long as 2 days.

5. When ready to serve, preheat broiler. Uncover ramekins and place them on
baking sheet. Top each with a thin layer of brown sugar. Use knife to spread
sugar evenly across the custards. Broil custards about 2 inches from flame for
30 seconds to 2 minutes until sugar is caramelized, watching constantly to make
sure it does not burn. Serve immediately.

Yield: 8 servings.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings (pg. C1 & C6)

Photo: At Nicola Paone, Franco Alfonso, manager, and Nicola Paone, owner, create
a Caesar salad, a returning favorite on menus. (Michelle V. Agins/The New York
Times) (pg. C6)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Book Notes

BYLINE: By Edwin McDowell

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 739 words



Mailer's New Novel

Norman Mailer's new novel will not be out until late summer, but the manuscript
-- all 2,700 pages of it -- was delivered last month. The Random House catalogue
for books to be published through August puts the number of printed pages at
1,408, which would make it one of the longest novels on record, about three
times the size of an average novel. The catalogue lists the retail price at $30;
if that price holds, on the basis of the number of pages the book will be a
great bargain.

The novel, "Harlot's Ghost," is about the Central Intelligence Agency. It takes
place from 1935 to the present, with the main action from about 1950 to the
assassination of President John F. Kennedy. Nevertheless, Harold Evans, the
president and publisher of Random House, said yesterday that "Harlot's Ghost"
was a comic novel. "The absurdities are satires of the espionage business," Mr.
Evans said. "It's a social comedy and one of the few books that made me laugh
out loud."

Scott Meredith, Mr. Mailer's literary agent, said that Mr. Mailer had wanted to
write a C.I.A. novel for 30 years "and has been working on it for the best part
of the last six years."

Excerpts of "Harlot's Ghost" are to run in three issues of Rolling Stone before
publication. Mr. Meredith said the novel had already been sold in about 20
foreign countries, including Britain, France, Germany, Israel, Japan, Portugal
and Spain. Asked if he was worried the novel was too long, Mr. Evans said, "I
would have been if it was written by anybody else." Then he added with a smile,
"I took the manuscript to Florida to read, and had to declare excess baggage."

On the Middle East

The sudden public interest in reading about the Middle East has resulted in best
sellers for three recently published books on the region. They will appear on
the best-seller lists in The New York Times Book Review of Feb. 3, reflecting
sales through the week that ended Saturday.

The books are "The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money and Power" (Simon &
Schuster) by Daniel Yergin, which will be No. 2 on the hard-cover nonfiction
list; "Saddam Hussein and the Crisis in the Gulf" (Times Books) by Judith Miller
and Laurie Mylroie, which will be the No. 3 paperback nonfiction book, and "The
Rape of Kuwait" ( Knightsbridge Publishing ) by Jean Sasson, the No. 5 paperback
nonfiction title.

More such books are on the way, including a biography of Saddam Hussein by
Efraim Karsh, a professor of war studies at the University of London, to be
published in April by Free Press/Macmillan, and "The Death Lobby" by Kenneth R.
Timmerman, an account of how Iraq acquired its weapons of war, to be published
in the fall by Houghton Mifflin .

At least one current novel also touches on events in the Middle East: "Something
to Die For" by James Webb, which is just off the presses from William Morrow &
Company.

The novel, about a Navy battle group and a contingent of United States marines
sent to deter aggression when a war breaks out in a Middle East desert, should
be of more than passing interest because its author is a former Assistant
Secretary of Defense. He is also the author of several other novels, including
"Fields of Fire," a highly praised book about the Vietnam War. Mr. Webb was a
combat marine in that war, earning eight decorations, including two Purple
Hearts, the Bronze Star, the Silver Star and the Navy Cross. His military
decorations appear on the jacket of "Something to Die For."

Behind 'The Prize'

Of the three best sellers about the Middle East, the lone hard cover is Daniel
Yergin's "The Prize," 781 pages with about 70 pages of notes.  After a first
printing of 55,000 last month, it has gone through four more printings, bringing
the total to 97,500 in print.

Like so many books requiring extensive research, "The Prize" arrived at the
publishing house several years late and its epilogue arrived on July 28, with a
warning to readers to keep an eye on President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.

Less than a week later, Hussein's troops invaded Kuwait, and Simon & Schuster
quickly decided on a crash publishing program.

At the height of the 1970's energy crisis, Mr. Yergin published his book "Energy
Future," which became a best seller. Recently the author was asked about his
uncanny timing, Mr. Hills, the editor of "The Prize," said. The author's reply?
"Easy. I just keep missing deadlines."

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
Why Movies Are Only Movies And a Real War Is War

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1170 words


For years we have thrilled to the movie exploits of the one-man army, the bold
and celebrated fighter pilot, the anti-terrorist vigilantes who accomplish
miracles while armed to the teeth. Now the consequences of all that false
bravado have come home to roost.

Among the past week's many painful lessons is that real war bears scant
resemblance to what we've seen in movies, especially movies of the last 10
years. If war films a generation ago emphasized patriotism, group effort and the
value of individual sacrifices made for a larger cause, then those of the recent
past have told a different story, a story attuned to the egotism and
self-aggrandizement of the 80's. Not for nothing does "Rambo" figure in Iraqi
pronouncements concerning our unreasonable notions of what combat is about.

One of the first things to become apparent over the past few days is that real
war, unlike movie war, is no source of vicarious excitement. The apprehension
and dread provoked by these real events have nothing to do with the suspense in
which war films usually trade. What's more, a film that brings viewers to the
edges of their seats generally brings those viewers back again, providing some
kind of catharsis to dispel the anxiety of battle. The real thing offers no such
relief.

Even the antiwar films of the post-Vietnam era, from "Apocalypse Now" to
"Platoon" to "Casualties of War" to "Born on the Fourth of July," provide the
kind of closure that is seldom available in real life. The characters in these
films, however much they view battle as a frightening and disorienting miasma,
however radically they find their thinking reordered by combat experience, still
develop ways of coming to terms with this upheaval. Movie endings, in cases like
these, hold forth at least the possibility of acceptance and release. Real life
makes no such promises.

If the experience of war as seen on the big screen is somehow finite, the same
can be said for the movie enemy's imagination. The person or power being fought
in a film may embody evil, but it is usually an evil that the audience can
understand. However determined the war film's villain may be to thwart its
heroes' rightful interests, that villain is usually a like-minded individual in
some perverse way. Even when the enemy is reduced to stereotype or sheer
inscrutability, those too are somehow extensions of our own attitudes. The enemy
whose aims and strategies are truly impenetrable rarely finds his way to the
screen.


The movie enemy's game plan, even when ostensibly mysterious, is often well
within our reach. The camera's selective eye and the editing process see to
that. When a piece of luggage at an airport is somehow suspect, the film's
having called attention to it helps clarify the situation. There is no such
assistance in a world where any parked car or abandoned parcel has suddenly
become an object of concern.

People in the movies talk tough when it comes to war; people who have been seen
and heard in recent reportage have spoken a different language. "It's
frightening and depressing," someone from Wichita told a television reporter
last week, using words that would be verboten in any dramatist's version of
these events. The euphemisms of the moment, like the "voluntary departure" of
American civilians from Saudi Arabia, have a seriousness that makes them that
much more chilling than bombastic movie talk would be.

So too do some of the most casually bizarre images of the past few days, from
the gas-masked reporters and interviewees in Tel Aviv to the sight of an
American servicewoman wearing combat fatigues and cradling her newborn baby. If
these sights beggar the war film's ability to invent frightening and disturbing
images, so does the fact that this war's first combat casualty, Navy Lieut.
Comdr. Michael S. Speicher, could be seen sending a cheerful videotaped greeting
to his wife and children the day after he was listed as missing in action after
his plane was destroyed by an Iraqi missile.


What place is there, within the context of such authentic and wrenching sights,
for the swaggering self-interest seen in a "Rambo" or a "Top Gun?" The latter,
after all, is so insistently upbeat that its videocassette version begins with
an ad in which cute, wisecracking fighter pilots banter about one another's
"refreshment systems" and swig Diet Pepsi. The film itself isn't much more
substantial, with its hotshot fliers taking their risks to the accompaniment of
jaunty rock music (the soundtrack number about a "danger zone" is as close as
anyone comes to believable peril) and endless jousting among young pilots as to
who will be "the best of the best."

Aside from the foolishness of its suggestion that one can become "the best"
simply by boasting about it, "Top Gun" now looks all the more objectionable for
having broached such a concept of individual supremacy at all. This film's
hollow showboating, and the way in which its military setting becomes nothing
more than a backdrop for displaying a hero's star quality, set a standard as
profoundly unhelpful as it is dishonest. Yet the attitudes exemplified here have
been widespread on the screen. In "Firebirds," starring Nicolas Cage as a
helicopter pilot, Mr. Cage's lone daredevil is seen grandly taking center stage
in what looks like a meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and delivering a
lot of backtalk, too.

The propagandistic combat films of World War II, like Howard Hawks's 1943 "Air
Force," were in their own way just as contrived. ("I'll be back in a couple of
weeks and we'll take time off for that honeymoon," says an airman, whose
"routine flight" turns out to be a Dec. 7, 1941, trip to Pearl Harbor.) Yet
their espousal of team effort and courageous sacrifice was a source of
inspiration to many who watched them, and that inspiration had demonstrable
value. Far better to believe in the power of brotherliness, dedication and
forbearance than in the ability of sheer vanity and arrogance to conquer all.


It should be said that the "Top Gun" school of posturing does offer undeniable
uplift, and that if its dauntless bravado becomes a source of strength to anyone
facing the realities of war, then so much the better. A smiling soldier who in a
television interview this week described his unit as "in a hurry to get in
harm's way" had obviously seen a latter-day movie or two. So had the unit that
had nicknamed itself "Scudbusters," or the Marine battalion setting up
operations in what one called "Hard as Hell Hotel." For that matter, on the
evidence of video-screen images depicting high-tech missile hits, it won't hurt
pilots to have played more than their share of Nintendo.

But this much is certain: When movies finally have their chance to chronicle
this new war, neither the reflexive patriotism of World War II films nor the
moral ambiguity of Vietnam dramas nor the extraordinarily empty boosterism of
the past few years will be adequate. A different story will have to be told.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Anthony Edwards, left, and Tom Cruise in "Top Gun," a war movie
that emphasizes self-interest. (Paramount Pictures)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Back Up the Bombing Boasts

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 594 words


Government accounts of how the war is going are beginning to encounter
skepticism, and rightly so. Two of the most important claims about the war have
proved wrong. Military officials have backed down from an earlier claim that
they had achieved air superiority over much of Iraq. Now, they say, they have
local superiority wherever they need it, but most of Iraq's air force may be
intact.

So, too, early claims that Iraq's Scud missile launching capability was largely
destroyed were replaced by the admission that the missiles were "nowhere near"
elimination. That point was tragically reinforced yesterday when a Scud missile
struck a residential area in Tel Aviv, resulting in several deaths and providing
television viewers with their first sight of blood drawn in this war.

The Pentagon has nurtured disbelief by its relentless boasting about the
historic dimensions of the air war without yet documenting its effectiveness.
The allied air attack has been portrayed as the most intense in world history.
Officials keep reporting the thousands of missions flown, the huge tonnage of
bombs dropped and an amazing 80 percent success rate at releasing weapons onto
targets.

Official films have shown the precision of "smart" weapons. And television has
played and replayed dramatic pictures of jets streaking into the sky and Patriot
missiles exploding as they intercept incoming Scuds, turning war into a
boosterish highlights show. All that leaves the impression that the Iraqi
military machine is being pounded into helpless rubble.

But almost nothing has been said about how effective the air attacks have been
or what damage the bombs have caused. There is thus no way to judge the
truthfulness of even the most basic claims about the war. The Pentagon risks
erosion of public support if the situation is not corrected.

Military officials say weather conditions prevent them from assessing bomb
damage. And they are understandably wary of letting vital information slip to
Saddam Hussein via television. But there are ways to separate what is sensitive
from what is suitable for public broadcast. The Pentagon seems to have chosen
not to do so.

Outside the frames that the Pentagon has selected, hundreds of thousands of
pounds of bombs are falling all over Iraq and Kuwait. On whom and on what are
they falling? What are the consequences of that action? These questions beg to
be answered, and in detail.

Meanwhile, in the field in Saudi Arabia, the problem has not been unsupported
claims but censorship that's unusually severe even for wartime. Local commanders
have been arbitrary to the point of capriciousness. Timely publication of
stories has been made nearly impossible. Reporters are forced to withhold
information on the grounds that it might aid the Iraqis only to see it released
later by the military.

This secrecy is driven by recollections of Vietnam. Many in the military still
believe that unfavorable news coverage made the war unpopular at home and
ultimately lost it. This misrepresents history. Americans lost faith in that war
because they gradually realized that the Government had misled them.

The Pentagon, under its current policy, risks a similar collapse in American
sentiment -- and at a very early stage of the war. Skepticism and disbelief
thrive in the absence of information. In the words of a soldier talking about
the curtailed news broadcasts in Saudi Arabia, where he is stationed: "It is the
lack of news that gets people anxious . . . You start to wonder what they are
keeping from us."



LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: THE WHITE HOUSE;
Bush at War: Seeking to Be Not Too Detached, Yet Not Gripped by Detail

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1245 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 22


Unlike Lyndon Johnson during the Vietnam War, George Bush does not sit in the
White House choosing enemy targets. Indeed, President Bush does not even know
the specific targets American forces are bombing in the Persian Gulf war, his
aides said, and he has not talked to the commander of the allied forces, Gen. H.
Norman Schwarzkopf, since the war began.

"It's not like there are five targets," explained the White House spokesman,
Marlin Fitzwater. "There are hundreds of targets."

It is an ironic fact of the electronic war that President Bush sometimes gets
information on the battle faster from watching the small television in the study
off the Oval Office than he does by reading the latest military intelligence
data.

"He's been glued to his television whenever possible, just like the rest of us,"
Mr. Fitzwater said.

In their eagerness to avoid any impression that Mr. Bush is micro-managing the
war, Bush advisers sometimes portray the President as a bit remote, suggesting
that he knows little more than the average citizen.

Most Important Mission

But that is a false impression. Mr. Bush has sought from the beginning of his
Administration to strike a middle note between Jimmy Carter's obsession with
details and Ronald Reagan's amiable detachment.

But as he said at the Republican convention in 1988, he is a man who sees his
life in terms of missions. He knows this is the most important mission of his
life, that his Presidency depends on the outcome of the war against Saddam
Hussein, and he is consumed with successfully completing this mission.

He devours raw intelligence data, as he always does in a crisis, and he never
seems happier than when he settles down for a briefing on the air war in the
gulf in "the tank," the Pentagon room where the Joint Chiefs of Staff gather.

But, in a practice developed over many years of holding top appointive jobs in
fields that he knew little about at the beginning, Mr. Bush has always operated
very much as a generalist who depends on the advice of specialists. "He
delegates like hell and then he makes the final decision," a Bush intimate said.

In choosing his advisers, Mr. Bush rates good judgment and personal ties more
highly than he does academic expertise. He invited some outside specialists in
the Middle East over to the White House before he made the decision to attack
Iraq, but some said afterward that the President did not seem to be paying
attention.

Although Mr. Bush still seems baffled by the inscrutable and seemingly suicidal
behavior of Saddam Hussein, Mr. Bush does not really have a Middle East expert
on whom he relies. He prefers to talk to his own top advisers or directly to
Arab leaders.

Mr. Fitzwater said the President had few strategic decisions to make, other than
deciding to dispatch emissaries like the Deputy Secretary of State, Lawrence S.
Eagleburger, to Israel and a former Pentagon official, Richard L. Armitage, to
Jordan.

A person who spoke recently with Mr. Armitage said the intent of the mission was
to move Jordan back toward a semblance of neutrality and to persuade King
Hussein to stop harboring terrorist groups taking aim at Israel.

At today's State Department briefing, Margaret Tutwiler, the department's
spokeswoman, was asked whether Mr. Armitage would also visit Iran. She suggested
he would not, saying, "My understanding is that he is coming back today."

Having signed off on a comprehensive battle plan before the war started, Mr.
Bush is leaving the details of battle to his generals. Mr. Fitzwater said any
final judgment on when and where to use ground forces, for instance, would be
made by the military, in consultation with the President.

To make sure the war is progressing according to the daily planned objectives
and to get bomb damage assessments, Mr. Bush huddles for about 70 to 80 percent
of each day with members of his war council: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney; the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Colin L. Powell; Secretary of State
James A. Baker 3d; Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser; Robert M.
Gates, the deputy national security adviser; Vice President Dan Quayle, and the
President's chief of staff, John H. Sununu.

Calls During Night

The Situation Room sends Mr. Bush pieces of paper detailing Scud missile attacks
on Israel and Saudi Arabia, and Mr. Scowcroft, who is more than ever the
President's shadow, calls him during the night with important developments.

But Mr. Bush focuses mostly on his favorite part of the Presidency: telephoning
world leaders, telling them "where he's coming from," as he likes to put it, and
asking them "where they're coming from." He spends time every day dialing fellow
members of his global club to trade information and insure that the coalition he
has painstakingly built up against Saddam Hussein does not tear.

President Johnson left decisions to the field commanders except in cases he
deemed of special "political and human sensitivity," said Walt Rostow, who was
Mr. Johnson's National Security Adviser.

Mr. Rostow recalled the Tuesday lunches in the White House family room that
began with a round of sherry and tomato juice and ended with Mr. Johnson asking
three questions of his top advisers: What is the importance of the targets? How
many planes and men are we likely to lose? How many civilian casualties are
there likely to be?

"Then there was a discussion of the calculus and the President made the final
decision on targets," Mr. Rostow said.

Mr. Rostow, who said he thought a "myth of micro-management" had grown up around
Mr. Johnson because of his decisions on those bombings, said that Mr. Johnson
was "overly cautious" about the bombing because he was afraid that the Chinese
or the Russians might get involved on the other side and trigger a full-fledged
nuclear war.

Barbara Kellerman, a visiting professor of political science at George
Washington University who has co-written a book titled "The President as World
Leader," suggested that Mr. Bush's circle might be too tightly knit to serve him
well in times of war.

"He does not have a naysayer in the group, as Franklin Roosevelt did," she said.
"He is at the center of the wheel of a group of like-minded souls who have been
unanimous in their support of him and each other all through this crisis."

On big decisions, Ms. Kellerman argued, it is important for a President to call
in a range of experts, to generate information from a variety of channels, and
to map out policy alternatives that take into account a host of unanticipated
consequences.

Grounded for the longest period since he took office -- he has already traveled
267,072 miles -- Mr. Bush is keeping his schedule at the White House light. The
only items on his schedule today were meetings with his inner circle. On
Wednesday, his only official duty is to meet with the President of Mongolia.

He makes a cursory nod to domestic affairs and the coming State of the Union
address and he watches football games or the occasional movie on weekends "as a
distraction to war," as Mr. Fitzwater put it.

The President is trying to maintain the same hours he usually does -- 7:15 A.M.
to 6:30 P.M. -- and continue to go to Camp David some weekends as a way of
showing that he is not a hostage to the crisis.

"He's in a pretty good mood, I would say," Mr. Fitzwater said. "He's pensive and
fairly preoccupied. This is on his mind a good deal of the time."

NAME: George Bush

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vehicles in a United States Army convoy during a stop yesterday
in the muddy Saudi desert. A debate is developing over whether ground troops
should be used at all in the conflict. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A Mambo King Speaks Words of Comedy

BYLINE: By GLENN COLLINS

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1305 words


He sounds Japanese. He looks Japanese. But he's really Hispanic. He stands
onstage in a gray worsted suit from Savile Row and asks provocatively, "Why
settle for being Latin trash when you can settle for so much more -- like being
Japanese?" He eyes the audience confidently. "I used to be loud and obnoxious
and full of street mannerisms. Now I listen to Lite-FM!"

His name is Yakimoto, one of seven sharply observed characters who people the
alternative Hispanic universe of the actor John Leguizamo. Yakimoto is
delivering his "Crossover Seminar" for upscale-obsessed Hispanic Americans who
want to learn how to pass for Japanese.

"He's based on the self-hating Hispanic people who are desperate to assimilate,"
said Mr. Leguizamo. "I call these types the
Word-Perfect-5.1-Assimilated-Hispanics. A lot of them are Huppies. You know,
Hispanic yuppies."

Source of Inspiration

The savage Yakimoto sendup is the finale of Mr. Leguizamo's one-man show, "Mambo
Mouth," which is having an open-ended run at The American Place Theater (111
West 46th Street). The streetwise actor has brought his own troubled past and
his own mordant view of the Hispanic condition to the show. Thanks to his
razor-edged portraits of men living on the urban edge, the 26-year-old Mr.
Leguizamo has already been referred to as the Hispanic Eric Bogosian. But his
inspiration was really Richard Pryor, Mr. Leguizamo said.

"His characters are more than entertaining," the actor said. "He has something
to say. I feel the same way. I couldn't just go out on a stage and do characters
. They have to have an edge. I've got to show you a little sting or shock or
pain."

On TV, Egotistically

In addition to Yakimoto, Mr. Leguizamo's hypermacho rogues' gallery includes
Agamemnon, the public-access television talk-show host who announces that he
built himself "up from the arroz-con-pollo circuit." Swaggering in his blinding
white suit and hat, he is the host of "Naked Personalities," an "uncensored look
at your favorite celebrity -- me!"

There is also Loco Louie, a 13-year-old sex-mad Hispanic homeboy whose
wise-mouth witticisms taunt his friends with lines like "your mother is so
stupid she trips over the cordless phone." And there is Manny Garcia, a
violently inclined Hispanic transvestite hooker, "who carries a big knife, but
she carries a bigger mouth," Mr. Leguizamo said.

Though his characters are oft victimized, "they're not victims," said Mr.
Leguizamo. "They're survivors," he said. "They are witty and smart and trying to
stay on top of things, in very difficult circumstances. They have courage."

Stereotypical, or Not?

Some audience members have berated the actor for stereotyping Hispanic
Americans. "They are usually the people who have tried hard to assimilate, and
are ashamed of their culture," he said of those who have criticized him. He sees
his characters not as stereotypes, he said, but as "characters with depth and
feeling."

The most stereotypical Hispanic characters "are the ones you usually see on TV:
the drug dealer, the super, the gardener," he said. "Those are the kind of
acting roles they offer you," he added. "They're cardboard characters, with no
depth and no reality. They are background. Peripheral. And that's what Hollywood
usually thinks of Hispanics."

Many of Mr. Leguizamo's portraits are drawn from his family or his own
experience. For example, Agamemnon, the public-access king, "is a bit of my
father, and some of his older friends: they're all lost in this strange macho
world." Loco Louie is "mostly, well, kind of like me at that age," he said. "I
was a terrible jerk," he added. "A major jerk."

Coming to America

Onstage, Mr. Leguizamo appears to be seven discrete individuals; in conversation
he is irrepressible, infinitely talkative, wiry. At 5 feet 7 inches tall and 147
pounds, "I'd make a good junior welterweight," he said. Around his neck is a
silver-and-emerald Colombian Chibcha necklace and a nickel-plated cross; he
wears a single rap-master hoop earring of silver.

Mr. Leguizamo was born in Bogota, Colombia; his father was Puerto Rican, his
mother Colombian. The family moved to America when he was 5, and he grew up in
Jackson Heights, Queens, "in about a hundred different apartments," he said.
"The first one, I remember, had a Murphy bed in the living room," he said.

"We always had enough food, and I didn't have to live out on the street, but I
remember them making fun of me in school because my pants were too short and I
had cheap sneakers. I went to the Fresh Air Fund camps in the summer. Both my
parents were always working at two jobs, so I was a latch-key kid. I brought
myself up."

"I hung out with tough kids," Mr. Leguizamo continued. "I wanted to be a tough
kid but I wasn't really a tough kid. So I became goofy and funny so they'd like
me."

Problems at School

He said his father, Alberto, a waiter, insisted that he attend the
business-oriented Murry Bergtraum High School in lower Manhattan, "so I could
make something of myself." What he made of himself was a nuisance. "I lived to
make the class laugh," he said. "I'd write jokes at home and use them next day
in school.

"That's what the mambo mouth is. Dancing with your mouth. That's me."

At the age of 15, mambo mouth was unable to talk himself out of being arrested
for truancy one day in Times Square. This came after an arrest when he and a
friend kicked in the door of an unoccupied conductor's booth on a No. 7 train
and proceeded to commandeer the conductor's microphone, saying things like,
"This is our train, people!"

"I guess that's how I broke into show business," Mr. Leguizamo said slyly. "We
were idiots. Two cops arrested us when we left the booth."

A Change for the Calmer

His years at Murry Bergtraum were so troubled that the school refused to let him
attend unless he attended sessions at the Youth Counseling League in Manhattan.
He went for four years "and it helped me to get over my rage and my negativity
toward myself," he said.

"When I was 18, I made a 180-degree turn," he said. A guidance counselor
encouraged Mr. Leguizamo to take acting lessons. "I got the Yellow Pages and
looked under 'Acting Instruction.' " He arbitrarily picked out an acting teacher
and used $350 from his savings from his job at Kentucky Fried Chicken to pay for
tuition.

Eventually, he went to Pace University, transferred to New York University, and
was cast in an award-winning student film, "Five Out of Six." That performance
led to a role -- as a drug-dealer's son -- on three episodes of "Miami Vice."
Subsequently he performed in the Public Theater as Puck in "A Midsummer Night's
Dream" and took the lead role in "La Puta Vida."

He also played the traitorous soldier Diaz in "Casualties of War," Brian De
Palma's Vietnam movie. In "Revenge," with Kevin Costner and Anthony Quinn, he
played "a crazy little Mexican guy with a gold tooth."

Behind a Show

Of "Mambo Mouth," the actor said he felt compelled to create the solo show
"because it's as if Hispanics, real Hispanics, do not exist on television, in
movies or the radio."

"I looked around and I said, 'Where are my people?' " he said.

He began writing "Mambo Mouth" in August 1989. Last summer, he started working
on the piece with Wynn Handman, the director of the American Place, and Peter
Askin, who became the director of "Mambo Mouth."

"The characters kept bubbling up," Mr. Leguizamo said. "I don't know what
triggered them." He paused, and looked at his interviewer.  He had been talking
nonstop for more than an hour. "You know, I like talking about myself," he
suddenly said, and smiled. "I am my favorite subject!" He began to laugh. "After
all, I do a one-man show. Is there a more egomaniacal thing you could do?"

NAME: John Leguizamo

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Leguizamo in his one-man show, "Mambo Mouth." (Jack
Manning/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

In a Rare Public Forum, Bavaro Avoids 'Retiring'

BYLINE: By MALCOLM MORAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 745 words

DATELINE: TAMPA, Fla., Jan. 22


Two football products of the University of Notre Dame -- one among the most
public-relations conscious and the other among the most reticent in the 25
buildups to Super Bowls -- conducted business in the sunshine this morning at
Tampa Stadium.

Joe Theismann, the former quarterback of the Washington Redskins and an eager
focal point when this game was played here seven years ago, stood in a crowd and
held a television microphone. Mark Bavaro, the Giants' tight end, who had not
publicly answered questions from reporters this season, was there because the
National Football League said he had to be there.

"Are you in the best physical shape that you've been in, in a while?" Theismann
asked.

"Define 'a while,' " Bavaro said.

"O.K., two years," Theismann said.

"I'll tell you that I've seen better days," Bavaro said. "But I'm happy and
pleased with my health. I can't complain. I'm thankful for what I have, and I
try to make the most with what I've got."

End of Career?





Bavaro's successful but difficult return from surgery to repair two ligaments in
his left knee a year ago this month has led to speculation that the last game of
this season could be the last of a six-year career.

His weight training regimen has been reduced because of injuries. His diligence
on the practice field, and the need to preserve his body, has led Coach Bill
Parcells to give Bavaro the freedom to decide when it is wise to cut back.
Bavaro did not take part in the Giants' practice today.

His 33 receptions this season, second most on the team, were half of his figure
during the Giants' 1986 championship season.

"I'm not 19 years old anymore," Bavaro said, "although I'm still a young man."

Bavaro's problem, at the age of 27, is that this business makes young people age
quickly.

"No injury talk, and no retirement talk," Bavaro said, softly but firmly, to one
questioner. "I'm not planning on retiring until I have to."

100 Percent, Sort Of





When others stopped by along the sideline for a rare access to his thoughts, and
asked Bavaro if he felt 100 percent, he lowered his chin and looked at his legs.
"I'll say it's 100 percent," he said, "for what's there."

The last time Bavaro passed through this sort of ordeal, the week of the Giants'
Super Bowl game against Denver four years ago in Pasadena, Calif., he talked
about rejecting the nickname of Rambo because he felt it showed a lack of
respect for troops who served in Vietnam.

Today, a military helicopter passed overhead shortly before Bavaro was asked
about his feelings now. "I've got one eye on the Super Bowl and one eye on
what's going on in the Middle East," Bavaro said. "Not to forget the Soviet
Union. This is my job, and it will be over in a week, and I just hope things
remain peaceful here and I hope that things are over quick there with minimal
casualties."

And yet at the end of a season that began in pain and is ending with the concern
of more important events elsewhere, Bavaro said this season had probably been
the most fun. "No special reason," he said.

Some time after the Super Bowl victory in January 1987, at least one of his
teammates said that Bavaro had created the most memorable moment of the day.
With the California sky somewhere between day and night, Bavaro's touchdown
reception was immediately followed by a decision to genuflect and say thanks.

"It wasn't premeditated," Bavaro said. "I was very grateful and thankful at the
time. I'm grateful every time I walk off the football field and I'm healthy and
I've made it through another series.

"I kneel and give thanks to God in every area of my life. It wasn't anything
special. It was very routine, kneeling down in the Super Bowl, because that's
what I do in my life. It wasn't a show. It wasn't an act."

'My Bank Account?'





When seasons have ended, when some high-profile players consider opportunities
to add to their income, Bavaro has not. Would his off-the-field career benefit,
he was asked, from a willingness to become a more public person?

"My career?" Bavaro asked. "You mean like my bank account. I get paid plenty
enough money. I don't need all the money in the world. Obviously, people have
had it and it hasn't made them happy. I like what I get, though. But there are a
lot more important things I can do with my spare time."

"Not to say that I wouldn't do anything if something came up," he added. "No one
has ever asked me."

NAME: Mark Bavaro

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Giants' Mark Bavaro at Tampa Stadium: "I'm not planning on
retiring until I have to."

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The Vice President;
Quayle Aims At Protests, A la Agnew

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 801 words

DATELINE: NORFOLK, Va., Jan. 23


Until now, the White House has made a point of treating the antiwar
demonstrations across Pennsylvania Avenue and across the country with benign
neglect. But, in visits to three military bases today, Vice President Dan Quayle
took a page from Spiro Agnew's approach during the Vietnam War and offered some
tart criticism of the demonstrators and coverage of them.

Vice President Quayle did not have any catchy epithets, such as his
predecessor's harangues against the press as "pusilanimous pussyfooters" and
Vietnam War protesters as "effete corps of impudent snobs who characterize
themselves as intellectuals."

Mr. Quayle told members of the armed forces and their families at bases in
Jacksonville, Fla., Fayetteville, N.C., and Norfolk, Va., that the protests
against the war in the Persian Gulf were among the "less inspiring sights at
this time of conflict" and had been exaggerated by news organizations.

Calls Support Overwhelming

"As all of you know from speaking to your friends and neighbors in your
communities, in your churches, and in your living rooms, there is overwhelming
support in this nation for President Bush's determination to get Saddam out of
Kuwait."

Asked later, in an interview on Air Force Two, if his criticism was a departure
from the more benign approach that the White House had been taking, Mr. Quayle
said: "Go ahead and do it. You can cover it any way you want. But I, looking at
it, especially when you go out and say there are these massive demonstrations
and then you see how massive they are, I would think that perhaps the coverage
ought to be somewhat of the percentage of those involved."

The Vice President has been present at all of President Bush's war councils, but
today marked his debut as a more active participant in the Administration's
attempts to keep support firm in the nation and morale high among the American
forces.

"We will hold Saddam and his henchmen personally accountable," Mr. Quayle told a
pleased crowd at the Mayport Naval Station in Jacksonville, the home port of the
aircraft carrier Saratoga and other ships and air crews involved in the war. "He
refused to yield to the force of logic. Now he will have to yield to the logic
of force."

Meets Wife of First Victim

The Vice President met privately at Mayport with Joanne Speicher, the widow of
Lieut. Comdr. Michael Scott Speicher, the first American casualty of the Persian
Gulf war, and her two small children, and with Robin Hunter, the brother of Guy
Hunter, a marine who was one of the bruised prisoners of war shown denouncing
the war.

He also met with relatives of servicemen who died in a ferry accident off Israel
in December that left 21 dead. He had private sessions with other family members
of American casualties at the other bases.

The Vice President said he wa impressed by the toughness and endurance of some
of the wives he met privately, and said there were tears "on both sides."

In his speeches, Mr. Quayle told his audiences that he could not promise that
the troops would be home soon or that they would all come home safely. But he
could promise, he said, that "Operation Desert Storm will not be another
Vietnam," adding, "They will not be asked to fight with one arm tied behind
their back."

Received With Warmth

Some White House officials had fought against Mr. Quayle's trip to visit the
troops in Saudi Arabia over New Year's, fearing that his service in the National
Guard during the Vietnam War, a war he supported, might offend some servicemen.

But there was no problem on that trip and Mr. Quayle was received with similar
warmth today by most family members, who waved small pieces of notepaper with
the names of their relatives' ships: the America, the John F. Kennedy, the
Saratoga. Some wore T-shirts that read, "We Scared the Sand out of Saddam" and
many crowded around the Vice President to get an autograph or a picture.

"I say, let the past be the past and let's not dwell on Vietnam anymore," said
Marsha Thorpe, 30, at Mayport Naval Air Station, when asked if the controversy
over Mr. Quayle's National Guard service had faded. She said her husband, James,
is a Naval officer serving in the Persian Gulf.

For and Against Quayle Role

Other wives of servicemen in the gulf said they had given the matter passing
thought, but agreed that Mr. Quayle is the Vice President who is now cheering on
American troops and, as such, deserves full respect.

But in each crowd there were some who disagreed. "I don't see how they could
send him on a mission of comfort to us when he did those things to get out of
going to Vietnam," said Mona Gunn, a resident of Norfolk Naval Air Station whose
husband, Louge, is a chief service manager on the hospital boat, the Comfort, in
the Persian Gulf.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vice President Dan Quayle meeting yesterday with relatives of
servicemen at the Mayport Naval Station in Jacksonville, Fla. While at Mayport,
the VicePresident met privately with Joanne Speicher, widow of Lieut. Comdr.
Michael Scott Speicher, the first American casualty of the Persian Gulf war.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Strategy;
Iraq: Hidden Cards?

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE JR., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1156 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Jan. 23


Is Saddam Hussein playing possum? If so, what does that portend for the course
of the war in the Persian Gulf? A week after allied bombers opened the campaign
to oust Iraq from Kuwait, those are the most pressing questions facing American
strategists.

Iraqi air bases, control posts, troop units and supply lines have been heavily
damaged, according to witnesses and allied assessments. Enemy radar operations
are said to have dropped off. The allies say their losses have been tiny.

Officials say Mr. Hussein has launched no militarily meaningful air, ground or
naval attacks on allied forces in Saudi Arabia. "He has not thrown a single
military punch at us," Gen. Colin L. Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, said at a Pentagon briefing today.

Yet allied officials acknowledge that most of Iraq's army and air force remain
intact, despite an air assault of unprecedented intensity. There is no
indication yet that the Iraqis have lost either the capacity or the will to
defend conquered Kuwait and their homeland.

As a result, a widespread expectation has developed here and in Riyadh that the
war is going to last longer than many had anticipated. Three months or longer is
now a commonly voiced estimate. Few officers predict a ground attack before
another two weeks have passed, at least. That may be disinformation, designed to
mask the allies' real intentions, but it seems more likely that it reflects the
need for further softening-up raids.

Iraqis 'Hunkering Down'

"They are hunkering down, probably questioning whether we can keep this up,"
General Powell said. Defense Secretary Dick Cheney conceded that major surprises
might still lie ahead and added, "No one should assume that Saddam Hussein does
not have significant remaining military capacity."

"For one reason or another," a British staff officer commented, "Saddam has
decided to play it long. He says in his speeches that he hasn't yet begun to
fight, and from my vantage point, that seems to be true enough. The only
question is, why?"

Vladimir N. Sakharov, a former Soviet military attache in Iraq who defected to
the United States, said this week that the Iraqis had assimilated much of basic
Russian military doctrine. One of its principal tenets, he said, is to conserve
one's resources if attacked by a superior enemy, with the intention of launching
a surprise counterattack with massed forces.

Baghdad has committed no more than a fraction of its 600-odd combat aircraft to
battle, and although a few American officers see this as evidence that Iraqi
pilots lack the stomach for a fight or that most of their bases are unusable,
many find it a disturbing development.

Damage to Communications

In addition, American intelligence suggests that although the communications
network by which Mr. Hussein controls the defense of Iraq and Kuwait has been
damaged, there are enough backup systems to keep him in touch.

Nor is there much conviction here that the bombing has sapped the fighting
qualities of the Iraqis or destroyed their capacity to adapt, repair, invent,
replace and survive, as populations under air assault have often done. Like
economic sanctions, bombing has made life in Baghdad and Basra and on the front
much harder, but there are no signs yet of any large-scale defections.

A United States Marine officer on the Kuwaiti brder, relecting a typical view
here, said he believed he was faced with elaborate systems of trenches and
underground headquarters that would prove largely impervious to air attack.
Skeptical about what he termed "Pentagon euphoria," he predicted that a bloody
land offensive would be needed to break the 30 or more Iraqi divisions based in
or near Kuwait.

The American command said today that to date its pilots had shot down 19 enemy
planes and destroyed 22 more planes on the ground. Even if the figures are
conservative, that would leave more than 500 combat aircraft in President
Hussein's inventory.

Refuges for Planes

According to pilots' accounts, some planes have been flown to northern Iraq,
where there are at least three big airfields. Others may be hidden in
tunnel-like bunkers with walls four feet thick and heavy blast doors, built in
recent years by British contractors. Some hangars are believed to be buried in
huge sand dunes, making the job of hitting them harder.

"If he has saved all those planes," an American operations officer said, "he
must plan to use the for some big bang or other. Maybe a chemical attack on
Israel, hoping that if he sends enough planes one or two could penetrate their
air defenses. Maybe a run against our ships with Exocet missiles. Maybe an
attempt to hit our ground forces as we move up."

Exocet missiles, made in France, proved deadly against British ships during the
war in the Falkland Islands, sinking the frigate Sheffield. It was an Iraqi
Exocet that severely damaged the American frigate Stark in the Persian Gulf in
May 1987. Civilian analysts have spoken as well about the possibility that Mr.
Hussein might be planning to use an even more horrific weapon, never before
employed in combat, known as the fuel air bomb, which spreads a circle of fire.

Closer to Parity

Others believe that the Iraqi leader will commit his planes and other weapons
that he has held back, such as chemical and perhaps biological agents, only when
the ground battle has been joined. Although on a man-for-man basis Iraqi troops
are not considered a match for American, British and other allied troops, the
size of the Iraqi ground forces means that they come far closer to equal
strength with their opponents than Iraqi air or naval forces.

Their chances of hanging on for a time would be improved if even a fraction of
Baghdad's planes could be used to support their resistance.

Iraq's intention would not be winning the war at a stroke, which allied officers
and most analysts consider well beyond Mr. Hussein's reach, but striking a
psychological blow, perhaps weakening the allied coalition by pulling Israel
into the war and stringing out the conflict in the hope that public opinion in
the United States would tire of protracted fighting.

Mr. Cheney sought to dismiss that possibility today with the comment, "He will
quit long before we do."

Clearly, Vietnam is the Iraqi leader's model, at least in part. But his terrain
is much more favorable to the allies than Ho Chi Minh's, and he has other
disadvantages, such as the difficulty of resupply and the lack of a highly
motivated civilian population and a mass political party.

Still, even in eventual defeat, experts on the Middle East think Mr. Hussein
might be able to make himself a warrior-hero to many Arabs, as did Gamal Abdel
Nasser of Egypt. The longer he can hold out, the more he can argue that he stood
up to the United States and other big Western nations and the more he can foment
continued unrest in an already unstable region.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The President;
Excerpts From Bush's Remarks to Reservist Group on Resolve in the Gulf

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 953 words


Following are excerpts from President Bush's speech in Washington last night to
the Reserve Officers Association, as recorded by The New York Times:

I am proud to share this evening with the leadership of the Reserve Officers
Association, and I am deeply honored to be named Minuteman of the Year.

But I know tonight our thoughts go out to men and women earning the honor of a
grateful nation at this very moment -- the citizen soldiers, 100,000 strong,
serving now with the coalition forces in the gulf. And I salute them, each and
every one.

Those American reservists are part of an allied force standing against the
forces of aggression, standing up for what is right. . . .

As we meet right here tonight, we are exactly one week into Operation Desert
Storm, but it is important to date this conflict not from Jan. 16 but from its
true beginning, the assault of Aug. 2, Iraq's unprovoked aggression against the
tiny nation of Kuwait. We did not begin a war seven days ago. Rather, we began
to end a war, to right a wrong that the world simply could not ignore.

From the day Saddam's forces first crossed in Kuwait, it was clear that this
aggression required a swift response from our nation and the world community. .
. .

Gulf War on Schedule

America was not alone in confronting Saddam. No less than 12 resolutions of the
United Nations Security Council condemned the invasion, demanding Iraq's
withdrawal without condition and without delay. The United Nations put in place
sanctions to prevent Iraq from reaping any reward from its outlaw act. Countries
from six continents sent forces to the gulf to demonstrate the will of the world
community that Saddam's aggression would not stand.

Appeasement, peace at any price, was never an answer. Turning a blind eye to
Saddam's aggression would not have avoided war, it would only have delayed the
world's day of reckoning, postponing what ultimately would have been a far more
dangerous, a far more costly conflict.

Unfortunately, in spite of more than five months of sustained diplomatic efforts
by the Arab League, the European community, the United States and the United
Nations, Saddam Hussein met every overture of peace with open contempt. In the
end, despite the world's prayers for peace, Saddam brought war upon himself.

Tonight, after one week of allied operations, I am pleased to report that
Operation Desert Storm is right on schedule. We have dealt, and I salute General
McPeak and the airmen flying under united command out there from the Navy and
the Marines as well as, of course, the Air Force. I salute him.

We dealt a severe setback to Saddam's nuclear ambitions. Our pinpoint attacks
have put Saddam out of the nuclear-bomb-building business for a long time to
come.

Allied aircraft enjoy air superiority, and we are using that superiority to
systematically deprive Saddam of his ability to wage war effectively. We are
knocking out many of their key airfields, we're hitting their early-warning
radars with great success. We are severely degrading their air defenses. The
main danger to allied aircraft now comes from some 20,000 antiaircraft guns in
the Baghdad area alone.

War Is Never Cheap

And let me say, I am proud of the way our aviators are carrying out their tasks.
In head-to-head combat, our jet fighters have destroyed 19 Iraqi jets, and they
have hit, at most, one American jet in aerial combat.

Step by step we are making progress toward the objectives that have guided the
world's response since Aug. 2 -- the liberation of Kuwait, and the restoration
of stability and security in the gulf. And there can be no doubt -- Operation
Desert Storm is working.

There can be no pause now that Saddam has forced the world into war. We will
stay the course, and we will succeed -- all the way.

As I said on the third day of this campaign -- war is never cheap or easy. There
will be problems. There will be setbacks. There will be more sacrifices. But let
me say, I have every reason to be very pleased with our progress to date.

Saddam has sickened the world with his use of Scud missiles -- those inaccurate
bombs that indiscriminately strike at cities and innocent civilians, in both
Israel and Saudi Arabia. These weapons are nothing more than tools of terror,
and they do nothing but strengthen our resolve to act against a dictator unmoved
by human decency.

Prime Minister John Major of the United Kingdom said it well yesterday. Saddam,
he said, may yet become a target of his own people. It is perfectly clear that
this man is immoral. He takes hostages. He attacks population centers. He
threatens prisoners. He is a man without pity, and whatever his fate may be,
said Prime Minister Major, I, for one, will not weep for him.

No Tears for a Tyrant

No one should weep for this tyrant when he is brought to justice, no one
anywhere in the world. I watched, along with all of you, that repulsive parade
of American airmen on Iraqi television. One more proof of the savagery of
Saddam.

But I knew as they read their prepared statements criticizing this country that
those were false words, forced on them by their captors. One -- I saw one of
General McPeak's kids. One American pilot yesterday was asked why he was sure
the pilots were coerced, their statements false. And he said, "I know that
because these guys are Americans." He could well have said the same thing about
the other pilots being held from Britain, Italy and Kuwait -- all men of courage
and valor, too.

Tonight I repeat my pledge to you, and to all Americans: This will not be
another Vietnam. Never again will our armed forces be sent out to do a job with
one hand tied behind their back.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Marines;
Finding Life's Meaning in Winds and Rains of War

BYLINE: By CHRIS HEDGES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 835 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Jan. 23


Night comes early in the Saudi desert and these days it is accompanied by a
bitter wind, sporadic rain and the loneliness that isolation and fear bring to
the hearts of young soldiers about to go to war.

The men in the Marine Corps' First Battalion, who will probably be in the front
ranks of any ground attack, are struggling to grasp huge thoughts: the meaning
of their lives, the capriciousness of fate and the duty they feel.

Each one grapples with his ideas in his own way, some writing poetry, some
reading books and everyone studying their manuals, reviewing tactics and
cleaning and re-cleaning their weapons.

"It is reassuring to clean your weapon," said the battalion commander, Lieut.
Col. Michael O. Fallon. "It is something you can do."

'Feeling of Anxiety'

The rituals of life in the Marines' desert encampment are spartan.

The men, who have been in Saudi Arabia since September, get showers every two
weeks. They sleep under large ponchos that they tie to the camouflage netting
staked out over their armored vehicles. In the day, and often at night, they
practice assaults. They are also receiving instruction in first aid, how to
identify enemy armor and what to do during gas attacks.

The humor in the battalion has a hard edge, with men joking about the wheelchair
races they will have when they get home.

"A lot of people will joke about it, make sly remarks about it," said Lance Cpl.
Henderson J. Nugent, "but underneath we all have this feeling of anxiety."

Becoming Introspective

The sarcasm is usually gone by nightfall and many Marines, unable to read
because of the order to keep lights out, lie in their sleeping bags and carry on
discussions usually associated with men much older.

"It has caused us to be very introspective" said Corporal Nugent, whose platoon
handles TOW anti-tank missles. "I have no doubt about God now. I am closer to
Him and my inner self. You think about how you will be remembered if you bite
the big one."

Cpl. David E. Logsdon of Prairie Grove, Ark., reads the Bible and books like
"Moby-Dick" in an effort to understand what drives people toward destructive
obsessions.

"I concentrated on Ahab the most," he said. "I concentrated on his obsession
with the whale, the way he kept after it. I wondered if he was like Saddam
Hussein."

The most painful memory for many marines is the farewell from their families.
Corporal Nugent, who is 22 years old, wrote a poem about his mother crying on
the telephone. The poem struck a chord in his platoon.

We keep our weapons clean, preparing them to fire.
If I said I had no fear, you know I'd be a liar.
But my greatest fear of all is not that I might die.
But that if I do get killed, I'll still hear my mother cry.

 Colonel Fallon, the battalion's 44-year-old commander who also fought in
Vietnam, speaks of his 4-year-old daughter, Charlotte, whose pictures he keeps
in a plastic bag he carries.

"She is the pride and joy of my life," he said. "When I left she was crying and
telling me she didn't understand why I had to go. It really got to me."

The Stars Seem to Help

Lance Cpl. David A. McNamee, from Woburn, Mass., said that the night before he
left for Saudi Arabia, his fiance woke up in the middle of the night in tears.
She had dreamed that two Marines in dress uniforms had come to her door to tell
her that he was dead.

"Everything had been going all right with my departure until then," Corporal
McNamee said. "It kind of scared me seeing her that upset. I got too much to do
in my life to let some Iraqi get me."

The sweeping beauty of a clear night sky in the desert frequently affects the
Marines, who are stationed about 50 miles from Kuwait.

"At night, when I look at the stars and the moon, I wonder what everyone is
doing back home," said Cpl. Richard L. Wells of Princeton, Iowa. "I always think
of my wife and my family when I look at the stars. The stars seem to bring
everything out of your subconscious."

The Roar of Jets

The marines said they have become superstitious, hanging on to any good-luck
charm. Many said they always make a wish on the shooting stars that streak
across the sky.

Each night, as the marines lie in their sleeping bags, the sounds of the planes
and jets on bombing missions to Kuwait and Iraq fill the desert.

"Listen," said Corporal McNamee as wave after wave went by unseen late one
evening. "I like that sound."

Shortly after he spoke, a battery of 155-millimeter howitzers fired a series of
volleys. The desert suddenly filled with the noise of munitions and planes. The
marines listened until the planes were gone and the artillery fire had ended.

Corporal McNamee made a high whistle that gradually descended into a low whine
and then a guttural immitation of an explosion.

After his imitation of a falling bomb, the men said nothing. All that could be
heard was a rain, beating on the canvas ponchos overhead and the wind whipping
across the expansive desert floor.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Terrorism;
Threats, Real or Not, Stir Fears Across U.S.

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1225 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Jan. 23


It certainly looked suspicious, the taped shopping bag found outside the Louis
Vuitton luggage boutique on Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills the other morning.

Sheriff's deputies rushed in and closed off the street, and the bomb squad
gingerly carted the bag off to an empty canyon, where it was exploded -- with a
puff of feathers. The suspected terrorist bomb turned out to be a pillow.

If Rodeo Drive, where high-price shops now cater largely to busloads of Japanese
tourists, seemed an unlikely target for Iraqi terrorists, the episode
underscored the jitters that have swept the country since the outbreak of war in
the Persian Gulf.

And if all the scares have so far proved false alarms or hoaxes, many Americans
are nonetheless wandering through a psychological twilight zone of enormous
stress in which it is difficult to differentiate reality, perception and
fantasy.

"People are nervous -- everyone is dealing with the issue of what is real and
what is fantastic in a state of threat," said one expert, Dr. Mardi J. Horowitz,
a psychiatrist who directs the Program on Conscious and Unconscious Mental
Processes at the University of California at San Francisco.

'State of Hypervigilance'

"People are searching for information to make the distinction," he said. "It
creates a state of hypervigilance." Dr. Horowitz confessed that he was uneasy
about taking a planned flight to Washington this week.

He is not alone in an American public whose fears were only heightened this week
by news pictures of grim-faced captured American pilots, the deadly Iraqi
missile raid against Tel Aviv on Tuesday night and terrorist attacks today on
two American organizations in Istanbul and at two banks partly owned by Saudi
and French investors in Lebanon.

Psychologists and psychiatrists say the fears feed largely on television images
from the war zone as well as those of possible domestic targets.

Examples of the form these fears take abound:

*On an Amtrak Metroliner from Washington to New York the other morning, Melinda
Lukasz, a video producer with the Bell Atlantic Corporation, was uneasy. "I
thought twice about getting on this train," she said. Nearby, Phil Williams, a
Washington lawyer, said he had felt in the train station at Washington "an eerie
feeling of impending peril," as if "people felt they had to look over their
shoulders."

*Ara Soulahian, a Federal Express courier who works in the heavily Jewish
Fairfax district of Los Angeles, mused on his fate: "I realize now how I
probably will die -- on the job. I'll be making a delivery, and it will blow up
right in my face." He said that in the current climate some offices were not
admitting him or anybody else who delivers packages for a living.

*Steven L. Kaufman, a salesman in Cerritos, Calif., canceled his regular flight
to Salt Lake City on Monday. "With the hostilities," he said, "the first thing I
thought of was my 14-month-old daughter at home. It was more important for me to
be here than risk flying." He added that he and his wife, Christine, had bought
extra bottled water on the chance that terrorists might throw poison into the
aqueducts that supply the Los Angeles area.

*Bill Payne, a Hollywood screenwriter, has decided to drive from Los Angeles to
Ohio on a family visit instead of taking a flight there. "I know I'm sounding
silly," he said, "but I don't like flying anyway, and I know somebody's going to
get blown up. So I'm trying to reduce my chances." He has also avoided seeing
the new movie "Not Without My Daughter," starring Sally Field as an Iranian's
American wife trying to flee Iran, because of bomb threats against theaters that
show the movie. Ms. Field hired a bodyguard last week, as did many other
celebrities.

Fears of Calamity

Probably not since the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 have Americans felt
a keener threat of calamity on American soil, a fear reinforced by televised
images of Federal agents in gas masks practicing how they would combat
terrorists at the Super Bowl in Tampa, Fla., this Sunday, of armed guards
closing off public access to the Birmingham Water Works in Alabama and of new
security rules at airports.

According to a New York Times/ CBS News Poll of 2,135 adults taken Jan. 17 to
19, just after the war with Iraq began, 63 percent of American adults are "very
concerned" about the possibility of a terrorist attack in the United States. A
separate survey of 766 adults, taken about the same time by the Gallup
Organization, found that only one in four Americans felt in personal danger,
although the proportion was almost certainly higher in cities.

Clearly, it is easy to dismiss some of the fears as outpacing any objective
reality. Flashes of lightning and thunder over Southern California, seeming to
mimic the television images of antiaircraft fire over Baghdad, stirred a brief
panic among some people here Monday night.

But countless rational Americans see good reason to be worried and are taking
precautions, especially Jews, many of whom see themselves as special targets.

"There is a legitimate reason to be fearful," said Rabbi Martin Hier, dean of
the Simon Wiesenthal Center here. "We have to take a man like Saddam Hussein,
who has a track record of using every weapon he has, including terrorism, at his
word. It would be very naive to dismiss it out of hand."

'Fear of the Unknown'

Dr. Barbara Cadow, a psychologist on the adjunct faculty at the University of
Southern California, said she had at first thought that only the extremely
neurotic would be fearful of a terrorist attack. But she soon found that even
the "high-functioning professionals" among her patients were turning anxious.

She said live television scenes of Israelis' putting on gas masks, placing their
small children in special protective devices and retreating to sealed rooms had
a powerful effect, particularly on mothers. "It was very effective in
heightening anxieties," she said. "It was hard not to be affected."

Indeed, Army surplus stores in numerous American cities reported a run on gas
masks and chemical warfare suits this week, and gas masks sold out completely in
Marysville, Calif.

Diagnosis: Overreaction

But others see in all this a vast overreaction to danger in faraway places.

"Clearly there is a possibility of some type of terrorist activity, but
certainly the reaction has been exaggerated," said Dr. Manuel Tanay, a clinical
professor of psychiatry at Wayne State University in Detroit.

"My office is across from the General Motors Building, and they have almost
transformed it," he said. "They have guards everywhere. Let's face it: these are
overreactions. Overreactions usually indicate some type of emotional process is
at work, and my interpretation is that it's a displacement of the war, where
there is a real danger to our young men and women, onto the domestic situation."

Whether the current state of vigilance can be maintained is doubtful, said
Shlomo Breznitz, a psychologist from the University of Haifa in Israel, who is a
visiting professor at the New School in New York. Even in Israel, he said,
attention to uncertain threats attenuates with time and with false alarms.
Indeed, he said, false alarms are part of the terrorist arsenal, inducing people
to let down their guard and making later attack easier.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The outbreak of war in the Persian Gulf has led to fears of
strikes by terrorists in the United States. A motorcycle officer on guard near
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial was part of increased security put in place
recently at monuments in the Capital by the National Park Service. (Jose R.
Lopez/The New York Times); Steven L. Kaufman of Cerritos, Calif., canceled an
airline trip on Monday, and his wife bought extra bottled water for fear
terrorists might poison water supplies. (Bart Bartholomew for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

High Dioxin Levels Linked to Cancer

BYLINE: By WARREN E. LEARY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 23


A new Federal study suggests that the toxic chemical dioxin causes cancer in
people exposed at high levels, but may not pose a substantial risk of cancer at
lower levels.

Many Vietnam War veterans are particularly concerned about dioxin because it was
a contaminant of Agent Orange, a plant-killing chemical widely used by the
United States military during the war.

Soldiers who handled Agent Orange or were accidentally sprayed with it in the
field are concerned that the exposures are the cause of cancers and other health
problems subsequently found in Vietnam veterans, and they have been lobbying the
Government for more compensation for injuries they attribute to the chemical.

The latest study found that industrial workers exposed to much higher levels of
dioxin than Vietnam veterans had an increased death rate from cancer, but death
from several types of cancers previously linked with the chemical was not
significantly increased.

The Largest Workplace Study

The study did find significantly increased mortality from soft-tissue cancers
and respiratory cancers in a subgroup of workers that was most exposed to the
substance.

A report on the study of 5,172 male workers at 12 plants that produced chemicals
contaminated with dioxin is being published in Thursday's issue of The New
England Journal of Medicine. It was the largest workplace study ever done
involving dioxin.

It included an examination of the death certificates of 1,052 of the workers in
the study, and found a small but significant increase in mortality from all
cancers combined. Most of the increased cancer mortality was attributed to a
group of 1,520 workers who had the highest exposure to dioxin and had worked in
the industry for more than 20 years.

Workers in the high-exposure group, who were exposed to 500 times more dioxin
than the general public, had a cancer death rate almost 50 percent higher than
normal, including greatly increased mortality from a type of cancer called
soft-tissue sarcoma and from cancers of the lung and respiratory system.

Risk From High Exposure

Dr. Marilyn A. Fingerhut, an epidemiologist who directed the study, said in a
telephone interview that the data strongly suggested that dioxin was a human
carcinogen at high-exposure levels.

But she said the 5,172 subjects of the study did not make it statistically
strong enough to spot certain relatively rare cancers. Death from several
cancers previously associated with dioxin exposure, including stomach, liver and
nasal cancers and Hodgkin's disease, was not significantly higher than normal in
the study, the report said.

Although the study did not confirm findings of previous studies that a number of
cancers were associated with dioxin exposure, the researchers said the excess
deaths from cancer that it did pick up were probably caused by dioxin. But it is
still possible that other factors, like smoking, may have contributed to the
excess cancer, they said.

Dioxin has been a major health concern because studies show it may be the most
powerful cancer-causing agent ever tested in laboratory rodents. Dioxin was not
a commercial product, but rather, a manufacturing contaminant that found its way
into other chemicals, including insecticides.

Results Termed Equivocal

In an editorial accompanying the study, Dr. John C. Bailar 3d of McGill
University in Montreal praised the study as well designed and probably the best
that could be done. But he said the results, like other studies, are equivocal
and likely to be used by people on both sides of the dioxin debate.

"It is conceivable, although by no means certain, that we shall in time converge
on a middle position in which dioxin is accepted as a human carcinogen, but one
that does not have the extreme potency observed in rodents," he wrote.

Dr. Fingerhut said the Government researchers measured the blood levels of 253
workers for dioxin, which has a long residual life in the body, and found that
those who were exposed to the chemical the longest had peak blood levels of
3,600 parts of dioxin per trillion. The average American has a blood level of 7
parts per trillion.

Another group of workers, those who handled dioxin for less than a year, had
blood levels of 640 parts per trillion, or 90 times the level of the general
public, but the study found their cancer death rate 20 years later to be almost
identical to that of the general public. This indicates that the greatest cancer
risk from dioxin resides mostly with the highest exposures, Dr. Fingerhut said.

Veterans' Figures Compared

Relating these figures to Vietnam veterans, Government surveys have found that
members of the armed forces who handled Agent Orange regularly had mean peak
blood levels of about 400 parts per trillion at the time, and that ground troops
who were sprayed with the chemical had blood levels of up to 45 parts per
trillion.

Dr. Fingerhut declined to relate the results of her study to veterans, but said
people could use the data to make their own evaluations.

Dr. Jeanne Stellman, an associate professor of clinical public health at
Columbia University, who also is a consultant to the American Legion, was
skeptical about attributing any meaning to blood test results because no one
knows how present readings relate to actual exposure.

"There is much more we need to know before we can extrapolate these results back
to veterans," Dr. Stellman said. "But there is enough here, from a policy point
of view, to give veterans the benefit of the doubt and attribute some of these
cancers to dioxin exposure."

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: P.O.W.'s;
P.O.W.'s Now Told to Resist Cooperation to 'Best of Their Ability'

BYLINE: By DANIEL GOLEMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 871 words


In light of a major shift in what is expected of Americans who become prisoners
of war, the appearance on Iraqi television of captured American pilots can be
seen as part of a ploy to survive rather than a break in discipline, military
psychiatrists say.

In a major change, the military code of conduct that once required those
captured give only name, rank and serial number now simply requires them to
resist cooperating with the enemy "to the best of their ability."

"The operative principle is that you do what you've got to do in order to
survive," said Dr. Michael Wise, who was an Air Force psychiatrist for 21 years.

The new attitude toward prisoners of war who cooperate with their captors
results from findings by military researchers that virtually all American
servicemen captured by the North Vietnamese broke under pressure from their
captors, military psychiatrists say.

"The few who tried to resist totally, from what we know, did not survive
captivity," said Dr. Robert Rahe, now a psychiatrist at the University of Nevada
at Reno and former head of the Navy's Center for P.O.W. Studies in San Diego.
"Nobody can be John Wayne. They can always find a torture so grave you'll
confess to something."

Even so, servicemen are instructed to try to resist in some way, if only
symbolically. Thus someone who reads a statement prepared by the enemy might
mispronounce words or otherwise fumble enough that it suggests to the audience
at home that the person is under duress.

"The art is to find the balance point between cooperating enough that you avoid
too many beatings and too much torture, while resisting enough that you survive
with dignity," Dr. Rahe said. "If you don't resist at all, you pay a psychiatric
price later on."

Dr. Rahe said the robot-like way in which Lieut. Jeffery N. Zaun, a flier
captured by the Iraqis, read a statement on television may have been a form of
resistance. But he said the fact that Lieutenant Zaun had cooperated so soon
after capture might work against him. "Once you've made one statement your
captors may come back and pick on you again," he said.

Although they acknowledged that it is impossible to tell from a brief image on a
television screen, the former military psychiatrists and other experts said the
almost identical demeanor the pilots exhibited might also suggest that they had
been injected with powerful tranquilizing or neuroleptic drugs like
phenothiazines. The phenothiazines, including one sold in the United States as
Thorazine, calm agitation and stop hallucination when given to schizophrenics.
But when given to people who do not have these symptoms, they act like a
chemical straitjacket, making them lethargic, expressionless and apathetic.

"They all had the same even, slow movements, with their faces completely rigid
and expressionless, and an unblinking stare," said Dr. Frank Stein, a professor
of psychiatry at Cornell University Medical College. "They looked like statues.
While you can't really tell from a brief TV picture, it's a picture consistent
with a large dose of neuropleptics."

In a study of 200 Navy prisoners of war in Vietnam, Dr. Rahe found that the
worst psychiatric problems were among those who capitulated completely.
"Everyone has a different breaking point, but you should feel that you resisted
to the best of your ability," Dr. Rahe said. "We found that there was no one who
could give only name, rank and serial number. Most ended up feeling guilty, to
some extent."

Benefits of Defiance

He said there were major psychological benefits in even small acts of defiance.
"As a P.O.W. you have virtually no control over what happens to you," he said.
"But you can still exert some small control over things that have great symbolic
meaning to you. It gives you the feeling that you are still fighting the war in
your own way."

During a course in survival skills, servicemen at risk of being captured, are
subjected to simulated captivity. They are taught to give only minimal
information that might be of actual use, even if they are seeming to answer
questions, and to keep physically fit, even in a small cell. Servicemen are also
urged to stay mentally fit, by practicing some skill such as a foreign language
in the long hours they are alone.

The servicemen are also urged to look after each other to the extent that they
can, and to maintain the chain of command even in prison.

From his research and that of other military psychiatrists, Dr. Rahe has
identified a series of psychological phases that most captive servicemen go
through.

In the first, anxiety and self-pity are prominent. "You feel 'Why me?' or 'Poor
me,' " Dr. Rahe said. "You dwell on your bad luck, and worry about the life
you've left behind, especially your family."

In the next phase the focus shifts to making the best of one's situation.

In the final phase, which may last years, P.O.W.'s expand their perspective and
get more interested in religion, in the fate of your country, and in humanity as
a whole," Dr. Rahe said.

Those P.O.W.'s who made the healthiest adjustment on their return, Dr. Rahe
found, often went into humanitarian callings such as teaching, or were drawn to
politics.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

War Hurt Theaters And Helped Films, But Effect Was Brief

BYLINE: By WILLIAM H. HONAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 984 words


War in the Persian Gulf glued people to their television sets and reduced
attendance at some entertainment events last week, people in the cultural and
entertainment industry in New York report. But they add that some escapist
entertainment benefited from the war and that attendance and video rentals are
returning to normal.

"Box office was off by about 7.5 percent last week, but yesterday sales were as
good as before the war started," said Paul Libin, producing director of Jujamcyn
Theaters, one of Broadway's major theater owners. He was interviewed yesterday.

"I think people responded pretty much the way the news media did," he continued.
"At first, the only news was war news, but then gradually other things
reappeared. People were the same. After four days of watching TV or listening to
the radio, they began to say, 'I've got to start getting my life back on track.'
"

Mr. Libin added that January is normally "a very tough season for ticket sales."
He said he was nevertheless hopeful because "traditionally, in bad times people
go to the theater to get away from it all."

Phil Smith, executive vice president of the Shubert Organization, the largest
Broadway theater owner, said his company's experience was much the same as
Jujamcyn's.

"The daily take was considerably off last Wednesday and Thursday," he said, "but
on the weekend it began to build as if people needed some diversion."

Closings Were Expected

A spokesman for the Nederlander Organization, Broadway's second largest theater
owner, said attendance at its theaters declined sharply, but he attributed that
to the traditional January slump.

Sunday's closing of "Black and Blue," "Shogun" and "Peter Pan," said Arthur
Rubin, vice president and general manager of the company, was expected even
before the fighting started.

Mr. Rubin acknowledged that the Nederlander Organization's box office receipts
were definitely affected by a new war-related phenomenon -- the sudden departure
for Israel by stars who are Israeli citizens or who want to express solidarity
with Israel during the war.

Topol, who stars in the revival of "Fiddler on the Roof," left Saturday night
and is expected back in time for Sunday's matinee. The comedian Jackie Mason
canceled four performances of "Jackie Mason: Brand New" to visit Israel. He is
expected back for tomorrow's performance.

"It's hard to differentiate whether box office is being affected by the season,
the economy or the war," Mr. Rubin said. "We may get some indication of what's
going on next Monday when the box office opens for Neil Simon's play 'Lost in
Yonkers.' "

Half-Price Tickets Off

Stuart Little, a spokesman for the Theater Development Fund, said that sales at
the TKTS booth in Times Square were "considerably down," but he attributed that
to the recent closing of shows like "Peter Pan" as well as to preoccupation with
the war.

But cancellations are few. "People cancel when there's a snowstorm," Mr. Rubin
said, "but not when there's a war."

Several producers said they have noticed a few empty seats in sold-out houses,
and they suspect that some foreign tourists cut short their stays to return home
before the expiration of the Jan. 15 United Nations deadline for Iraq to leave
Kuwait.

Joseph E. Spinnato, president of the Hotel Association of New York, agreed with
this assessment. "Foreign visitors to New York went home sooner than originally
planned," he said.

Joseph McKaughan, vice president for public affairs at Lincoln Center, said that
ticket sales for tonight's performances were "good to strong." The shows are
"Don Giovanni" at the Metropolitan Opera, "Six Degrees of Separation" at the
Beaumont, "Monster in a Box" at the Newhouse and performances by the New York
City Ballet and the New York Philharmonic.

He added: "That's largely because subscription tickets for these performances
were sold about a year ago. However, the City Ballet held a nonsubscription
performance last Sunday and that sold quite well."

Movies Do Well

Movie attendance apparently benefited from the war. "Last week was a big box
office week," said John Krier, president of the Exhibitor Relations Company of
Los Angeles, which tracks movie attendance.

"The box office take was about $63 million, which is approximately the same as
the previous week and slightly better than the same period last year," he said.

The comedy "Home Alone," about a boy who defeats a couple of burglars when left
at home alone by his vacationing parents, led the top 10 box-office earners for
the 10th consecutive week by taking in an estimated $9.4 million.

More disappointing was "Flight of the Intruder," featuring Vietnam-era air
combat, which was in fifth place, grossing $4.9 million for the week. "It didn't
capture the public interest as might have been expected," Mr. Krier said.

"If the heavy coverage of the war continues," he added, "people will tend to
look for escapism more and more."

A spokesman for Loew's Theaters in New York said business seemed not to have
changed at all from this time last year.

Video rentals, however, went into "a steep decline and then rebounded," said Amy
Innerfield, general manager of Videoflash, a home video tracking service of
Alexander & Associates in New York.

Before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August, she said, about 41 percent of the
families owning a VCR rented at least one cassette a week. After the invasion,
only 36 percent of VCR households did so. Later, the figure slipped to 35
percent, but then after the fighting started last week it bobbed up to 42
percent.

"You could see a real impact," Ms. Innerfield said, "and the reason seemed to be
that last fall people were watching the news and didn't have time for rental
cassettes. Then, after the first few days of real war, people wanted some escape
from the war coverage so they went out and rented a movie."

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

WAR IN THE GULF: Marines;
Finding Life's Meaning in Winds and Rains of War

BYLINE: By CHRIS HEDGES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 835 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Jan. 23


Night comes early in the Saudi desert and these days it is accompanied by a
bitter wind, sporadic rain and the loneliness that isolation and fear bring to
the hearts of young soldiers about to go to war.

The men in the Marine Corps' First Battalion, who will probably be in the front
ranks of any ground attack, are struggling to grasp huge thoughts: the meaning
of their lives, the capriciousness of fate and the duty they feel.

Each one grapples with his ideas in his own way, some writing poetry, some
reading books and everyone studying their manuals, reviewing tactics and
cleaning and re-cleaning their weapons.

"It is reassuring to clean your weapon," said the battalion commander, Lieut.
Col. Michael O. Fallon. "It is something you can do."

'Feeling of Anxiety'

The rituals of life in the Marines' desert encampment are spartan.

The men, who have been in Saudi Arabia since September, get showers every two
weeks. They sleep under large ponchos that they tie to the camouflage netting
staked out over their armored vehicles. In the day, and often at night, they
practice assaults. They are also receiving instruction in first aid, how to
identify enemy armor and what to do during gas attacks.

The humor in the battalion has a hard edge, with men joking about the wheelchair
races they will have when they get home.

"A lot of people will joke about it, make sly remarks about it," said Lance Cpl.
Henderson J. Nugent, "but underneath we all have this feeling of anxiety."

Becoming Introspective

The sarcasm is usually gone by nightfall and many Marines, unable to read
because of the order to keep lights out, lie in their sleeping bags and carry on
discussions usually associated with men much older.

"It has caused us to be very introspective" said Corporal Nugent, whose platoon
handles TOW anti-tank missles. "I have no doubt about God now. I am closer to
Him and my inner self. You think about how you will be remembered if you bite
the big one."

Cpl. David E. Logsdon of Prairie Grove, Ark., reads the Bible and books like
"Moby-Dick" in an effort to understand what drives people toward destructive
obsessions.

"I concentrated on Ahab the most," he said. "I concentrated on his obsession
with the whale, the way he kept after it. I wondered if he was like Saddam
Hussein."

The most painful memory for many marines is the farewell from their families.
Corporal Nugent, who is 22 years old, wrote a poem about his mother crying on
the telephone. The poem struck a chord in his platoon.

We keep our weapons clean, preparing them to fire.
If I said I had no fear, you know I'd be a liar.
But my greatest fear of all is not that I might die.
But that if I do get killed, I'll still hear my mother cry.

 Colonel Fallon, the battalion's 44-year-old commander who also fought in
Vietnam, speaks of his 4-year-old daughter, Charlotte, whose pictures he keeps
in a plastic bag he carries.

"She is the pride and joy of my life," he said. "When I left she was crying and
telling me she didn't understand why I had to go. It really got to me."

The Stars Seem to Help

Lance Cpl. David A. McNamee, from Woburn, Mass., said that the night before he
left for Saudi Arabia, his fiance woke up in the middle of the night in tears.
She had dreamed that two Marines in dress uniforms had come to her door to tell
her that he was dead.

"Everything had been going all right with my departure until then," Corporal
McNamee said. "It kind of scared me seeing her that upset. I got too much to do
in my life to let some Iraqi get me."

The sweeping beauty of a clear night sky in the desert frequently affects the
Marines, who are stationed about 50 miles from Kuwait.

"At night, when I look at the stars and the moon, I wonder what everyone is
doing back home," said Cpl. Richard L. Wells of Princeton, Iowa. "I always think
of my wife and my family when I look at the stars. The stars seem to bring
everything out of your subconscious."

The Roar of Jets

The marines said they have become superstitious, hanging on to any good-luck
charm. Many said they always make a wish on the shooting stars that streak
across the sky.

Each night, as the marines lie in their sleeping bags, the sounds of the planes
and jets on bombing missions to Kuwait and Iraq fill the desert.

"Listen," said Corporal McNamee as wave after wave went by unseen late one
evening. "I like that sound."

Shortly after he spoke, a battery of 155-millimeter howitzers fired a series of
volleys. The desert suddenly filled with the noise of munitions and planes. The
marines listened until the planes were gone and the artillery fire had ended.

Corporal McNamee made a high whistle that gradually descended into a low whine
and then a guttural immitation of an explosion.

After his imitation of a falling bomb, the men said nothing. All that could be
heard was a rain, beating on the canvas ponchos overhead and the wind whipping
across the expansive desert floor.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 29, 1991, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

An article on Thursday about a United States Marine unit in Saudi Arabia
misidentified the unit. It is the First Battalion of the First Marine Regiment.


                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

At Last, Pax Americana

BYLINE: By Joshua Muravchik; Joshua Muravchik, resident scholar at the American
Enterprise Institute, is author of the forthcoming "Exporting Democracy."

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 684 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


It will be weeks before the guns in the gulf fall silent, but we can see already
the political contours of the world following an American victory. Important
changes are in the offing on three levels of politics: domestic, Arab and
global.

Domestically, the most profound consequences may be felt in the Democratic
Party, dominated ideologically since the Vietnam War by its dovish wing. If the
large majority of American voters continues to view the gulf war as the most
just, necessary and successful our country has fought since World War II, the
Democrats will pay a heavy price for having opposed it.

However, those who bucked the leadership and supported the President -- Stephen
Solarz, Les Aspin, Dave McCurdy, Dante Fascell in the House; Joseph Lieberman
and Albert Gore in the Senate -- will emerge vastly strengthened. They will win
plaudits both for being right and for having risen above partisanship. If they
stick together even loosely they will constitute a formidable new force in the
party. From their ranks may come the next Democratic Presidential candidate,
albeit not before Mr. Bush has had his second term.

In the Arab world, the drubbing of Saddam Hussein will be an epiphany that will
demolish the appeal of the radical path. The bane of Arab politics has been a
millenarianism that has stood in the way of a reckoning with reality -- the
reality of Israel, the reality of the West. Whether in the form of pan-Arabism,
religious fanaticism or secular radical ideologies, this millenarianism has led
many Arabs to believe that, with unity or the right leader or theory, the
humiliations of colonialism and underdevelopment could be redeemed and the world
could be had on Arab terms rather than through compromise.

Not since the heyday of the former Egyptian President, Gamal Abdel Nasser, has
one man concentrated in his own person all the wishful hopes of Arab radicalism
as has Saddam Hussein. The very outrageousness of his aggression against Kuwait,
his irrational defiance of America and his missile attacks on Israel have only
reinforced his hold on the radical imagination.

If -- as seems all but certain -- the war ends in Saddam Hussein's utter
humiliation, the sobering effect should be enormous. With Mr. Hussein's Baath
Party in tatters, Soviet influence a thing of the past, Islamic extremism losing
its luster in Iran and the myth of unity shattered as never before, the Arab
world may be ready finally for realism and moderation.

Last but not least, the gulf war marks the dawning of the Pax Americana. True,
that term was used immediately after World War II. But it was a misnomer then
because the Soviet empire -- a real competitor with American power -- was born
at the same moment. The result was not a "pax" of any kind, but a cold war and a
bipolar world.

During the past two years, however, Soviet power has imploded and a bipolar
world has become unipolar. A global rush toward democracy and free markets has
spelled a huge victory for America on the ideological plain. Now, in the gulf
war, our ideological supremacy is being matched by a demonstration of America's
refurbished military capability.

Since Vietnam, doubts had abounded, both at home and abroad, about America's
willingness to use force and its ability to do so effectively. It may well have
been such doubts that led Saddam Hussein to ignore President Bush's pleas and
threats. It is not likely another ruler will soon hasten to make the same
miscalculation.

America's rediscovered prowess will not be used for conquest but to deter others
from conquest: to secure the "new world order" that has been a goal of American
policy since President Woodrow Wilson. In addition, it will strengthen the
attraction of America's political and economic system.

This Pax Americana will rest not on domination but on persuasion and example as
well as power. It will consist not of empire but of having won over a large and
growing part of the world not only to the joys of jeans and rock and Big Macs
but also to our concept of how nations ought to be governed and to behave.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 25, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: THE COSTS;
2 Unsavory Choices on the Budget: Increase Borrowing or Raise Taxes

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 24


No one knows how much the war will cost. That is because no one knows how long
it will last, how many lost planes and expended weapons will have to be replaced
and how much money the allies will contribute to offset the price to the
American taxpayer.

But the cost, running at several hundred million dollars a day since the
shooting began, is sure to be substantial, and that started a debate this week
over how the war should be paid for.

Policy makers have their fingers crossed that a healthy share of the tab will be
picked up by the Japanese, the Germans and the Saudis, but most officials agree
that the United States will end up bearing the brunt of the financial cost as
well as the human cost of the allied effort.

Two Options

Since few in the Administration or Congress are willing to cut domestic spending
by enough to pay the war bills, there are only two ways to meet them: by raising
taxes or by borrowing the money.

Those who favor a "pay as you go" approach take their text from the contrast
between the American experiences in Korea and Vietnam.

In 1950, at the outset of the Korean War, taxes were raised; the country came
out of the war with inflation under control, and the economy boomed after the
war.

By contrast, President Lyndon B. Johnson waited for more than a year to propose
a tax increase after his Council of Economic Advisers in late 1965 recommended
one to pay for the Vietnam buildup. Then, Congress did not approve the war
surtax for another 18 months. The inflation that resulted from the increased
budget deficit damaged the economy for years afterward.

Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, and Robert D.
Reischauer, director of the Congressional Budget Office and Congress's chief
economist, say that circumstances now are different in two respects from those
that existed at the outset of the Vietnam War.

Recession Is a Factor

First, the economy was growing rapidly in the mid-1960's; now it is in
recession. As a consequence, inflation is a less serious threat now than it was
then. And a tax increase now, Mr. Greenspan and Mr. Reischauer said at separate
Congressional hearings this week, could worsen the recession. Mr. Greenspan
urged Congress not to raise taxes to pay for the war, even though that would
increase the budget deficit.

The second difference is that when the fighting began in Vietnam, the military's
supply of planes, tanks, ships and weapons was deemed inadequate, and a rapid
expansion of Pentagon spending ensued. Now, because of the military buildup in
the 1980's and the end of the cold war, the war in the Persian Gulf can be
fought largely with stockpiled weapons and equipment.

Each of the Navy's Tomahawk cruise missiles, for example, costs $1 million to
produce. But if new missiles are not produced to replace the ones that are shot
in the war, there is no budget cost and thus no cost to the economy.

Economists acknowledge that borrowing the money to finance the war would
substantially raise the budget deficit, which already will be above $300 billion
this year. The war costs could easily wipe out the nearly $40 billion in deficit
reduction for the fiscal year 1991 that President Bush and Congress so
laboriously negotiated in the fall. That would lead to somewhat higher interest
rates, less saving and investment and some long-term harm to the economy, they
say.

Uncertainty Is Cited

But most economists in and out of the Government agree that to raise taxes now
when the country is in a recession and when no one has the foggiest idea how
much money will be needed would be foolhardy.

"This is a one-time emergency expenditure," a Bush Administration economist said
in an interview. "It's like an investment, like a city issuing a bond to pay for
a sewer system, and it makes more sense to deficit finance than to tax finance."

Charles L. Schultze, who was budget director in the Johnson Administration and
who is now a senior fellow in economics at the Brookings Institution, said he
agreed that taxes should not be raised while the economy is in recession and
that taxes might not need to go up at all if the war turns out to be a short
one. But he said, "If as we learn more, the costs seem to be at the higher end
of what seems probable, once we're in recovery we probably ought to put on a
temporary tax to recover the loss."

But some politicians are uneasy with the idea of going further into debt to pay
for the war. "We face a choice of whether we are going to face up to this thing
and do it on a 'pay as you go' basis or let it slide by and let our
grandchildren pay for it," said Senator Paul Simon, an Illinois Democrat.

The lawmakers have been frustrated by the Bush Administration's reluctance to
address the matter fully and publicly. Charles H. Bowsher, the Comptroller
General and the Government's top auditor, told Congress that the Pentagon's
accounting systems were so weak that it was impossible to measure the costs with
any precision. Indeed, the budget President Bush will send to Congress early
next month will have what budget writers call a "place-holder," a number picked
out of the blue with a notation that the actual amount cannot be estimated.

Sharing the Burden

What the politicians want, of course, is for more of the burden to be borne by
the allies, particularly Japan and Germany, which have strong economies, rely on
Middle Eastern oil and do not have any troops in the gulf region.

Japan promised $4 billion last year but has only paid about $600 million so far.
After days of behind-the-scenes wrangling, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu
announced today that Japan would give another $9 billion this year. But the
contribution must be approved by Parliament, and Mr. Kaifu faces strong
opposition on the issue.

Germany pledged about $3 billion last year, but actually contributed about a
tenth of that. Chancellor Helmut Kohl, despite strong antiwar sentiment among
Germans, has promised an additional, unspecific amount this year. Mr. Kohl said
he would probably have to raise the money with a tax increase. Analysts said the
Chancellor was simply using the war as an excuse for higher taxes that were
necessary in Germany for other reasons, principally to pay the high costs of the
unification of West and East Germany. In any case, getting the allies to
contribute a larger share may be easier said than done.

"What do we have to do to force the Germans and the Japanese and others to pay
more?" Senator Timothy E. Wirth, a Colorado Democrat, asked a panel of
economists at a hearing this week. "How do we do it? What kind of leverage do we
have?"

The economists had no ready answer.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 25, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF;
More on the Gulf

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 112 words



NOW A CRITIC Gen. William C. Westmoreland, criticized in the Vietnam War, is the
critic now. And George McGovern says he may run for President. Page A14.

TOWN PITCHES IN A Michigan town pitches in to help after vandalism and a fire at
a restaurant owned by a Palestinian-American who opposes the war. Blissfield
Journal, page A14.

CHILDREN'S FEARS Peter Jennings, the ABC News anchor, is trying to address the
concerns children have about the war. Word and Image, page C28.

HOW HIGH THE COST?  As the Administration tries to stabilize the economy to ward
off inflation or recession, the war's cost may overwhelm all its calculations.
Economic Scene, page D2.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 25, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: THE TROOPS;
Blacks Wary of Their Big Role as Troops

BYLINE: By ISABEL WILKERSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1672 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Jan. 24


Wesley Hatch, a black teen-ager from Chicago's impoverished West Side, graduated
from high school with few choices two years ago. He dreamed of going to college
to study architecture, but his mother did not have the money. That left dead-end
jobs, the streets and the military. He chose the military.

"He didn't want to go," said his mother, Rhoda Hatch. "But he thought by joining
the Army he'd be able to do better, help me out and go to school."

104,000 in the Gulf

Now he is a foot soldier on the Kuwaiti border, one of about 104,000 black men
and women who, Defense Department statistics show, account for nearly 25 percent
of the American troops in the Persian Gulf and almost 30 percent of Army troops
there.

Despite their numbers in the armed forces, blacks make up 12 percent of the
nation's civilian population. And as the gulf conflict moves closer to ground
combat, a painful debate has divided many blacks about young blacks' role in the
war and in the military.

The statistics documenting the number of blacks in the gulf have stirred a deep
well of resentment and anger in some blacks who fear that their community will
pay disproportionately for a war that many of them do not support.

The most recent New York Times/ CBS News Poll, conducted Jan. 17-20, asked 3,002
adults whether they favored starting military action or continuing the use of
economic sanctions. The 250 blacks in the poll split about evenly on the
question, and whites favored military action by a 4-to-1 ratio. And in a vote
four days before the war started, all the black Democrats in Congress were
against the measure authorizing force in the gulf.

Some black critics of the war say they are bitter that their sons and daughters
are being sent to war by an Administration that they see as being insensitive to
members of minority groups. Others say problems like drugs and crime in this
country are more important than Kuwait but will not receive attention because of
the preoccupation with the war. And with a fervor reminiscent of the civil
rights movement, some are forming antiwar groups to discourage more blacks from
joining the military.

Still other blacks express pride and comfort in Gen. Colin L. Powell, the
nation's first black Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as well as a loyal,
if resigned, sense of duty to the war effort. Others fully support President
Bush's use of force against a man many view as a threat to the entire Middle
East and say that other concerns have to take a back seat for now.

Pentagon officials acknowledge the dispproportionate number of blacks in the
armed forces, but say it is the random outcome of having an all-volunteer force.
"Nobody's making them enlist," said Christopher Jehn, Assistant Secretary of
Defense for force management and personnel. "They're not victims; they're
willing, patriotic Americans."

Critics Point to Inequities

Black critics of the war argue that blacks have defended the country its wars
and still face inequities at home. "Once and for all, black women are saying,
we're not sending our sons anymore," said Jamillah Muhammad, a Muslim who heads
a black women's group in Chicago that is opposed to the war. "Until things
change for our children," she said, the military is not going to getthem.

But those who support the war say that this is a time when blacks and whites
should be pulling together in the face of a larger threat.

Bertha Bailey, a high school teacher in McKinney, Tex., whose grandson is among
the blacks serving in the gulf, says she accepts the inevitabilities of war.
"Sometimes, some things can't get corrected without someone getting hurt," Mrs.
Bailey said. "We don't need a fight within a fight. Why worry about who is
overrepresented when they're all at danger points?"

But the Rev. Jesse Jackson and many black Congressmen have said the
disproportionate number of blacks in the gulf was evidence of the bleak economic
opportunities they have.

"This nation ought to be ashamed that the best and brightest of our youth don't
volunteer because they love it so well, but because this nation can't provide
them jobs," said Dr. Benjamin L. Hooks, president of the National Association
for the Advancement of Colored People.

And during a week of commemorations marking the birthday of the Rev. Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr., his son urged blacks not to participate in the war. In a speech
in Chicago last week for Operation PUSH, Martin Luther King 3d said: "Every
black soldier ought to say: "You all do what you want to. I'm not going to
fight. This is not my war.' "

The debate underscores an agonizing irony for blacks. Blacks have faced
discrimination and harassment as they fought for important war posts to prove
their worth and citizenship. In the last 20 years, since the easing of racial
strictures, large numbers of them volunteered for the armed forces as a way out
of poverty and now must face the war as a consequence of that decision.

At the core of the problem, said Martin Binkin, a military analyst with the
Brookings Institution, are the mixed perceptions of the military and perhaps the
conflicting motivations of those who join. "The military is seen as a benefit in
peacetime," Mr. Binkin said, "and a burden during war."

In the years of peace since the Vietnam War and the end of the draft, which had
tended to equalize the number of blacks and whites in the armed forces, blacks
have joined the military at a rate up to three times that for whites. In 1980,
42 percent of black men between the ages of 19 and 24 who could potentially
qualify for the armed forces had served in the military, as against 14 percent
of all potentially qualified white men in the same age group, according to
research conducted by Mr. Binkin. He estimated that today 33 to 35 percent of
all qualified young black men have served in the military, as against 16 or 17
percent for young white men.

Military analysts and many blacks agree that the armed forces, while not a
racial utopia, offer a more egalitarian and welcoming environment for blacks
than perhaps any place in the civilian world. That assessment stems in large
part from a military system of promotion and pay based mainly on seniority and
skill rather than on race and intangibles.

"The military is the only major institution in America with something like a
level playing field," said Prof. Charles Moskos, a sociologist at Northwestern
University. "It is the only place where a white will be bossed around by a black
on a regular basis at the local level. There is probably a better racial climate
in the military than on a college campus."

General Powell has said, "The armed forces have always provided opportunities
for blacks, which blacks have found attractive and have gone after, and I see no
reason to change that now."

A Poverty Draft Is Seen

But critics say the military is taking advantage of economic conditions in which
the armed forces are the only chance for steady work that some black people
have. They say that such enlistment amounts to a kind of poverty draft. "We join
because we don't have anyplace else to go," Mrs. Muhammad said.

Now that troops have been sent and a war has started, there is scarcely a black
church or inner-city school where someone does not know at least one person, if
not a lot of people, in the gulf. "There is a sense of impending disaster," said
the Rev. George H. Clements, pastor of Holy Angels Roman Catholic Church in
Chicago, a predominantly black church with 104 members or relatives of members
in the gulf.

Critics of the war fear that the black communities that have already lost great
numbers of men to drugs and crime will now lose "the good ones" to war. Military
analysts say, that unlike white enlistees who tend to be poorer and less
educated than their civilian counterparts, most black men and women in the
military are high school graduates or better from working- and middle-class
families.

"The stabilizing forces in our community are being drawn out," said Kathy
Flewellen, a leader of the National African-Americans Against United States
Intervention in the Gulf, a network with affiliated groups in six cities that
was formed in Washington, to protest the war.

The feelings of loss and dispair are mixed with a sense of satisfaction about
General Powell. "Everytime he's on TV I feel proud," said James Exum, a Vietnam
War veteran living in Chicago. "I feel confident with him there. I don't think
he'll rush into ground action knowing that there are black men on the front
lines. I feel a sense of comfort knowing that there's a black man calling the
shots."

Like so many black servicemen, Mr. Exum, a former army captain and Green Beret,
enlisted right out of high school to escape the housing projects of Washington.
"I didn't see that I had any options," he said. "I got many benefits, but I
could have gotten killed."

He survived commando raids that he led into North Vietnam and said he
experienced a kind of multiracial fraternity he has not seen since the war.
"When somebody got shot down, none of us asked if they were black or white or
what religion they were," Mr. Exum said. "All we needed to know was, is the
person American. It was the only time we lived up to what this country is all
about."

The recent debate over racial disparities in the military has stirred several
efforts on Capitol Hill, and hearings on the topic in the coming weeks are being
considered.

And black antiwar groups across the country are pushing for improvements in
vocational education to give black youths an alternative to the military.

But many say that the demographics of a volunteer force, will not change, until
the economic climate does. "Until the problems of society are solved where
blacks have more opportunities, you almost by definition will have a
disproportionate number of blacks in the military," said Mr. Binkins of the
Brookings Institution. "Until then, we have to live with what's over there now."

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Rhoda Hatch: "He didn't want to go," she said of her son
Wesley, who is serving in Saudi Arabia. "But he thought by joining the Army he'd
be able to do better, help me out and go to school."; James Exum: "I feel a
sense of comfort knowing that there's a black man calling the shots," he said of
Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.; Jamillah Muhammad:
"Until things change for our children" she said, the military is not going to
get them. (Photographs by Steve Kagan for The New York Times) (pg. A12)

Graph: 'Black U.S. Troops' shows number of black U.S. troops in the Gulf and on
active duty worldwide in each branch of the service (Source: Defense Department)
(pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 25, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

GATHERING OPENS WITH G.O.P IN FLUX

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 797 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 24


The Republican National Committee began meeting here today with its next
chairman, Clayton K. Yeutter, embroiled in the politics of the Persian Gulf
while another top Republican campaign official, Edward J. Rollins, said that he
planned to resign.

Mr. Yeutter, the Secretary of Agriculture, came under strong Democratic fire for
suggesting on Tuesday in Nebraska that Democrats would suffer in the 1992
elections for opposing the use of force in the Persian Gulf.

At the same time, Mr. Rollins, the co-chairman of the National Republican
Congressional Committee, said he was leaving to join a private consulting firm.

"In all honesty, I'm tired," said Mr. Rollins, who came under attack from the
White House last fall for suggesting that Republican candidates might want to
distance themselves from the Bush Administration's budget deal with Congress.
Mr. Rollins, who said he would continue to advise the campaign committee,
probably as a volunteer, said his decision to leave was not a result of White
House pressure.

Loss of 2 Officials

Both developments underscored the flux in the Republican political operation.
The National Republican Congressional Committee, which is the official campaign
organization for House Republicans, was losing not only Mr. Rollins but also
Marc Nuttle, its executive director.

Mr. Yeutter found himself explaining comments reported this week in The Omaha
World-Herald, which said he had noted that most Democrats voted against the
Congressional resolutions authorizing President Bush to use force in the gulf
and should be held accountable for it.

"I would guess 90 percent of them now wish they had cast their votes the other
way," Mr. Yeutter said. "They picked the wrong side. If the conflict goes well,
that will work against them."

Democrats countered that Mr. Yeutter was injecting partisan politics where it
did not belong.

Senator Bob Kerrey, a Nebraska Democrat who won the Medal of Honor in Vietnam
and was singled out by Mr. Yeutter for opposing the resolution, asserted that
Mr. Yeutter's comments "trivialize the deep misgivings that all Americans have
about sending our sons and daughters into combat."

Politics and War

Thomas S. Foley, the Speaker of the House, said that Mr. Yeutter's "judgment has
deserted him" and that his comments were "unfortunate and I would almost say
disreputable."

An aide in the Democratic leadership said Democrats wanted to "cut off at the
pass" any attempt to play politics with the war in the gulf and the votes that
authorized it.

The White House sought a middle ground. "We don't believe the gulf is a partisan
issue," said Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, but he added, "There
was a certain partisanship about the way the votes were cast."

Mr. Yeutter said today that he had not been trying to "challenge anyone's
patriotism" or to politicize the war in the gulf.

"I simply said the American public would hold members of Congress accountable
for their votes and their actions during this entire time frame," Mr. Yeutter
said. "That's the way a democratic society works."

As members of the Republican National Committee began gathering today for their
midwinter meeting, party regulars sought to quash a resolution that denounces
Richard G. Darman, the White House budget director, and calls for his
resignation.

The resolution is sponsored by Morton C. Blackwell, a conservative committeeman
from Virginia, who asserted that Mr. Darman was "the personification" of last
year's budget deal with Congress that broke President Bush's "no new taxes"
pledge.

Resolution Is Defeated

The measure was rejected by the national committee's resolutions panel today,
but Mr. Blackwell said he would seek to raise it before the full national
committee on Friday. That would require a two-thirds vote of the committee to
suspend the rules and is considered unlikely.

Several national committee members said the war in the gulf, and the desire to
rally round the President, had muted internal strife in the party -- at least
for now. Mr. Bush and White House officials came under extraordinary fire from
their own party last fall, largely because of their handling of the budget
negotiations, which many Republicans asserted gave the Democrats a huge tactical
advantage.

Many Republican strategists have worried about the void left by Lee Atwater, the
current chairman, who is suffering form a brain tumor, and the conduct of the
White House political operation has done little to ease those fears. Now Mr.
Bush has chosen a new party chairman who is better known for policy than
politics. Mr. Yeutter, whom the President chose this month to succeed Mr.
Atwater, will be officially elected by the national committee in a pro forma
vote on Friday.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Agriculture Secretary Clayton K. Yeutter, who is expected to be
elected chairman of the Republican National Committee today, talking to
reporters yesterday at the group's meeting in Washington. (Paul Hosefros/The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 25, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: JOURNALISTS;
CBS News Says Crew Vanished Near Front Lines

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 627 words


A four-man CBS News crew led by the veteran correspondent Bob Simon has been
missing in a front-line region of the Persian Gulf war since early Monday, the
network said yesterday after the crew's vehicle was found in the Saudi desert
near the Kuwaiti border.

Four sets of footprints, apparently those of the missing men, were found in the
desert trailing northward from the car into Kuwait, Saudi officials said last
night. There was no word on when the vehicle had been abandoned.

It was the first report of any news personnel missing in the nine-day war.

As concern arose that the crew might have been captured by Iraqi forces, CBS
News had quietly asked the Pentagon and American military forces in Dhahran on
Wednesday for help in finding the missing men.

No Sign of a Struggle

CBS disclosed that its crew was missing after a Saudi military unit on routine
patrol found the crew's Toyota Land Cruiser yesterday morning on the side of a
road near Ar Ruqi, a Saudi town just south of the southwestern corner of Kuwait.
There was no sign of a struggle, CBS said, or any indication of what had
happened to the newsmen.

Saudi trackers followed the footprints northward from the car into Kuwait, but
were unable to proceed past a checkpoint manned by Iraqi troops, the Saudi
Defense Ministry said in a statement.

The statement said that $6,000 in cash, television equipment, some Iraqi
currency and a wristwatch with a picture on the dial of the Iraqi President,
Saddam Hussein, had been found in the crew's vehicle. Many journalists who have
visited Iraq in recent weeks have purchased the watches as souvenirs.

"We hope they've hooked up with a friendly military unit and are off somewhere
and just not able to communicate," said Tom Goodman, the director of
communications for CBS News. "But the reality is we just don't know their
whereabouts or condition."

Last Contact on Monday

News correspondents in war zones are occasionally unable to communicate with
their offices for two or three days. It is rare for reporters to be missing as
long as Mr. Simon, who last contacted the CBS base in Dhahran at about 9 A.M.
Monday.

Pete Williams, the Pentagon's spokesman, said yesterday that all allied military
commanders in the northern Saudi desert had been asked to be on the lookout for
the CBS crew, but that no word on the missing men had been relayed.

Mr. Simon, a 49-year-old correspondent who covered the Vietnam War, conflicts in
the Middle East and Central America and other major news events in 24 years with
the network, was accompanied by Peter Bluff, 47 years old, a CBS News staff
producer; Roberto Alvarez, 37, a cameraman, and Juan Caldera, 31, a sound man.
Mr. Alvarez and Mr. Caldera are a freelance team based in Miami who often work
for CBS.

Mr. Simon, who has frequently filed reports from Saudi Arabia since Iraq invaded
Kuwait last August, took his crew into the gulf region several weeks ago. Like
an increasing number of correspondents, he was dissatisfied with the Pentagon's
pool arrangements for combat reporting. He went out without a guide or military
escort last week to report from the front.

Not a Violation of Rules

Such independent reporting is frowned upon by American military officials, but
does not violate the Pentagon's rules for journalists covering the war.

The town Ar Ruqi, where the newsmen's car was found parked on the side of the
road, is a short distance from the desert junction of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and
Iraq. It is the heart of a combat no man's land occupied on the Saudi side by
the First and Second Marine Divisions, and on the Kuwaiti-Iraqi side by Iraqi
troops, who have crossed the border in recent days to engage in firefights with
the Americans.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The correspondent Bob Simon and three of CBS News crew members
have been missing in the Saudi desert since Monday. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 25, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

ABROAD AT HOME;
A Dark Trumpet

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 29; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 749 words


After one week of the war with Iraq, I am persuaded of three propositions.

* The war is going to be longer and uglier than most Americans at first
believed.

* The political consequences in the Middle East will be extremely dangerous.

* The United States has no real choice now but to go on to the end -- the end of
Saddam Hussein's power.

The public began with expectations of a short war. Those feelings were
encouraged by colorful television film of wizard American weaponry.

Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney has warned from the start against "euphoria."
But the military contributed to it. Spokesmen put out selective videotapes of
remarkably accurate bombing. They emphasized the high numbers of air sorties,
though numbers prove little. They prematurely claimed air superiority over Iraq.

The television networks added a good deal of hype. CNN has done a remarkable job
in many respects. But on the first night of the war it was guilty of an
unforgettable example of misreporting: a statement that Iraq's Republican Guard
had been "decimated" in Kuwait by U.S. bombing. The Guard remains.

By now, all concerned have pulled back from rosy forecasts. Print reporters have
done a fine job of pointing out the basic truth: that Iraq's main forces, air
and ground, have not been committed and remain safe underground so far as we
know. There have been no significant defections of Iraqi forces.

Gen. Colin Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs, warned that Saddam Hussein
may be deliberately holding back. His strategy, then, would be to suck the
allies into a ground attack in Kuwait -- against forces dug in behind trenches,
mines, barbed wire and fires.

The allies can pound the Iraqi troops in Kuwait mercilessly from the air. B-52's
are doing that right now. The hope is that the Iraqis will eventually give up.

But that was the hope in Vietnam. It is true that the terrain offers little or
no cover in the Persian Gulf; there are no jungles. But the Iraqis have had five
months to go underground in Kuwait, perhaps as deep as the Vietnamese who
survived American bombing in tunnels.

Despite the military cautions now being expressed, there is still no significant
doubt that the allies can win the war. But what of the political outcome? On
that score, there are extremely worrying signs.

Egypt is by far the most important Arab country opposing Iraq. When I was there
two weeks ago, President Hosni Mubarak sounded gung-ho for war. He said it would
last "a couple of days, or a couple of weeks at most." Egyptians disliked Saddam
Hussein because he cheated many Egyptian workers in Iraq out of their pay.

But now Youssef Ibrahim of The New York Times reports that sentiment in Egypt
"is clearly shifting in favor of Iraq." Egyptians have been shocked by the
intensity of the allied bombing, seeing in it a carelessness about the value of
Arab lives.

Rami Khouri, a Palestinian journalist in Amman, edited the English-language
Jordan Times for seven years. He is a measured, thoughtful man, respected by
many Western reporters. So when he warns that the war is creating an
anti-Western tide, it is significant. And he has just done that in a piece for
New Perspectives Quarterly.

Mr. Khouri has no illusions about Saddam Hussein, his occupation of Kuwait or
his ultimate defeat. But the political future after the war, he writes, will be
determined by "the bitter and resentful sentiments of hundreds of millions of
grassroots Arabs. . . . Every day that Iraq holds out against the U.S. and
strikes against Israel, the grassroots emotional support for Iraq grows
stronger. [It] is likely to result in serious political turmoil throughout the
region, including changes in regimes."

We may not like that message. We cannot. But we had better listen. It is not
only in Egypt and Jordan that anti-Western emotions are rising. They are evident
in Algeria, Tunisia, Morocco, Mauritania.

All these concerns, political and military, argue that President Bush would have
been wiser to let sanctions continue working rather than plunge into war. But
now that we are in it, to pull back would be far worse than pressing the war to
the quickest possible end.

It is a just war -- if not, as I believe, a wise one. No one can doubt that
Saddam Hussein is a vicious, dangerous leader. He cannot be left in power now.
We can only hope that the war will not drag on, and that President Bush is
thinking about how to mitigate the political consequences.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 25, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

ON MY MIND;
War: The One-Week Jitters

BYLINE: By A. M. Rosenthal

SECTION: Section A; Page 29; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 742 words


Can you imagine? This war is a week old already and we don't even know yet when
it will end!

What's more, it looks as if this fellow Saddam Hussein is so mean that he
actually intends to hit us with those airplanes, tanks, missiles and poison
weapons all our friends sold him.


And get this -- our generals cannot figure out in advance every move in his war
plans. Would you believe it -- our pilots actually miss the targets on some
bombing runs, despite all that fancy high-tech equipment we were generous enough
to give them. What's going on here?

What is going on here is a war against one of the most powerful armed forces in
the world, run by one of the fiercest dictators, ready now as always not only to
kill his enemies but slaughter his countrymen by the million, in pursuit of
empire.

But what is also going on is a case of self-induced American jitters. That can
be dangerous, so it is best to recognize at once where it comes from and deal
with it before it deals with us.

On TV and in the newspapers we are now told over and over that Saddam Hussein's
air force has not been destroyed, that we don't know exactly how badly Iraqi
power has been damaged so far, that he remains an extremely powerful adversary.

All true, and exactly what we should be told. But something is missing from many
of the reports and commentaries, which sometimes you cannot quite tell apart.
Every reporter knows, or should, that what's missing from a story is often more
important than what's in it.

What's missing is that none of this should be a surprise. Americans knew that
Iraq was a militarily strong country and would not be easy to conquer. Each
passing month Saddam Hussein made himself stronger. God help us if we had waited
another year or gave sanctions "time to work."

The only thing astonishing about the fact that he has not been mortally wounded
in a week is that anybody in the press, military or public is astonished. Yes,
things happen in wartime that are not quite as expected -- such as the extent of
the military communication system that the West built for Saddam Hussein and the
number of Scuds that the Soviet Union shipped to him.

It's callous to call any war "short," but this one will last months, not years
-- unless we give him victory through panic brought on by unjustified jitters.

The problem may be that on the first night the American attack was so
successful, American pilots so skilled, that Americans began fantasizing about
an immediate Iraqi collapse. The military was too enthusiastic about the damage
to the hidden Iraqi air force, and there was journalistic talk about how the
tank divisions of the Iraqi Republican Guard were being devastated.

Since then, as a professional news reader and listener, I have detected a
foot-stomping note of irritability and querulousness in the press questioning
and some of the reporting. And in Saudi Arabia, one general started a briefing
by announcing his detestation of the press; reporters should have walked out,
leaving him alone with his stunted adolescence.

But apportioning blame for the jitters is far less important than calming them
-- with more truth, not less.

Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin Powell helped with their full,
lucid press briefing, but the Pentagon can do more to let Americans get the one
thing that will help most -- full reporting.

Right away, kill the Big Brother rule that a public information officer must be
present when a reporter talks to a soldier. That puts an insulting zipper on the
soldier's mouth. Americans won't believe what they read and hear; disbelief
creates insecurity and nervousness.

Shunting reporters around in noncompetitive "pools" makes the military the
assignment editor of the war, deciding what should or should not be covered. End
it; let reporters work independently within security realities. Barry Zorthian,
the American spokesman during the war in Vietnam, says that reporters were
welcomed by most soldiers -- and never were a security threat. That will be as
true in the desert as in the jungle.

The country needs hard reporting in the war, and American journalism needs the
chance to deliver. What the country does not need, from the press or military,
is astonishment that Saddam Hussein is really as strong as we made him. For
Saddam Hussein and his supporters in the U.S. and abroad, unjustified jitters
would be one more powerful weapon, handed to him by us.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 25, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AS A NEW WAR IS RAGING, OPPOSING VOICES FROM THE PAST SOUND OUT AGAIN;
McGovern: 'I Am Ready' to Run

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 960 words

DATELINE: DURHAM, N.H., Jan. 24


The year is 1991 and America is at war in the Persian Gulf. But for a moment
today it seemed as if it was the early 1970's and a different war, for here was
George S. McGovern on a college stage talking about running for President.

"I have not yet made the decision, but I am seriously considering it," former
Senator McGovern told an overflow audience of 850 students and faculty members
at the University of New Hampshire. His suggestion drew cheers and prolonged
applause on a campus not noted for political activism.

Donna Melillo, a 42-year-old psychologist with the school's counseling service,
said, "It's great to hear him talk again." Dr. Melillo said she had voted for
Mr. McGovern when he was the Democratic nominee in 1972 and, running on a
platform of opposition to the Vietnam War, lost badly to President Richard M.
Nixon. He carried only Massachusetts and the District of Columbia.

"It sounds like a lot of hookey, but he appeals to what is best in us, to honor,
and not to the greed of the 80's," Dr. Melillo said.

A New Set of Issues

The three-term Senator of South Dakota said that if he did decide to run again,
"I would not plan to base my campaign primarily on opposition to the war in the
Persian Gulf." He said that while he would have preferred that the United States
continued with economic sanctions against Iraq and not gone to war in the gulf,
"as an American, I want our forces to prevail."

Mr. McGovern, now 68 years old, said that for the next election he was primarily
concerned with America's deteriorating economy and the erosion of the nation's
political system. Borrowing a catch phrase from the Republicans, Mr. McGovern
said that what America now needs is "a new definition of patriotism" that gets
beyond symbolic flag waving.

Under this new patriotism, he said, it would no longer be patriotic to accept
huge national debts, to spend hundreds of billions of dollars for defense
against the Soviet Union with the cold war over, to tolerate pollution or to go
along with "the philosophy of greed and breakdown of Federal supervision that
produced the savings and loan scandal."

"It is not patriotic to commit young Americans to war unless our national
security clearly requires it," Mr. McGovern added. "It is certainly not
patriotic to wink and nod as race relations come under new strains."

Into the Vacuum

Looking tanned and relaxed, Mr. McGovern said, "I would prefer that a younger,
less battle-scarred candidate would now come forward" to provide a strong new
voice for the Democrats. "But if that is not to be, I believe that I am ready in
heart, mind and body to raise the Democratic standard."

He noted that so far, no Democrat has seriously begun a campaign for the
Presidency, and in particular that not a single Democrat has opened a campaign
operation here in New Hampshire, with its influential first-in-the-nation
primary.

It was Senator McGovern's strong second-place finish in the New Hampshire
primary in 1972, after Senator Edmund Muskie of Maine, the favorite, that helped
propel him to a surprise capture of the Democratic nomination that year.

In 1984 Mr. McGovern, with a poorly financed organization, tried again, narrowly
missing a second-place finish in the Iowa caucuses to Walter Mondale and Gary
Hart, his former campaign manager.

Third Time the Charm?

Four years later Mr. McGovern bought an inn in Stratford, Conn., but it has been
struggling to survive. Asked in an interview about a new Presidential bid, he
said: "I'm not under any illusions. I'd like to get something other than pure
ridicule if I did it."

In particular, friends say, Mr. McGovern does not relish being labeled another
Harold Stassen, the perennial Republican candidate of the 1940's, 50's and 60's.

But Mr. McGovern, who frequently lectures at colleges, said that he had been
contacted "by a number of people around the country over the past year about
running again." As a result, a group of these people met at his inn on Dec. 28
and decided to form an exploratory committee.

"I haven't told them I would do it, but I said I would give them an answer in a
couple of months," he said in the interview.

His visit to New Hampshire today is part of an effort to see whether it makes
any sense to run, Mr. McGovern said. The keys are whether he can get enough
contributions to qualify for Federal matching funds and whether he can put
together a strong campaign organization, he said. In his 1972 campaign, it was
his army of zealous volunteers, many of them strongly opposed to the Vietnam
war, that helped propel him to the Democratic nomination.

Mixed Feelings From Supporters

Encouraging him to run again is Woody Woodland, a minister in New Boston, N.H.,
who was Mr. McGovern's state coordinator in 1984. "McGovern people who know the
Senator personally have mixed feelings," Mr. Woodland said. "We are excited, but
we know it will be rough with comparisons to Stassen."

In his appearance today, Mr. McGovern was careful to differentiate his all-out
opposition to the Vietnam War from his reservations about American involvement
in the gulf. "One obvious difference is that there was clear aggression in the
gulf, with Saddam Hussein invading Kuwait," he said.

He pointed out that Dale Nitzschke, the president of the University of New
Hampshire, has a son who is a Marine fighter pilot in Saudi Arabia. And he asked
for a moment of prayer for all those caught in the war.

Paradoxically, it was Mr. Nitzschke who invited Senator McGovern to speak here.
"I have great respect for George," Mr. Nitzschke said. "The invitation was
extended some time ago, before the war, but I know George has a little gleam in
his eye. He's sampling things."

NAME: George S. McGovern

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Former Senator George S. McGovern speaking at news conference
yesterday in Durham, N.H. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 25, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AS A NEW WAR IS RAGING, OPPOSING VOICES FROM THE PAST SOUND OUT AGAIN;
Westmoreland: 'I'm Very Upbeat'

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 885 words


When the United States went to war in the Persian Gulf, the Pentagon never
bothered to consult one of its more famous old soldiers, Gen. William C.
Westmoreland, the commander of American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968. But
that does not mean he has nothing to say about the new war.

In the occasional interview and lecture, the retired general applauds the
freedom given the military to fight the war its way -- a freedom, he likes to
point out to his audiences, that he was denied.

In the 1960's, the press criticized the general as being too optimistic about
the war. But now it is the general who is the critic, accusing the press of
being "overly optimistic" in its initial accounts of the war against Iraq.

"I would hope we can wrap it up in a year," he said, far longer than the few
weeks or few months that President Bush and his top advisers have indicated the
war would take.

Amazed at New Technology

Reached by telephone at his home in Charleston, S.C., this week, General
Westmoreland said he has been following the war on the television, like millions
of other Americans. "I'm very upbeat about the situation," said the general,
whom critics of the Vietnam War accused of misleading the country by his
optimism. "It's just amazing what the technology, especially the Patriot
missile, has done."

The general, who is 76 years old, said of himself, "I'm over the hill."

Nevertheless, he said he still receives a lot of mail, "a bushel basketful every
couple of days," from Vietnam veterans and other Americans.

And he occasionally lectures on Vietnam, as he did Wednesday at Southern
Methodist University in Dallas, although he turned out to be no match for a
campus basketball game and drew only 150 people, many of them children of
Vietnam veterans.

In his view, the Vietnam War and the war against Saddam Hussein are so different
"that about the only similarity is that you've got armed men fighting each
other."

Two Conflicts Contrasted

One of the most important differences, he said, is that "because President
Johnson was afraid of bringing in China and starting a world war, we weren't
allowed to enlarge the battlefield." That meant giving the North Vietnamese
sanctuaries in their half of Vietnam, as well as in Laos and Cambodia from which
they could move troops and supplies into South Vietnam.

In the gulf war, General Westmoreland said, there is no longer any need to fear
involvement by either China or the Soviet Union. Indeed the Iraqis, unlike North
Vietnam, will not be able to replenish supplies of weapons from the major
Communist nations.

Moreover, he said, the current allied air attack on Iraq is likely to be far
more effective than the American bombing of North Vietnam because in the Vietnam
War, "the White House selected the targets to be hit."

The only time Washington lifted its restrictions on bombing in North Vietnam was
at Christmas 1972, when President Richard M. Nixon ordered heavy B-52 bomber
raids on the Hanoi area to try to force the Communists to conclude the Paris
peace negotiations. The damage inflicted in the Christmas bombing was dramatic,
and the North Vietnamese soon resumed negotiating.

Looking Back on Tet

"One can only speculate what would have happened if we had used that kind of
bombing after our military victory at Tet," General Westmoreland said. "The
outcome of the war could have been very different."

He was referring to the Communist offensive at the Tet lunar New Year holiday in
1968, in which Vietcong and North Vietnamese troops initially occupied parts of
virtually every city in South Vietnam but were soon beaten back with extremely
heavy losses.

The Tet offensive has been widely regarded as the crucial turning point in the
war. The ferocity of the attacks, especially an assault by a small unit of
Vietcong guerrillas on the United States Embassy in Saigon, suggested to many
Americans that General Westmoreland had been too optimistic in his assessments.

Although the Communists suffered terrible casualties, the offensive is regarded
by historians as a major Communist political victory, turning many Americans
against the war and leading to President Johnson's decision not to run for
re-election.

Contrast in Terrorism Seen

General Westmoreland compared Saddam Hussein's use of Scud missile attacks on
Israel and Saudia Arabia to the Vietcong's assault on the American Embassy in
Saigon, in which 20 Communist guerrillas never penetrated the building and were
all killed within a few hours. But the event was shown on American television,
giving the impression of Communist strength.

"The attack on the embassy was a terrorist operation, like the Scuds, with no
military significance," he said. But the way these events have been shown on
television gives them greater psychological impact than they deserve from a
military standpoint, he added.

He believes history will show that America actually won the Vietnam War. "We won
the war after we left, in effect," he said. "One of our great strategic aims was
to stop the Communist advance in Southeast Asia, and when you look at Southeast
Asia today, the Communists have made no gains."

"Today, Vietnam is a basket case run by a bunch of old men and is a threat to no
one but itself," he said.

NAME: William C. Westmoreland

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. William C. Westmoreland, retired, said the only similarity
between the wars in Vietnam and the Persian Gulf is that "armed men are fighting
each other." (Mark Perlstein for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 26, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1150 words



War in the Gulf 4-9

An enormous oil slick has spread from an oil terminal on the Kuwaiti coast. The
United States accused Iraq of releasing millions of gallons of oil, creating a
spill that dwarfs the Exxon Valdez disaster. Page 1

The spill could cause lasting damage to the environment, crippling fishing and
desalting plants that supply much of the region's fresh water, but U.S.
officials said it would have little effect on military operations. 1

The spill is a "sick," desperate act, President Bush said. He ordered the
Pentagon to take action to stop it, and officials said the effort could include
military action to stop the spill at its source in Kuwait. 5

An Iraqi Scud missile hit Riyadh, the Saudi capital, killing one and destroying
two buildings. Seven missiles were intercepted by Patriot missiles over Tel
Aviv, but an Israeli was killed when debris fell. 6

Reporter's Notebook: Saudis fight their own holy war 6

British officials say air war will last two or three weeks 7

Iraq's formidable Republican Guards block to road to victory 7

Soviet agency says Iraq executed two top air commanders 7 The use of nonlethal
gas in the war has been authorized by the Pentagon, which said the decision to
use the gas in certain circumstances against Iraqi forces was driven by a desire
"to save" American lives. 7

Reporter says allied jets hit residential area in Iraq, killing 24 5

Pan Am has refused to carry Iraqis on domestic and international flights since
the war began. The airline ordered ground staffs to turn away anyone from Iraq,
whether or not they presented any signs of threat. 9

Pro-Iraq sentiment is growing in North African nations 8

Chancellor Kohl is besieged by criticism of Germany's role 8

Japan says it will be isolated if it does not join the war effort 8

The war has hurt local economies already in recession. While stores selling such
things as radios, flags, maps, military gear and religious publications have
benefited, most retailers have watched sales fall. 31

Cardinal Law of Boston backs President's action in gulf 9

Mayor Dinkins will go to Israel despite opposing the war 29

 International 2-3

The Soviet Army will patrol cities jointly with the police to fight "crimes of
an audacious and cynical nature," the Kremlin said. The move was seen as an
ominous new sign of a hardline crackdown. 1

The U.S.-Soviet summit meeting scheduled for February in Moscow will be
postponed indefinitely because of the Kremlin's crackdown in the Baltic
republics, Administration officials said. 3 Moscow Journal: Literary journal
struggles to survive 2

Tensions have risen in Yugoslavia. Television stations aired footage purporting
to show Croation Government officials as they purchased weapons abroad, planned
attacks and talked of waging a civil war. 3

Kidnapped Colombian publisher is slain in raid to free her 2

 National 10-12

The fund that insures bank deposits will show a deficit sometime next year,
Government officials said. After that, the hole will only grow deeper, they
said, raising the specter of another huge taxpayer bailout. 1

Columbia Savings and Loan in California is seized 31

The nation's economy contracted by 2.1 percent in the final three months of
1990, the biggest quarterly drop in more than eight years. The fall, however,
was not as drastic as many economists had predicted. 1

State capitals and college towns grew in the 1980's, fueled by new employment in
state government and higher education, according to census figures. Cold-weather
cities shrank, as warm-weather suburbs boomed. 10

The toughest anti-abortion law of any state was signed by Utah's Governor. It
prohibits almost all elective abortions and poses a direct challenge to the
Supreme Court's decision guaranteeing the right to abortion. 10

Austria will release funds to pay for Noriega's legal fees 10

Three said to be supremacists are indicted in Florida 12

The next Secretary of Agriculture will likely be Representative Edward Madigan
of Illinois, an influential farm policy expert. The nomination of Mr. Madigan by
President Bush is expected to be approved. 11

The E.P.A. called for a reassesment of the nation's environmental priorities
that the agency's leader says are sometimes misplaced. The call won the support
of Senators but also evoked some skepticism. 11

Magellan transmits map of Venus showing volcanism 11

Operation PUSH says its financial troubles force layoffs 12

 Regional 27-29

New York City's teachers' union voted to save the jobs of younger colleagues by
deferring part of their salary for four years, averting the prospect of 3,500
layoffs or a shortening of the school year. 1

Cuomo expects that SUNY tuition will rise again 29

Dean of medical school at Cornell resigns to take new job 29

Governor Florio plans severe cuts in state government, including the elimination
of up to 8,000 jobs, officials said. To avoid new taxes, his $14 billion budget
would consolidate departments and lay off workers. 27

Letters on the condition of bridges will not be surrendered by the Dinkins
administration to a City Council panel that says they are vital to its
investigation of why subway service returned to the Manhattan Bridge. 27

A 13-year-old girl was found stabbed to death on the East River promenade under
the Wards Island Bridge. The police said the girl, who had vanished from her
building on East 111th Street, had been raped. 27

Two charged with illegally serving alcohol to teen-agers 28

The closing of Moon Palace has grieved its Upper West Side neighbors and
patrons. The Chinese restaurant on Broadway was more than another place to eat;
it was a relic of an earlier culinary age. 27

Neediest Cases 28

Business Digest 31

Arts/Entertainment

Talks with one film union gain 15

Sundance Film Festival winners 15

In Europe, the Year of Mozart 15

Items seized at antiques show 19

Books: Two books on Vietnam, 1945-90 19

TV: "Women on the Inside" 48

Sports

Basketball: Lakers beat Nets in overtime 45

Column: Anderson on Super Bowl team owners 45

Football: Parcells wants low- scoring game 45

No game if TV turns to war 45

Obituaries 13

Rear Adm. Thomas D. Davies, navigation expert

Consumer's World 50

So, what is "environmentally friendly"?

For collection agencies, these are busy times

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials 24

Germany's ostrich-politik

War: live. Fears: magnified

Truth and the police plan

Saddam Hussein is no Saladin

Letters 24

Russell Baker: Paradise for Pentagon 25

Tom Wicker: Ghosts of Vietnam 25

Verlyn Klinkenborg: For Buffalo, the Bills pay off 25

Paul Stephen Dempsey: The sky ought to be the limit 25

Mark Green: Oil prices and profits: What goes up . . .  25

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 26, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Reporter's Notebook;
Saudis Would Like to Know Whose Holy War It Is Anyhow

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1091 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Jan. 25


President Saddam Hussein of Iraq has called for a holy war against Saudi Arabia
and its Western allies, but Saudi soldiers and airmen at the front lines of the
battle say they are confident that theirs is the divinely backed side.

"Every time a Saudi jet fighter takes off, it is going to fight for the defense
of Islam," said Maj. Mohammed abu Amnah, the commander of a squadron of Saudi
jet fighters. "Every attack we carry out against the Iraqis is carried out in
the name of Mohammed."

Long before the war began, many American and British military planners had
assumed that the Saudi armed forces would insist that their Western counterparts
do virtually all of the fighting.

Despite all their sophisticated, high-cost Western weaponry, the Saudis had no
real experience in fighting a major war and, it seemed at first, no real desire
to fight.

But Saudi jet fighters have been flying continuously since the war began, and to
the envious chagrin of some of their proud American and Western counterparts, it
was a Saudi F-15 pilot who was the first in this war to shoot down two Iraqi
planes in the same day.

And at a forward position on the Saudi desert Lieut. Khalis al-Koblan looked
toward an unseen enemy from a windswept mound that is serving as the
headquarters of his Saudi armored platoon, He made it clear that he was eager
for the battle to move from sky to earth.

"You give too much time," he said, telling American visitors that Iraqi forces
had already been given too much time to withdraw from Kuwait. "When they say go,
we go," he said. Death, he said, was not a fear. "No problem," he said. "We die
or we finish."

 Breaching the Line

For the hundreds of thousands of Western ground troops waiting in remote desert
camps for their part of the war to begin, there is a last opportunity now to
practice skills that, they say, will soon be employed on battlefields in Kuwait
and Iraq.

In a remote desert camp near the Iraqi border, the combat engineers of the
Seventh Corps spent this week simulating a breach of the so-called Saddam Line,
the heavily fortified Iraqi line of defense drawn across the southern border of
Kuwait.

Working from photographs of Iraqi installations obtained from spy satellites,
the engineers have set up a replica of the Iraq's defensive positions in Kuwait,
complete with mock minefields, tank traps, oil trenches, razor wires and other
obstructions that American tanks and troops are expected to face.

"The most grueling obstacle is a minefield combined with things like concertina
or razor wire," Capt. Jeffrey Jerome, 31 years old, of Kahokia, Ill., told an
American reporter. "One big thing we fear is the variety of mines out there."

Despite the engineers' best efforts, he said, finding a mine sometimes "comes
down to somebody stepping on one."

 The Man in the Black Bag

Felicito Hernandez, a Filipino cook working as one of several civilian
employees, at an air base in central Saudi Arabia, spent much of his time in the
opening days of the Persian Gulf war with a black plastic bag over his head.

The base is near Riyadh, the Saudi capital, and Mr. Hernandez did not have a gas
mask when Iraq started launching Scud-B missiles at the city. Military planners
have worried that Iraq might place chemical or biological agents in missile
warheads.

In the early attacks, American airmen at the base were ordered to put on their
masks and charcoal-lined chemical-warfare suits but had nothing to offer Mr.
Hernandez and other foreign workers in the base dining hall.

"It was sad to see them with plastic bags over their heads," said Senior Master
Sgt. Robert Smolen, a member of the Air National Guard. "I couldn't believe it
when I saw it. They may be third world workers, but they are human beings."

Sergeant Smolen, said he put pressure on Mr. Hernandez's employer, the Saudi
Catering Company, and finally on Wednesday Mr. Hernandez and his relieved
colleagues were provided with their masks.

 Chemical Complications

The military and nurses who would treat battlefield injuries in a ground war say
that any use of Iraqi chemical weapons would seriously complicate emergency
treatment of life-threatening wounds and injuries.

"Treatment is delayed if you combine conventional injuries with a chemical
environment, increasing the risk,"said Maj. Richard Williams, an Air Force
surgeon and the commander of the First Tactical Wing Hospital in Saudi Arabia.

Under hospital procedures for chemical warfare, soldiers or airmen who have been
exposed to Iraqi blister agents or nerve gas would be taken to a decontamination
"tank" next to the hospital where medics would cut off their uniforms and wash
them off with a bleachlike solution.

It is only then, Major Williams said, that a patient could be admitted to an
emergency room for treatment.

"You can't do anything for a patient until he is decontaminated," said Dr. Terry
Hassler, an orthopedic surgeon and a former Vietnam War fighter pilot. "It slows
us down, and may lead to a loss of life."

 Monitoring Gas

The Dhahran International Hotel, which has been home to many of the foreign
newsmen covering the war, advised its guests in a newsletter that it had
obtained a Chemical Agent Monitor, a hand-held device that is to be used "to
monitor the presence of nerve or blister agents" that might seep into the
hotel's basement bomb shelter if one of the Iraqi missiles had a chemical
payload.

"Because we can monitor the shelter air, this will dramatically reduce the time
you need to wear a gas mask," the newsletter said. "That has to be good news."

 The Day of the Haggis

As a gesture of respect for his Scottish troops, the British commander, Sir
Peter De La Billiere, today ate a plate of haggis, the traditional Scottish dish
in which the heart, liver and lungs of a sheep are boiled in its stomach. It is
said to be an acquired taste.

Tonight is Burns Night, a time when Scots recall and cite the poet Robert Burns
even more then they do at other times, and Sir Peter marked the occasion at a
festive lunch at British forces headquarters in Riyadh. Iraqi missiles tend to
be launched at Riyadh at night, so Burns Night was celebrated with a midday
meal.

The guests were serenaded -- by a bagpiper. The haggis was prepared from a
recipe faxed to Saudi Arabia from Dunfermline, in Fife.

All that was missing was the traditional libation."It would be better with
whisky," Sir Peter said of his haggis. "we have learned to live without," he
said, a bit mournfully.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 26, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Weapons;
Pentagon Said to Authorize U.S. Use of Nonlethal Gas

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1198 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 25


The Pentagon has authorized the United States commander in the Persian Gulf to
use nonlethal riot-control gases in certain circumstances against Iraqi forces
and prisoners of war, Administration officials said today.

These officials said the Bush Administration's intense desire to limit American
casualties in the conflict prompted senior officials to add the nonlethal gas
weapon to the "tool box" of weapons that the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, Gen. Colin L. Powell, said this week would be available to his field
commander, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf.

The Pentagon spokesman, Pete Williams, said in response to a question that the
decision was driven by a desire to "save lives."

"We think the commander should have the authority to use tear gas in search and
rescue operations is the reason," Mr. Williams said. "This is not chemical
warfare on the battlefield. It is basically tear gas."

Mr. Williams added that the United States would use such gases "only in very
specific instances.

"Tear gas is intended to save lives," he said. "It's a way of avoiding having to
shoot people."

Some Experts Question Decision

The decision was immediately questioned by some chemical-warfare experts who
said that even the introduction of nonlethal gases could give President Saddam
Hussein of Iraq a pretext to escalate in any retaliation by using the lethal
chemical weapons that are already deployed with his elite forces.

"I don't buy that at all," Mr. Williams said. "That's ridculous."

Military officials and some members of the multinational military coalition who
have been briefed on the decision, which was made in recent days and transmitted
to General Schwarzkopf, said the rationale for granting the authority was to
give the military the capability to use a weapon that is commonly employed by
police forces in many countries.

Some officials also expressed the frustration that the threat of Iraqi
chemical-weapons attacks has forced United States and allied forces, as well as
thousands of civilians, to spend many hours a day in cumbersome gas masks and
protective clothing while no similiar allied threat has encumbered Iraqi forces.


Possible Pretext for Hussein

But some of these officials and coalition members acknowledged what one called
the "worrisome" potential that even the use of tear gases by United States
forces would hand Mr. Hussein a propaganda weapon and a pretext to escalate to
something worse.

"One real problem is that the first use of nonlethal chemicals can then lead to
escalation up the ladder," said Elisa D. Harris, a chemical-warfare specialist
at the Brookings Institution. "World War I began with irritant chemicals. The
French began with riot control agents, then the Germans went to chlorine, then
back and forth until mustard gas was the last lethal agent introduced."

It is unclear whether the United States would be able to use tear gas,
nausea-inducing agents or other nonlethal substances in offensive military
operations, but existing regulations set forth by executive order during the
Ford Administration may be interpreted for the first time in battle under the
authority granted to General Schwarzkopf.

Mr. Williams said the authority to use riot control agents was granted to United
States forces during the invasion of Panama.

Example of Possible Use

One senior official from an Arab country participating in the military coalition
said after a briefing by United States officials that "a good example" of how
nonlethal gases could be used by allied forces would be in urban combat. He said
the gases could be used in an operation designed to retake the Kuwaiti capital,
where house-to-house combat could otherwise produce high casualties.

In addition to tear gas, the United States inventory of nonlethal chemical
agents has included vomiting agents such as Adamite that can immobilize victims.
More persistent forms of tear gas have been produced that remain in the
environment for weeks. The chemical agents can be delivered by hand grenades and
mortar shells and from aerial bombs.

"Instead of killing people, you would immobilize them and save lives," the
official said.

International criticism over the use of herbicides and nonlethal chemical
warfare agents by the United States during the Vietnam War resulted in a
five-year effort to draft acceptable regulations for future military uses. It
culminated in a April 8, 1975, executive order that accompanied the United
States acceptance of the 1925 Geneva Protocal banning the use in war time of
"asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases and of all analogous liquids."

Document Specified Exceptions

In the document issued by President Ford, the United States renounced the "first
use of riot control agents in war except in defensive military modes to save
lives. . . ."

The order authorizes the use of non-lethal gases "in situations in which
civilians are used to mask or screen attacks and civilian casualties can be
reduced or avoided." The gases could also be used "in rescue missions in
remotely isolated areas of downed air crews and passengers."

Further use is allowed "in rear echelon areas outside the zone of immediate
combat to protect convoys" from attack. The order also allows nonlethal gassing
of escaping or rioting prisoners of war.

Earlier this week, United States air forces conducted a search-and-rescue
operation to extract an American pilot downed in Iraqi territory. During the
operation, the rescuers opened fire on an Iraqi truck that was approaching the
rescue site. Mr. Williams suggested that United States forces could have
immobilized the occupants of the truck using tear gas instead of gunfire under
the authority that was subsequently granted to General Schwarzkopf.

U.S. Holds Minority View

At the Brookings Institution, Ms. Harris said that the United States has held a
minority view in the United Nations that tear gas and other nonlethal agents are
not prohibited by the 1925 Geneva Protocal.

In United Nations debate, Ms. Harris said, "the international community has said
that tear gases are covered by the protocal and if we use them first in this
war, Saddam can use that as justification to use more lethal weapons. And that
is the last thing we want to do, is give him the legal justification for what we
suspect he will do in any event."

During the course of the Persian Gulf crisis, the United States has declined to
state publicly whether it would retaliate using lethal chemical weapons in
response to a chemical weapons attack by Iraqi forces.

But during a daily Pentagon briefing on Thursday, Maj. Gen. Martin L. Brandtner
responded to a query about United States policy by saying, "To this point in
time, we do not intend to use chemical weapons."

At that point in the briefing, Mr. Williams stepped to the podium and
interrupted General Brandtner to say, "We would never commit or not commit
ourselves to any future use of any kind of force."

"If the Iraqis were to use chemical or biological weapons," he continued, "the
United States would respond in the strongest way -- and we're obviously not
going to take it any further than that."

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 26, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
2 Versions of the Long View of the Vietnam War

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 969 words


The Vietnam Wars
1945-1990
By Marilyn B. Young
Illustrated. 386 pages. HarperCollins. $25.

Where the Domino Fell
America and Vietnam, 1945 to 1990
By James S. Olson and Randy Roberts
Illustrated. 321 pages. St. Martin's Press. $19.95.

It's a measure of their meaning for today that two strongly opinionated but
well-documented new histories of the Vietnam War include the same dates in their
subtitles: 1945 to 1990. They emphasize that Vietnam resulted from the cold war
and that its effects still linger in the United States, Southeast Asia and in
other embattled corners of the world.

Inevitably, the authors of both books -- "The Vietnam Wars" by Marilyn B. Young,
a professor of history at New York University, and "Where the Domino Fell" by
James S. Olson, chairman of the history department at Sam Houston State
University, and Randy Roberts, professor of history at Purdue University -- hear
echoes of the Vietnam war in the Persian Gulf.

"Why are we in the Middle East?" Professor Young wonders in a preface written
before the war with Iraq. "As of now, President Bush and his Administration have
told us that we are there to control the source of 'our' oil and through that to
protect our very way of life. They have invoked Munich and transcendent
principles of territorial integrity. I do not suggest any comparison between
Southeast Asia and the Middle East or between Vietnam and Iraq. But we had
better look very closely at how we approach this or any other intervention."

And she goes on to make this criticism of the military thunder in Washington and
Baghdad: "Watching the Iraq crisis unfold as I read the galleys of this book
seemed to provide it with a new, harsher and unwanted conclusion: that war
continues to be a primary instrument of American foreign policy and the call to
arms a first response to international disputes."


Professors Olson and Roberts lay their cards face up on the table in a preface
that frankly says: "The Vietnam War was the wrong war in the wrong place at the
wrong time. War is, above all else, a political event. Wars are won only when
political goals are achieved. Military firepower and troops are -- like
diplomacy and money -- essentially tools to achieve political objectives. The
United States went into Indochina after World War II with imprecise, muddled
objectives. It departed in 1975 after a 30-year effort with a political focus
just as blurred as it was in the beginning. The war was unwinnable because the
United States never decided what it was trying to achieve politically."

Of the two books, "Where the Domino Fell" is the more useful as a reference work
because it includes a good chronology and an interpretive bibliography of the
many works that have been recognized (after some of their authors were first
maligned for not being on the White House war team) as classics of reporting and
history.

The authors praise the books of three former correspondents of The New York
Times: "The Making of a Quagmire" and "The Best and the Brightest" by David
Halberstam, "My Lai" by Seymour Hersh and "A Bright Shining Lie" by Neil
Sheehan.  Other books singled out are "Vietnam: A History" by Stanley Karnow and
"The Ten Thousand Day War" by Michael Maclear and Peter Arnett (Mr. Arnett, the
respected former Associated Press reporter, has enhanced his reputation as a
daring journalist by staying on in Baghdad for the Cable News Network).


By taking the long view, both histories remind a new generation of readers that
Vietnam was not only Lyndon Johnson's war and Richard Nixon's war but John F.
Kennedy's war, too. The policies of these Presidents led to the 58,175 names on
the war memorial in Washington. Neither "Where the Domino Fell" nor "The Vietnam
Wars" gives any comfort to revisionist historians who surmise that President
Kennedy and his best and brightest would not have continued to take the United
States deeper into the quagmire.

A chapter in "Where the Domino Fell" called "The New Frontier in Vietnam,
1961-1963" begins with a boast by Robert F. Kennedy in 1962: "We are going to
win in Vietnam. We will remain here until we do win." The reader is reminded
that the warrior tone was heard most loudly, during all the decades of the cold
war, in President Kennedy's inaugural address when he famously warned: "Let
every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any
price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe to
assure the survival and success of liberty." More than 15,000 American military
personnel were introduced into Vietnam by the Kennedy Administration.

At the end of her book -- which is more conscious of the need for Presidents to
be wary of future military adventures -- Professor Young writes: "Ronald Reagan
jettisoned Carter's human rights policy and set out on a more direct and less
expensive approach to healing spiritual wounds: he renamed them. The United
States invasion of Vietnam was a 'noble cause,' the American-paid mercenaries in
Nicaragua were 'freedom fighters.' In one press conference he rewrote the
history of Vietnam itself, informing reporters that it had always been two
countries that France had liberated after World War II and whose possible
reunification was disrupted by Ho Chi Minh's refusal to participate in
elections."

Coming up to the present, "The Vietnam Wars" discusses President Reagan's 1983
invasion of the tiny island of Grenada and the bombing of Col. Muammar
el-Qaddafi's headquarters in Libya in 1986. In 1989 President Bush invaded
Panama to remove a former ally who had fallen out of favor. And in the summer of
1990, Professor Young writes, "President Bush's rapid millitary buildup in Saudi
Arabia seemed directed not only at Iraq but also at a war-phobic American
public."

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 26, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Germany's Ostrich-Politik

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 528 words


The new world order begins with a huge hole in the center of Europe. Germany,
now Europe's most important state, is trying to minimize its involvement in the
gulf war, citing the country's militarist legacy. It would be more constructive
to redeem past errors by making collective security more truly collective,
providing a real alternative to superpower policing of global crises.

Germany has not stayed entirely aloof from the gulf conflict. It joined the
diplomatic coalition condemning Iraq's aggression. It pledged $2.2 billion to
support allied efforts last fall, and now, under pressure, weighs a substantial
increase. This week it offered Israel Patriot missiles and $165 million in
emergency aid. But all this falls short of what might be expected from Europe's
richest economy.

Germany's postwar Constitution prohibits offensive use of the country's military
forces, but also provides for participation in "a system of mutual collective
security." That includes NATO and, arguably, the United Nations-sponsored action
in the gulf. Yet Chancellor Helmut Kohl has refused to acknowledge Germany's
obligation, under Article 5 of the NATO treaty, to treat any attack on Turkey as
an attack on NATO as a whole. And the Kohl Government interprets the
Constitution as barring any direct German military role in the gulf.

Mr. Kohl's reticence is easy to understand. Polls show 75 percent of Germans
opposed to military participation in the war. Peace demonstrations have drawn
wide support. The peace issue helped left-wing parties win a key state election
this week.

Many demonstrators act as if allied military action against Iraq is a replay of
the Vietnam War. It's not. For one, Saddam Hussein bears direct responsibility
for triggering this crisis with his invasion and sack of Kuwait. More to the
point, the allied coalition, though assembled and commanded by Americans, is
remarkably broad, and would be broader still if Germany played a larger part.

Further, German businessmen, like other Europeans, have some responsibility for
helping Saddam Hussein build his war machine. German companies sold biological
and chemical weapons components to Iraq, helped increase the range of its Scud
missiles and built a luxurious Presidential bunker designed to survive aerial
attack.

Recent history has left Germans skeptical of military solutions and involvements
far from their fatherland. Germans worry more about instability in Eastern
Europe and the Soviet Union than about who will sell them oil in the Persian
Gulf. And reunification costs leave little budgetary slack.

Yet history is the strongest reason for Germany to become more actively
involved. Before 1945, Germany's inability to find a constructive international
role commensurate with its economic strength brought terrible grief. In the
postwar years, West Germany, through integration with NATO and the European
Community, became a valued and respected partner.

A united Germany can now build on that legacy of cooperation. It can add its
hard-won sense of perspective and caution to coalition debates and draw strength
from its partners to face uncertainties in the east.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 26, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

War: Live. Fears: Magnified.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 389 words


The televised scene in Saudi Arabia: A reporter shouts "Gas attack!" and drops
his microphone to struggle into a gas mask. The untelevised scene some hours
later in Stroudsburg, Pa.: The Army and Navy store on Main Street sells its last
gas mask, ending a record gas-mask year in the Poconos.

Television images are distilled a million times hotter than images seen in
ordinary life, but we see with our own eyes, and our own eyes don't easily
distinguish. The result is a flood of fears, some reasonable but many
ungrounded, even hysterical. The Persian Gulf war, as large and important as it
is, needs proper perspective.

Vietnam was called the "television war," but images of that war were largely
confined to a few minutes of filmed news each night. The reports from the gulf
are live, lending urgency even when the reporting is peripheral. Television
exploits this link but gives little in return except anxiety. Live coverage is,
among other things, inefficient. There is precious little information in all the
hours devoted to war coverage.

Pictures of actual warfare may be lacking, but the television cameras quickly
swing skyward toward the next Scud missile. The war is reported in abundant and
trivial detail, sortie by sortie, casualty by casualty, prisoner by prisoner,
briefing by briefing.

The effects are all around us this weekend. Businesses have quite reasonably
curtailed foreign travel because Americans are targets of terrorism. But
yesterday Pan American World Airways reacted hysterically to the decline in
business by banning Iraqi nationals and even resident aliens from its flights.
Such clumsiness can only heighten the unjust hostility against Arab-Americans.

Security is a valid concern at the Super Bowl tomorrow in Tampa, where fans will
pass through metal detectors. Coolers, radios and umbrellas will be barred from
the stadium. But it's hard to conceive of a reasonable explanation for the
decision by some TV stations to drop plans to show the 1977 film "Black Sunday,"
in which terrorists commandeer a blimp to attack a Super Bowl crowd.

The live war from the Middle East has changed us, more than the facts warrant.
That means people will have to work harder to separate fact from hysteria, to
calm down for a war that probably has yet to reach its most wrenching stages.


LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 26, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
Ghosts of Vietnam

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 774 words


Since the war in Indochina, the reluctance of some Americans to commit U.S.
troops to foreign wars has been derided as the "Vietnam syndrome." But the most
persistent hangover from that lost war appears to be the conservative and
military myth that restraints imposed at home made victory in Vietnam
impossible.

As Vice President Quayle put it recently: "Operation Desert Storm will not be
another Vietnam. [U.S. forces] will not be asked to fight with one arm tied
behind their backs."

Gen. William C. Westmoreland, who commanded U.S. forces in Vietnam, was more
explicit: "Because President Johnson was afraid of bringing in China and
starting a world war, we weren't allowed to enlarge the battlefield," the old
general told Fox Butterfield of The New York Times.

He added that the current U.S. air attack on Iraq was likely to be more
effective than was the bombing of North Vietnam because then President Johnson
"selected the targets to be hit" instead of giving the generals freedom to do
so.

President Bush apparently does allow the military in the field more latitude in
Iraq than Lyndon Johnson permitted in Vietnam. It misleads the American people,
however, and insults history to suggest that U.S. forces in Vietnam had "one
hand tied behind their backs" and were not allowed to win the war.

Does this mean they couldn't use nuclear weapons? Neither, so far as we know,
can the forces in the Persian Gulf. Nor should they.

Does it mean that a second-rate Army of "societal scum" went to Vietnam? An
article in The Wall Street Journal by Richard Kolb, editor of the Veterans of
Foreign Wars magazine, debunks that canard: 75 percent of those who fought in
Vietnam and 73 percent of those who died in combat were volunteers; 79 percent
were high school graduates; 97 percent were honorably discharged.

Does the charge mean that the Vietnam Army was not well supplied or given the
latest and best equipment? No one who ever saw such impressive U.S. supply bases
as Camranh Bay would agree, and General Westmoreland certainly would not make
such a charge.

As for his argument that Johnson feared bringing on a war with China, and
possibly a world war, indeed he did. And why should he not have?  Having in mind
the example of Chinese entry into the Korean war, barely a decade earlier,
Johnson exercised the same proper Presidential caution that President Eisenhower
did in refusing to enter the Indochina war in 1954 -- caution that Americans of
their time demanded of both Presidents.
 Later research may show that there was little likelihood of Chinese
intervention in Vietnam; but Johnson could not be sure of that at the time. If
anything, his caution suggests the problems of fighting in regions and among
people of whom we know little. But can it be said that we know much more today
about the Middle East than we knew about Indochina in the 1960's?

Johnson was restrictive in the targeting he permitted. But that did not lose the
war; far more bombs were dropped on the two Vietnams, Laos and Cambodia than on
Germany in World War II. And when President Nixon ordered the "Christmas
bombing" of Hanoi in 1972, ample research shows that it was not really to drive
the North Vietnamese into negotiation; it was instead to persuade the South
Vietnamese that they could afford to accept a settlement already tentatively
worked out.

The argument that U.S. forces were not allowed "to expand the battlefield" is
simply false. They invaded Cambodia, arguably bringing about the Khmer Rouge
triumph in that tragic nation, and they provided tremendous logistical and other
support for the disastrous South Vietnamese invasion of Laos. An invasion of
North Vietnam would have required huge further investments of lives and money,
and run what then were thought to be high risks of war with China and/or the
Soviet Union.

Another ghost of Vietnam haunts the gulf -- the tight restraints on the press
imposed by the Bush Administration. No such restrictions were seen in Vietnam,
and many in the military today have convinced themselves -- contrary to the
evidence -- that the Indochina war was lost because pessimistic press accounts
turned the U.S. public against it.

Baloney. To believe that is to believe that the U.S. could have won the war in
Vietnam had not the press falsely reported it to be losing. The hard truth, to
deny which is only to feed superpatriot fantasies, is that the war was lost
because it could not be won -- not by any military means acceptable to an
American public that endured the loss of more than 50,000 lives, untold treasure
and its own political innocence.


LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 26, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Two Giants Were Heroes Far From Playing Field

BYLINE: By ROBERT McG. THOMAS Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 45; Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1246 words


If things don't go well for the Giants in the first half of their Super Bowl
showdown with the Buffalo Bills in Tampa Stadium tomorrow, and if Coach Bill
Parcells decides some halftime inspiration is in order, he could do worse than
to ask the lads to go out there and win one for Big Al Blozis.

If things really look bad, he could even invoke the memory of Jack Lummus.

Neither is a household name, but at a time when the National Football League
championship game is being played against the backdrop of a nation at war,
appeals in the names of Blozis and Lummus would seem to be especially
appropriate, in the Giant locker room or a Saudi Arabian bivouac.

Brief, Memorable Careers

By some reckonings, at least, the Giants -- and the nation -- owe one to Blozis,
the huge lineman who gave his all to the team during the 1942 and 1943 seasons
and then gave his life for his country in World War II.

There is a similar debt to Lummus, a promising receiver from Baylor who never
had a chance to go beyond his rookie season in 1941. He, too, was killed in
action before he could fulfill his promise as a player.

Of course, before he gives his halftime speech, Parcells might just have to be
briefed first.

The coach was not born until just before the 1941 season, the only one in which
Lummus played, and was barely a year old when Blozis, a 6-foot-6-inch, 245-pound
tackle, charged through the Washington line during a memorable 1942 rookie
performance against the Redskins, stretched out one long arm and slung Slinging
Sammy Baugh to the ground.

Two Deaths in 1945

Parcells was only 2 years old when Blozis roared through the 1943 season with
enough intensity to make an all-league team, and he was a toddler of 3 when
Second Lieut. Alfred C. Blozis was cut down by German machine gun fire on Jan.
31, 1945, and when First Lieut. Jack Lummus died on Iwo Jima a month later.

The only member of the Giants' organization old enough to recall the two war
heroes can't be of much help to Parcells.

"I was in the service myself," Wellingon Mara, the team's 75-year-old owner,
said the other day, recalling that he had seen little of Lummus during the
player's single Giants season as a substitute end, and that he was in the Navy
during the brief Blozis era.

Even so, Mara well recalls what Parcells's predecessor Steve Owen said about the
ferocious tackle, a Georgetown all-American who had also set a series of
national and world records in the shot-put by the time he joined the Giants.

"I remember his exact words," Mara said. "He said, 'He'll be the best tackle who
ever put on a pair of shoes.' "

'Could Have Been Greatest'

Someone with a better memory of Blozis is Mel Hein, the center who joined the
Giants out of Washington State in 1931 and stayed through the 1945 season.

"If he hadn't been killed, he could have been the greatest tackle who ever
played football," the 81-year-old Hein said yesterday from his home in
California, where one of his proudest possessions, the Lieutenant Al Blozis
Memorial Trophy for Sportsmanship, which Hein was awarded in 1945, is on display
on his mantle.

Hein, who recalled Blozis as an "amiable fellow," has special credentials when
it comes to assessing his former teammate. In those days, when an hourlong
football game meant 60 minutes' work, Hein backed up the line behind Blozis on
defense and usually played right beside him on offense when the Giants lined up
in their favored A-formation, an unbalanced variation of the single wing.

"I felt comfortable having him next to me," Hein recalled. "He was real strong
and real fast."

So fast, in fact, that on Giant kickoffs, Blozis was often 10 yards ahead of his
nearest teammate when he brought down the ballcarrier.

'All Over the Field'

"He made tackles all over the field," said Hein, who still marvels both at how
good Blozis was as a rookie and how quickly he improved. "He was good his first
year; the second year he was great."

Blozis, who was born in Garfield, N.J., and was a star athlete at Dickinson High
School in Jersey City before going to Georgetown on a track scholarship, was
regarded as the strongest player in professional football and had the physique
to prove it. To see him naked in the dressing room was "an awe-inspiring sight,"
Arthur Daley once wrote in The New York Times.

Curiously, the very size that made him so intimidating on the football field
kept him out of the military until late 1943, when, after repeated attempts,
Blozis finally persuaded the Army to waive its size limit and accept him. It
took further persuading to get from a desk job to the front lines. (During
infantry training at Fort Benning in Georgia, Blozis, who had to give up the
shot-put and the discus when he became a professional football player,
established the Army hand grenade record with a toss of 94 yards 2 feet 6 1/2
inches.)

During his final furlough, in 1944, Blozis played in three games, including the
championship game against the Green Bay Packers on Dec. 17. Two days later, he
sailed for France.

A little over a month later, the man who always led his teammates down the field
on kickoffs left his platoon behind and set off through hip-deep snow in the
Vosges Mountains of France to find a missing sergeant and a private. He never
returned.

Medal-of-Honor Winner

Lummus, just a dim memory to Hein, never really had a chance to make his mark on
the football field, but glory did not elude him. It just came at great cost.

On March 8, 1945, after a 48-hour rampage in which Lummus was credited with
almost single-handedly wiping out three Japanese fortifications, the lieutenant,
leading his Marine platoon on a charge against their final objective, shrugged
off two hand grenade wounds and then stepped on a land mine.

The explosion tore off his legs, and Lummus instantly recognized the sigificance
of the devastating wounds. As he told a startled surgeon before he died, "I
guess the New York Giants have lost the services of a damned good end."

For his efforts, Lummus was awarded the Medal of Honor.

For his, Blozis became the stuff of legends.

Although newspaper accounts indicated that Blozis's body was never found, Joe
McCluskey, a 79-year-old former distance runner who competed with Blozis for the
New York Athletic Club, says he knows better.

"I heard he was hit 38 times," he said the other day. "He was a big target. He
was so strong the first bullets weren't enough to kill him."

Missing Plaques

Plaques in honor of the two players were once affixed to a wall at the Polo
Grounds, but they were lost when the Giants moved to Yankee Stadium. Blozis's
jersey number, 32, was permanently retired, which is why Ottis Anderson, No. 32
during his years with the Cardinals, wears No. 24 with the Giants.

While Giants fans may not remember Lummus, who is buried near his boyhood home
in Ennis, Tex., he has not been entirely forgotten. In August, the Motor Vessel
Lieutenant Jack Lummus, a 673-foot, 22,700-ton cargo ship, left its Guam station
as part of a four-ship squadron that was delivering enough food, weapons and
other provisions to the Persian Gulf to supply an expeditionary brigade of
16,500 Marines for a month.

The Bills weren't around during World War II, but if Coach Marv Levy needs to
supply some halftime inspiration, he won't be entirely without resources. Bob
Kalsu, a guard with the Bills in 1968, was the only N.F.L. player killed in
Vietnam.


NAME: Al Blozis; Jack Lummus

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Al Blozis, a tackle who played for the Giants during the 1942
and 1943 seasons and was killed in combat in France in 1945. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

You Can Look It Up

BYLINE: By Randall Short; Randall Short writes on theater for Mirabella
magazine.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1143 words


Everything in the world exists in order that it may end up in a book, wrote the
poet Mallarme (cleverly anticipating a subsequent and more famous mot, "You
could look it up," by the eminent sage Casey Stengel). That, probably, is as
good a reason as any to explain why American publishing can now boast "The
Klingon Dictionary" (Pocket Books, $4.95), a handy grammar/lexicon enabling fans
of "Star Trek" to chew the fat in syntactically accurate guttural-brute style.
("Finally!" says the jacket copy.) Trekkies can choose from a pretranslated list
of Useful Klingon Expressions ("Four thousand throats may be cut in one night by
a running man," "Where is the bathroom?") or, with a little practice, construct
their own (e.g., "yISug yIn," "Get a life").

Ah, yes: for most, the phrase "reference book" brings to mind the
good-gray-workhorse division of the literary world, rows of demure volumes with
no ambition more outre than providing the earnest scholar with lists of American
Vice Presidents or the annual copper production of Mozambique. Be warned,
though. There are stranger animals than these baying for admission to the 000
shelf of your local library. It's not hard to see why: the dictionary/
encyclopedia format is a perfect repository for the unstructured obsession. Who
needs to be bothered with hammering his or her thoughts into unity when a book
like "The Kennedy Encyclopedia" (Plume, $12.95) allows you simply to print out
your card file? Entries include "The Butterball Problem," which is not a Robert
Ludlam novel but the patriarch Joseph's description of his son Teddy's weight
difficulties. (Sticklers may object that, in order to be a reference book, a
book has to have a reasonable chance of being . . . you know . . . referred to,
but until the Dewey Decimal boys come up with a numerical classification for
"neat, pointless factoid" the designation will probably have to stand.)

Still, although their subjects may be less than earthshaking, the scholarship on
view in several of these books would put many a lesser writer to shame --
especially (say) those of us who (say) cannot come up right off the top of our
heads with the name of the film in which the sinister Claw Monsters, "chemically
enlarged crayfish," made their big-screen debut, and must resort to "The
Encyclopedia of Monsters" (Facts on File, $29.95) for the answer. ("Panther Girl
of the Congo" -- sure, like you knew that.) Ditto for "The Billboard Book of
One-Hit Wonders" (Billboard/Watson-Guptill, $19.95), a comprehensive
1955-to-the-present listing of performers who enjoyed a single shining moment on
the Billboard top 40 charts before sinking back into obscurity. Exhaustive, this
-- and when I say exhaustive I mean it includes the Rock-A-Teens's "Woo-Hoo,"
the No. 16 song on Nov. 23, 1959. Or, for those interested in buttons --
buttons, buttons, buttons, the drama, the passion, the sweep -- "The Collector's
Guide to Buttons" (Walker & Company, $10.95) looks to this inexpert eye like
pretty much the last word on the subject. Or maybe not. "Buttons of the
Kennedys"? "Buttons of the Panther Girl of the Congo"? You see how these things
get started?  (After writing this, I had a sudden eerie premonition and rushed
to consult the Kennedy book. Yes: " 'Buttons' was President Kennedy's favorite
name for his daughter, Caroline." This means that "Buttons of the Kennedys" -- a
book title dashed off, you understand, as a silly joke -- could actually. . . .
No, no. I cannot go on. It is too depressing.)

Rather less meticulously researched, alas, is "Earl Blackwell's Entertainment
Celebrity Register" (Visible Ink Press, $19.95). Mr. Blackwell (no, this is not
the one you hear about for two days every January when he issues a list of
America's 10 Worst Dressed Women and whines about Cher's last gown) runs
something called Celebrity Service International, which provides "information on
an astonishing half million celebrities" -- not, if the present evidence is any
indication, very accurately. The actor Tony Randall will doubtless be surprised
to hear that "young Anthony Randall" left Tulsa for New York in his teens
(actually, he began life as Leonard Rosenberg), but the book's best sentence
occurs in the author's glowing description of his own career: "When Israel
celebrated its 25th anniversary in 1973, he [Blackwell] staged a cast of a
thousand at the Tower of David for his friend, Golda Meier" (sic). Hey, Gilda
and me -- we're like that, O.K.? Double-check those references, readers -- and,
for that matter, try to avoid "staging casts," which sounds as if it could be
painful.

But such books are the exception, not the rule, in the reference demimonde. Even
the most improbably titled tome, given a fair examination, can cause one to
wonder how he ever got along without it -- although, in the case of "A
Dictionary of Epithets and Terms of Address" (Routledge, Chapman & Hall,
$27.50), I have to admit that this feeling was principally due to the image of
its London author, who developed it from the classes in basic English he
conducts for recent immigrants, standing solemnly before his charges and saying,
"Fatso: Used as a disparaging term for a fat person, or [!] as a covert
endearment to a love-partner." (Ah, those English. Woo-Hoo.)

Somebody, somewhere, sometime, is going to need to know just what grammatical
errors the writer of "Moby-Dick," poor sap, made in the novel's prefatory
etymology of the word "whale" (the Danish adjectival form is used rather than
the noun). Think how glad they will be to have both volumes of "A Melville
Encyclopedia" (Whitston Publishing, $120) within easy reach. And -- kidding
aside for a moment -- the pages of acronyms and slang terms filling "Words of
the Vietnam War" (McFarland & Company, $45), many of them unprintable in this
newspaper, promise to provide a valuable grunt-level record of that troubled
conflict for future historians.

Really, who dares to make fun of even the most recherche-looking book's ultimate
uses? (Well, me. Still, though.) In his later years, W. H. Auden was fond of
recalling a volume that, by some odd accident, had found its way into his
nursery library: "Machinery for Metalliferous Mines," an engineering textbook
dealing with the unlikely subject of processing Britain's lead deposits. A
better primer on the constructing of imaginative intricacies could not have been
had, he said, and he dated his beginnings as a poet from its discovery. Even
now, some budding bard or bardette may be absorbing a chance copy of
"Antarctica: An Encyclopedia" (McFarland & Company, 2 vols., $135); even now,
the groundwork may be in progress for some future epic of the race -- clear,
icy, sharp-edged, cool. You can't predict these things.

What? Auden? No, seriously. He did. You could look it up.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On Language;
Brits, Tommies, Poms, Limeys & Kippers

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1119 words


ONCE AGAIN, IN THE crunch, the Yanks find themselves side by side with the Brits
.

Does this mean that G.I. Joe is slogging through the desert sands with Tommy
Atkins? No; use of the American term G.I., popularized in World War II after the
initials for "Government Issue," has fallen off. Perhaps this decline occurred
because the derivative term G.I. Joe must be accompanied by G.I. Josie,
acknowledging the presence of women as members of the armed forces. No sobriquet
has emerged as yet to characterize the American forces in the Persian Gulf;
Vietnam-era grunts, however, is passe. (Grunt, a verb from before the 12th
century and a noun since the 1500's, is onomatopoeic. According to The Times of
London in 1970, "Luckless victims of the American military machine are known as
'grunts,' a name said to be derived from their way of complaining as they trudge
along the jungle trails.")

We do know what to call the forces from Her Majesty's Government. Tommy is still
used, taken from the name "Tommy Atkins" used on government forms, much as we
use "John Doe" and "Jane Doe" (did the other fella, Richard Roe, ever get
married?); however, the term preferred is Brits.

That's what we call them, but is that what they call themselves? In the
interests of allied solidarity, the question was put to Lexicographic Irregulars
a month ago: Do people from Britain, which seems to have triumphed over Great
Britain and the United Kingdom as the name for that country, consider Brit an
ethnic slur?

The scientific sample was selected on the basis of the famed Literary Digest
poll of 1936 (which predicted Alf Landon would defeat Franklin Roosevelt) and is
subject to a polling error of plus or minus 100 percent. The result: 64 percent
of the British respondents say they are happy with the appellation Brit, 19
percent think it is an undignified clip of the term British, and the remainder
prefer not to be addressed at all until proper introductions have been made.

A significant percentage objected to the term in which the question was couched:
both letters pointed out British has to do with citizenship, not cultural
heritage. English, Scottish and Welsh are ethnic categories, they argue, for
people from England, Scotland and Wales, all of whom can be called Britons
because they are subjects of Great Britain, which unites those three cultures.
Add Northern Irish to the above, as many do, and you get into a political
argument.

A Canadian of British descent, Al Tassie, writes from Victoria, British
Columbia, using the noun as an adjective: "I polled several Brit friends and not
one objected to the word. A more popular word is kipper, and even the kippers
call themselves kippers, at least in this neck of the woods. The derivation is
obvious." Obvious to him, maybe. It could be from "English kipper," a herring or
sea trout cured by smoking and served with elegance by Mr. Clark, morning
headwaiter at Claridge's in London, or from brit, uncapitalized, used since the
early 1600's to mean "the young of the herring." Maybe the young of the English
were equated then with the little herrings; Eric Partridge pointed to slang
usage of kipper to mean "serviceman" in World War II.

The use of Brit, capitalized, dates back to Old English; it is related to Briton
, first used before the end of the 13th century. In Scotland, the shorter form
was applied to the Strathclyde Britons at least until 1300, when King Edward I
of England abolished "Laws between the Scots and the Bretts." After that, the
short form was used only historically, but popped up again in 1901 in a British
sports page: "The Brit is at his old game." The clip wavered between adjective
and noun use: "Are you trying to fool the Brit public?" asked Percy Wyndham
Lewis in 1948; "Your working-class Brit is a glutton for celebrities," Stanley
Price wrote in a 1961 book. In the United States the noun form prevailed.

That killed Britisher, and good riddance to that "odious vulgarism," which was
what an incensed lexicographer called the American term. That irritation
persists: Sheila Somner writes from St. David, Ariz., that she finds no
objection to being called a Brit, though she prefers being known as English, and
"I do take great exception to being called a Britisher. I don't call you an
Americaner." The New York Times stylebook is firm: "Do not use Britisher(s)."

(Tangentially, Ms. Somner offers an emendation of my recent discussion of drop a
dime on, meaning "to inform on," from using a coin telephone to call the police.
I veered off to define the dime dropped, meaning "sudden realization or
comprehension"; she recalls spending a penny as a euphemism for going to the
public toilet, where a coin was required to enter the stall. This was
substantiated independently by Janise Bogard, a Brit living in New York who is a
leading photographer of cats; she called to say, "Now the penny's dropped comes
from going to the loo, luv.")

"I, as a Scot," writes Anthony Eaton of London, "may say that Brit is not an
ethnic slur, as would be the use of English. . . . The word is usually used as a
method of demonstrating affection and seems more commonly used by Australians
and Americans than pom or limey."

Limey (from the lime juice used by English sailors to prevent scurvy) is
low-class and insulting unless used with jocular affection. Pom, from
"pomegranate" in a rough rhyme with "immigrant," is an Australian derogation of
immigrants from England.

"Let us turn the question around," Stephen Grover writes from All Souls College
in Oxford, one of the minority who think (construe this who as plural) that Brit
is a slur. "Is Yank an ethnic slur?"

Yank is sometimes intended as a slur, but it is not received as such, which is
disconcerting to the insulter. Americans do not use it for themselves unless in
referring to a New Englander, and then it is always Yankee, not the clipped Yank
, which is a Britishism. (That's preferred to Briticism, though we prefer
Scotticism to Scottishism. Go figure.)

Nobody can say with certainty where Yankee comes from; one popular theory points
to the Dutch name Jan Kees, "John Cheese," a slur at a Hollander, applied by
colonial Dutch in New Amsterdam to the English settlers (much as Australians now
hoot at them as poms; little changes in etymological patterns).

What, then, should the Brits in the gulf call their comrades in arms from the
United States? Whatever they like; as for us, we call each other Murkens.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Painful, Essential Images of War

BYLINE: By KEN BURNS; Ken Burns is the producer and director of the recent PBS
series "The Civil War."

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1465 words


In October of 1862, just a few days after the bloodiest single day of fighting
in the Civil War, when there had been more than 25,000 casualties, Mathew Brady
opened an exhibition of photographs at his New York gallery, titled "The Dead of
Antietam." Nothing like them had ever been seen in America before. There, next
to familiar roads and fields and peach orchards, were Americans, stiff, with
arms outstretched, bloated and contorted, heaped in sunken roads or lined to the
horizon in cornfields and in front of pacifist churches, dead.

The New York Times was stunned. "The dead of the battlefield," one reporter
noted, "come up to us very rarely, even in dreams. We see the lists in the
morning paper at breakfast, but dismiss its recollection with the coffee. Mr.
Mathew Brady has done something to bring to us the terrible reality and
earnestness of the war. If he has not brought bodies and laid them in our
dooryards and along our streets, he has done something very like it."

Americans became fascinated with the possibility of seeing and also thereby
subduing the carnage they were inflicting on one another. The "terrible reality"
was indeed "laid in our dooryards." The Civil War went on to become the first
war widely photographed; in fact, more than a million pictures were made for an
image-hungry public.

Now, more than 125 years after this photographed war, we are engaged in a new
and -- for the photographic image -- startlingly different war. In many ways,
our relationship to imagery has changed, the "value" of one picture down from
the cliched "1,000 words" to substantially less; devalued by familiarity and the
inability of images to shock as they once did, and by a new medium, television,
which always seems to impose itself between the picture and its ability to
impress, to make memories, to make history.

In recent years, as we have grown more and more dependent on visual signs and
language, less and less a country and society of letter writers and diary
keepers, television has become more and more the way we are connected to the
making of history. These visual connections have become a kind of emotional glue
that makes our new histories stick in our minds and hearts, permanently a part
of who each of us is, defining as they go the life of the nation.

So what, visually, is this new Gulf war telling us? Why do we feel, in a way, so
unconnected to it? Why have the potency of images and their ability to tell, to
narrate a story, diminished in this situation? Why has this been, at least in
these memorable early days, a war of voices, harking back to the first days of
radio? How do we understand an event when there are so few pictures?

Expecting in the Gulf war the same vivid imagery we have had in every conflict
since the Civil War, especially in our most recent experience, the excruciating
living-room war that Vietnam became, we find ourselves more than slightly
disconnected from this experience, expecting more in the way of images and
getting significantly less.

Certainly there are unforgettable pictures even now: the night sky of Baghdad
lit up by tracers, the eerie video-game-like destruction of Iraqi targets as
seen by bomber pilots' remote cameras, the terrifying sight of familiar
correspondents, electronic friends all, putting on gas masks in what seems like
impossible, apocalyptically unfolding scenarios, the frightful mug shots of our
prisoners of war, puffy-faced like stunned and worn-out boxers, and once again,
as always, the casualties. But mostly this has been a radio war, forced by
Government censorship on all sides, and inaccessibility to the battlefield
(wherever it might be, now that spectacular technology and electronic reporting
have conspired to remove the "there" from "over there"), to rely on the "mind
pictures" suggested in correspondents' reports.

Indeed, we spent hours the first night of the war glued not to hard, painful
imagery of the conflict, but to maps of downtown Baghdad, imagining the
destruction the old-fashioned way, through superb and unbelievably professional
reporting. As the war progressed, imagery took a back seat to merely getting any
information. For hours the second night of war, we all became P.O.W.'s to
rumors, and rumors of rumors, as unconfirmed reports of gas attacks on Israel
ricocheted throughout our electronic campsite, producing, but only in the mind,
the most gruesome pictures.

It has been a war of talking heads, albeit some strangely (and if the
circumstances were not so critical) comically transfigured by those gas masks
and their hideous historical associations. We jump from correspondent to
correspondent, briefing to briefing, still hungry for proof, for pictures of
what is happening, greedily devouring and also devaluing the few we do get by
constant overexposure and playing. I will be happy never to see another jet
fighter take off anonymously without context or story, from a base nowhere in
Saudi Arabia, or Patriot missiles being unloaded for the 20th time in Israel, or
the same Iraqi diplomat endlessly disgorged from the State Department.

In the midst of some of the finest, though hardly poetic, reporting that I have
seen, television has, of course, imposed its usual distracting theatrics on the
situation, with pounding new theme music specific to the war, and striking new
sets and maps and graphics, suggesting that the war itself might be a wholly
owned subsidiary of television, not the other way around. For television,
everything, despite its fascinating newness and fearful possibilities, seems at
times if not predictable, then certainly manageable, tailor-made. At the same
time, in television's constant breathless hyperbole, it is almost impossible for
any action, however minor or insignificant, not to take on earth-shaking import,
again devaluing the true, the significant.

Images have helped our understanding of this new war, though, in many ways.
Technology loves other technology, and so the Gulf war, in the absence of real
footage, has become a war of hardware and description of hardware; not since
World War II have we with such avidity learned the type and shape and
capabilities of the engines we have invented to prosecute the war. Television,
too, has made our geographically ignorant country indelibly aware of the lay of
this dangerous land. We have all come to know our leaders in a new and undiluted
way, seeing the pain and obvious weariness in our President's face, the
intelligence and no-nonsense directness of our Secretary of Defense and Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the eloquence of the Senate Majority Leader. And
we have been reminded constantly that not everyone in this country supports the
war, perhaps thereby reinforcing better than our Government has the real
strength of our position and the continuing world trend toward governments of,
by and for the people.

But the images, the images for all times, are not there yet. And may never come.
It is not clear whether this Gulf war will produce images as permanently part of
our history as the images of Union and Confederate skeletons on the fields at
the Battle of Wilderness, or the partisan in the Spanish Civil War at the moment
of his death, or the execution on the streets of Saigon of a suspected Viet
Cong. For the time being, there are just too few, too painfully overused or
overhyped, too censored, or too remote to make the kind of lasting impression on
our visual history these other wars and images have.

Ultimately, though, it will all take time, the critical historical tool, to know
what lasts and what merely occupies our present viewing. Philip Graham, the late
publisher of The Washington Post, once said that journalism was "the first rough
draft of history." He was, of course, right, but no one ever turns in a rough
draft. Refinements that only time can work and distant, dispassionate historical
attention can interpret, will finally decide what survives. This is true for our
new visual history as well. No one can predict the results. Just as for written
messages, it will take generations for its true emotional resonances to be
revealed. Then, like the words they often replaced, these images will be
history.

Immediately after the surrender at Appomattox, the appetite for Civil War
photographs fell off dramatically. No one seemed to want them anymore. Mathew
Brady went bankrupt. Thousands of glass-plate negatives were lost, mislaid or
destroyed. Thousands more were sold to greenhouses around the nation, not for
their images but as replacement glass. In the years after Appomattox, the sun
slowly burned the image of war from thousands of greenhouse panes. Still later,
some historians claim, the same glass became face-plates in World War I gas
masks.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Reports from the front: The night sky of Baghdad lit up by
antiaircraft fire (Associated Press), and a detail of a Mathew Brady photograph
of dead gunners after Antietam, the Civil War's bloodiest battle. At the onset,
pictures of the Persian Gulf war lacked the intimacy Americans have come to
expect (Mathew Brady/Ansco-Binghamton, N.Y.) (pg. 1); A nation's memories:
Detail of Robert Capa's photograph, above, of a G.I. edging toward Omaha Beach,
Normandy, on D-Day (Robert Capa/Magnum); right, detail of Eddie Adams's image of
a South Vietnamese police chief executing a Vietcong officer (Eddie
Adams/Associated Press); detail of Robert Capa's 1936 photograph of a Spanish
loyalist at the moment of a bullet's impact--Time will tell what images last.
(Robert Capa/Magnum) (pg. 35)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
Sondheim's 'Assassins': Insane Realities of History

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1716 words


Seated on the floor of a barn in Caroline County, Virginia, a tall, thin,
mustachioed man is singing passionately about why he did what he did. He did it,
he declares amid a crescendo, for the sake of his country. He has destroyed a
tyrant, the scourge of his nation. All about him, smoke is rising. Soon, before
he is consumed by the blaze, he will put a gun to his head and blow his
27-year-old life away.

The voice from history is that of John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of President
Abraham Lincoln, and the scene from 1865, with music and lyrics by Stephen
Sondheim, is being re-created eight times a week on the main stage of
Playwrights Horizons, a nonprofit Off Broadway theater company on West 42d
Street in New York City.

The credo of an American Presidential assassin is hardly your usual
musical-theater fare. But then again, this musical is not about an American
Presidential assassin. It is about nine of them -- nine assassins or would-be
assassins, nine bizarre, destructive and demented people. It is titled,
appropriately enough, "Assassins." It is directed by Jerry Zaks ("Anything
Goes," "Six Degrees of Separation"), with a book by John Weidman (who
collaborated with Mr. Sondheim on "Pacific Overtures" in 1976), and it opens
officially tonight.

"There are always people who think that certain subjects are not right for
musicals," Mr. Sondheim says, sitting with Mr. Weidman and Mr. Zaks in the
director's office on West 44th Street. "I remember that there was a letter of
protest when Rodgers and Hammerstein's 'South Pacific' opened that said, 'How
dare they write a musical about miscegenation?' 'South Pacific' hardly seems
like a shocker today, but it was in 1949. There were people who were horrified
that such a serious and upsetting subject as interracial marriage should be
dealt with by the most popular musical writers of the day."

He turns to Mr. Weidman, who nods in assent. "We're not going to apologize for
dealing with such a volatile subject," Mr. Sondheim says. "Nowadays, virtually
everything goes."

"Assassins," constructed in a form somewhere in the twilight zone between book
musical and all-star revue, tells the story of those nine people, who, through
madness or political conviction, or both, too often succeeded in changing the
course of history and bringing immense pain to the world. But the 90-minute
musical, presented with no intermission, is not meant to be a simple history
lesson; it has a surreal quality, created largely by scenes in which the
assassins from different eras meet one another.

In addition to Booth, the assassins and would-be assassins are Charles Guiteau,
who killed James Garfield; Leon Czolgosz, who murdered William McKinley;
Giuseppe Zangara, who tried to kill President-elect Franklin D. Roosevelt; Lee
Harvey Oswald, who assassinated John F. Kennedy; Samuel Byck, who tried to kill
Richard M. Nixon; Lynette (Squeaky) Fromme and Sara Jane Moore, who shot at
Gerald Ford, and John Hinckley, who shot Ronald Reagan.

Crossing the lines of time and space, the assassins talk and sing to one
another, accompanied by a three-member orchestra. They meet at a carnival booth,
where the faces of former Chief Executives roll by and a barker exhorts them to
step right up and kill a President. They taunt, they commiserate, they laugh,
they explain themselves with both pride and angst, and they engage in what can
only be termed very dark humor. Fromme meets Hinckley; Booth talks with Oswald;
Guiteau instructs Moore; they all gather over drinks at a bar. They sing as a
chorus. Woven through the evening are historical drawings and photographs, as
well as another character, a balladeer, who presents folklike songs about the
killers.

But amid the surrealism there is reality, at times an insane reality. "One of
the things we would like to emphasize is that the vast majority of the actual
details of the show are true," Mr. Sondheim says. "I don't want to give them
away, but there are so many bizarre things."

Featuring a cast of 16 that includes Victor Garber as Booth, Jonathan Hadary as
Guiteau and Terrence Mann as Czolgosz, the musical began preview performances
Dec. 18 in Playwrights Horizons' 139-seat main theater. The production, which is
scheduled to close Feb. 16, is sold out. The only tickets available are from
last-minute cancellations. There is also the possibility of an extension and
perhaps, depending in part on the critical response, a transfer to a commercial
Broadway or Off Broadway run.

Tackling difficult and provocative material is not unusual for Mr. Sondheim and
his various collaborators. "Sweeney Todd," after all, told the tale of the Demon
Barber of Fleet Street, a gruesome killer who dispatched his victims in
Victorian England amid the horrors of the Industrial Revolution. "Pacific
Overtures" took as its subject the forcible opening of Japan to the West in
1853.

Mr. Sondheim's breakthrough musical, "Company," dealt with the tangle of
male-female relationships; "Sunday in the Park With George" examined the nature
of creativity and art, and "Follies" investigated, through metaphor, the
disintegration of American society after World War II. As early as 1964, two
years after "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum," the first Broadway
show for which Mr. Sondheim wrote both music and lyrics, he and Arthur Laurents
created "Anyone Can Whistle," a musical in which patients escape from a mental
hospital and mingle with tourists in a small town.

So when Mr. Sondheim first encountered the idea of a musical about assassins, it
is not surprising that he was fascinated, just as throughout history many
nonmusical writers have been fascinated about the mind of the assassin, from the
motivations of Brutus to the machinations of Lee Harvey Oswald.

It all began, Mr. Sondheim says, about a decade ago, when the producer Stuart
Ostrow formed something called the Musical Theater Lab, which was devoted to
finding and encouraging new work. There was a panel of several composers and
songwriters, and one script that came across the desk, written by a man named
Charles Gilbert, was called "Assassins."

"I looked at the title," Mr. Sondheim says, "and I thought, 'What a great idea
for a musical.' " Mr. Gilbert's "Assassins" was a narrative about a Vietnam
veteran who becomes a Presidential assassin. Into it were woven readings from
diaries, poems and newspaper accounts of real Presidential assassins.

"For example," Mr. Sondheim says, "there was a poem that Charles Guiteau wrote
on the day of his execution, which began, 'I am going to the Lordy.' In fact, I
quote two lines from it in one of my songs. That poem, and the letters and
diaries, was what was most interesting about it. The narrative seemed to weigh
the piece down, so we never did it. But I thought, 'I wish I had had that idea.'
"

Years passed, and about two years ago, Mr. Weidman came to Mr. Sondheim with an
idea for a musical about an American President. It reminded Mr. Sondheim of the
old "Assassins" script, and he mentioned it to Mr. Weidman.

"My reaction to the title alone," Mr. Weidman says, "even before I knew what it
was about, was that it was a great idea."

With the help of Theodore S. Chapin, who was Mr. Ostrow's assistant at the
Musical Theater Lab and is now the executive director of the Rodgers and
Hammerstein organization, they tracked down Mr. Gilbert and got his permission
to, in Mr. Sondheim's words, "take his idea and run with it in our own way."

That involved investigating "the unexplored area between a narrative or book
musical and a revue," he says.

"The idea that people from different eras would have scenes together was
exciting," Mr. Sondheim says. "I loved the notion that John Wilkes Booth could
talk with somebody who lived 50 years after he died. Once the barriers are down,
you can allow yourself to cross eras and find parallels and contrasts."

At first, they thought their subject would be assassinations through the ages,
but there was too much material, so they wound up focusing on American
Presidential assassins. "The plan was that the piece would be built around
character," he says, "around people who had something in common. They were
entirely different people, but they were motivated by a similar kind of
passion."

Some of them were politically motivated, Mr. Sondheim says, and some had
personal motivations; "some were less than crazy, and some were more than
crazy."

Mr. Zaks agrees. History, he says, "has tended to lump these people together and
dismiss them all as just crazy." But it is more complicated than that. "What
they did caused such upheaval, such terrible pain," he says, "that it seemed
like they warranted a closer look."

Mr. Weidman says that the more he discovered about the assassins, the more his
enthusiasm for the project grew. "They really are fascinating," he says. "Not
just because of the dramatic and horrifying way in which they put punctuation
marks at the end of their own lives and the lives of others, but because it
turned out that the journey they had followed on the way to that moment was in
each case extraordinary. When you put them together and looked at them as a
group, they formed a kind of mosaic that had meaning and suggested that we
really had something to write about.

"One of the things we found out as we looked at them is that we were not writing
about shooting at the President of the United States," Mr. Weidman continues.
"What's provocative and upsetting and disturbing is the lives they led up to
that point and what those lives reveal. So in a sense the appalling and
horrifying acts with which they ended their journeys were like tickets of
admission into the show, rather than what the show was about."

When it comes to the meaning of the mosaic, however, or what the assassins'
lives reveal, the three creators are more than a bit evasive.

"The piece should speak for itself," Mr. Sondheim says. "We don't want to tell
people how or what they should think about it. We don't want to preach or
promulgate."

And then the composer, who has presented his audiences with so many challenges
over the years, gently issues another. "What would be nice is to tell them to
take the journey with us," he says. "It's a real roller-coaster ride."


LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The triumvirate behind the musical "Assassins," which opens
tonight at Playwrights Horizons: from left, Jerry Zaks, director; Stephen
Sondheim, music and lyrics, and John Weidman, book. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York
Times) (pg. 34)

Drawing: Taking aim at American Presidents across time and space--from left,
Annie Golden (as Lynette Fromme), Victor Garber (John Wilkes Booth), Terrence
Mann (Leon Czolgosz), Jonathan Hadary (Charles Guiteau) and Debra Monk (Sara
Jane Moore) in the musical "Assassins," opening tonight at Playwrights Horizons
(Al Hirschfeld) (pg. 5)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FARE OF THE COUNTRY;
Vietnamese Cuisine, Virginia Settings

BYLINE: By OLWEN WOODIER; OLWEN WOODIER, who lives in Vienna, Va., writes
regularly about food for The Times.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 6; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1854 words


FOR Asian immigrants, Eden Center, a Vietnamese-operated shopping mall on Wilson
Boulevard in Falls Church, Va., is a source of ingredients essential to their
national cuisines; for non-Asians, the lure is the more than 20 Vietnamese
restaurants in the area.

Even visitors heading mainly for a restaurant, however, might enjoy a stop
beforehand at the Eden Supermarket. Inviting examination are jars of curries and
chili pastes, quart-size bottles of soy sauces ranging from black to mild, more
than 300 kinds of teas, soup bowls and woks representing every Asian cuisine.

You can buy large, brown-skinned yams (real yams from South Africa, not the
orange sweet potatoes that are misnamed yams by many Americans); long,
rough-skinned taro roots; tamarind seeds in small boomerang-shaped pods, and
such herbs as lemon grass, cilantro and mint. In a kitchen at the back, a cook
makes fresh and deep-fried spring rolls that you can buy at the counter on your
way out.

Those who are homesick for more than groceries can reclaim their cultural
identity at Eden Center, which is named after the shopping center in Saigon.
There are more than 60 shops -- shops for, among other things, jewelry, bridal
gowns, videos, real estate, Oriental herbs, spices and medicines.

Restaurantgoers will generally find the service friendly and polite and the
prices reasonable. The restaurants, patronized primarily by the Asian community,
serve food of high quality.

Vietnamese food preparation is particularly oil-free, with subtle flavors, and
while some dishes are served in a sweet-sour caramel sauce, others are barely
dressed in a light marinade. Little bowls of thin dipping sauces (a combination
of the ubiquitous fish sauce nuoc mam, chopped peanuts and rice vinegar among
other flavors) accompany nearly every dish. Many of the dishes combine pork,
beef, chicken and shrimp in small crisp noodles or soup noodles. Jars of
condiments on each table allow the diner to add hot chili pastes or relishes to
suit his taste. Many of the dishes arrive with mounds of shredded lettuce and
sprigs of cilantro and sliced or shredded carrots, cucumber, daikon (Chinese
radish), all pickled in a sweet-sour liquid of sugar, water, rice vinegar, lime
juice and salt.


AT the recently opened Viet Royale, large glass containers of pickled vegetables
decorate the bar. Besides the typical selections of sweet-sour vegetables, one
jar contains mustard greens in a spicy chili and ginger pickling liquid; another
is filled with small white onions with hot red peppers. In northern Vietnam,
these pickled vegetables are eaten as a mixed salad traditionally a side dish
accompanying caramel spare ribs or caramel fish in a clay bowl fitted with a
domed lid.

Viet Royale serves dishes based on a single meat or fish; the other restaurants
in the mall and neighboring blocks typically combine three to four varieties of
meats or fish. Although a variety of other seasonings are apparent, almost
everything is flavored with fish sauce, the main ingredient in Vietnamese
cuisine, according to the owner of Viet Royale, Khanh Truong, who now has two
restaurants in northern Virginia. "We use it in every dish, in dipping sauces,
soups, everything, but then we add fresh basil, cilantro or mints at the last
minute for fresh flavor and garnish," he said. And although the Vietnamese also
cook with lemon grass, it is not as important as the lemon-cilantro-flavored rau
ram (perennial Vietnamese coriander), which is simmered in soups, with meats and
poultry.

At Viet Royale, a dish of lemon grass eel, for example, was served in a fish
sauce reminiscent of a Provencal garlic sauce but lightly spiced with chili
pepper and lemon grass (the restaurant serves frogs legs in the same garlicky
sauce). The only drawback to this dish (for a Westerner's palate) is that the
bones are left intact and have to be removed with each bite. The option is to
order lemon grass chicken or another dish such as shrimp in coconut juice, three
very large shrimp grilled in their shells with head intact. To enhance the
flavor, dip the shelled fish into the coconut and fish sauce. A more
interestingly seasoned shrimp dish is grilled shrimp with rice noodle. These
shrimp-in-shell are served on a bed of thin rice noodles, chopped lettuce, bean
sprouts, shredded carrots, finely chopped peanuts and a few leaves of cilantro
and cinnamon basil. Remove the shells and dunk in a lightly spicy fish sauce. An
appetizer of green papaya salad with shrimp and pork is a delicious blend of
color, texture and spicy flavor. A few doors away, the Huong Viet Restaurant,
formerly My An 2, opened in October, a popular restaurant that moved from the
original Little Saigon area in Arlington six years ago. So far, the change is in
name only -- the same delicious appetizers and entrees are on the menu. As in
all Vietnamese restaurants you'll find fresh spring rolls (goi cuon) and
deep-fried spring rolls (cha gio) offered.

No matter which restaurant you visit, the ingredients are practically identical.
There's a combination of steamed shrimp and pork with fresh vegetables, and
cilantro; crabmeat, pork, fresh vegetables and translucent noodles. Fresh or
deep-fried, they are served with one or two dipping sauces. At Huong Viet you
get a thin rice vinegar, oil and hot pepper flakes and a delicious creamy
combination of peanut butter, soy sauce and chopped peanuts. Hanoi beef noodle
soup comes steaming hot and is filled with slivers of beef (cooked when the hot
soup is poured over the top), rice noodles and topped with a mixture of sliced
vegetables. Another choice, for the brave, is Hue spicy soup. This has added
flavor from stomach parts and a little bite from chili oil.

Entrees here are quite copious, especially caramel chicken with ginger. The
caramel sauce is not as sweet as the name implies and the good flavor of ginger
and spice of chili take it out of the realm of Chinese sweet-and-sour. Seafood
Delight consists of two skewers of scallops and shrimp (squid when available)
that are dipped in a spicy sauce and broiled to a crusty tenderness. The dish is
served with large translucent rice crepes; the idea is to remove the seafood
from the skewers, dip it in the accompanying lemon-flavored, spicy nuoc mam
sauce, then enclose it in a crepe. "Funny" (white crispy curly) noodles are
included and are particularly good when sprinkled or dipped in the nuoc mam
sauce or eaten with a mouthful of the pickled vegetables.

Right next door is Loi Phuong Restaurant. From the mirrors on the walls to the
placement of the bar and the Formica tables, these two restaurants are
identical. Their food, however, differs. Huong Viet goes in for more pork
dishes, while Loi Phuong specializes in beef. The seven courses of beef, for
instance, adds up to a lot of food although each course is small.  For $13.95 a
person you will get shredded beef salad with shredded vegetables; a beef fondue
in which slices of tenderloin are cooked at table by dipping them in coconut
soda; marinated ground beef grilled over charcoal and wrapped in a Hawaiian lot
leaf; a steamed meatball mixed with mushrooms, vermicelli and spices; slices of
tenderloin marinated in lemon grass and grilled over charcoal; marinated cubes
of beef sauteed and served on lettuce, and, finally, a ground beef rice soup
flavored with spices, onion and cilantro. These dishes are also available as
individual entrees.

The Vietnamese crispy crepe is a wonderful melange of shrimp, chicken, bean
sprouts and onion flavored with coconut milk enclosed in a rice crepe and baked
to a golden crisp.  Another crisp dish is seafood fried noodles, a combination
of shrimp, scallops, chicken, beef and a mixture of vegetables served over crisp
fried noodles. Special grilled pork comes in the form of five small meatballs.
First marinated in a spicy sauce, they are grilled on skewers and served with
pickled vegetables, rice noodles and a very tasty chopped peanuts and bean
sauce. The accompanying rice-paper sheets are meant to be peeled apart and
wrapped burrito-style around the meatballs and vegetables.

Just two blocks before you arrive at Eden Center, there are two miniature
plazas. At the first, Champion's Oriental Shopping Center, you will find Sui
Sui, a small restaurant that specializes in chicken and soup. The bowls of soup
are large enough to make a satisfying lunch and are filled with broth, pieces of
shredded chicken, slivers of onion and thin rice noodles. You add seasonings
from a choice of basil, anise, mint, hot pepper, lime and bean sprouts.

The second plaza down in the next block is Wilson Plaza Shopping Center. This
has seven stores, including a Vietnamese market and the Xinh Xinh Restaurant.
Like Sui Sui, this is a smaller, family-run restaurant with seating for about 30
people. The menu offers a good mix of appetizers and soups, plus a wide variety
of meats and seafood served with egg noodle soups, rice noodles, rice vermicelli
and fried rice dishes. One of the specialties is a superb Vietnamese pancake, a
rice crepe fried and stuffed with pork, shrimp, mushrooms, fried onions and bean
sprouts. The generous filling is subtly flavored with curry. A dish of queen's
special fried rice comes with a mixture of shredded beef, pork, chicken, and
shrimp and finely diced omelet, carrots and peas.  A house speciality, softly
woked rice noodle, was a delicious combination of soft, flat noodles, barbecued
shrimp and sliced sauteed beef, chicken and vegetables in a wonderful garlic
sauce. Desserts in Vietnamese restaurants are also on the light side and include
fruit cups of longans and lychees. Richer possibilities include a creamy flan
caramel or a mung bean and coconut milk parfait. The range of nonalcoholic
beverages is far more interesting than those listed on an American menu and
usually include fresh lime soda, salted plum soda, beaten egg soda, or fruit
shake made from avocado, coconut or exotic fruits. If these don't appeal, you
can always fall back on Coke, Sprite or Pepsi. Imported and domestic beers are
available and red, white and rose house wine.

A SAMPLING OF RESTAURANTS

All of the following restaurants on Wilson Boulevard in Falls Church, Va., will,
on request, eliminate pork, beef or chicken from dishes so that they are cooked
with seafood only or served as vegetarian dishes.

Huong Viet Restaurant, at No. 6785; (703) 538-7110. Three-course meal for two
including two beers, $30. Open 10 A.M. to 10 P.M. seven days a week.

Loi Phuong Restaurant, No. 6781; (703) 538-4838. Three-course meal for two
including two beers. $38. Open 11 to 10 seven days a week.

Viet Royale Restaurant, No. 6795; (703) 533-8388. Three-course meal for two
including two beers, $38. Open 11 to 10 Monday to Friday and 10 to 11 weekends.

Xinh Xinh Restaurant, No. 6621; (703) 534-5730. Three-course meal for two
including two beverages, $25. Open daily from 11 to 10.

Sui Sui Restaurant, No. 6218; (703) 532-7282. Three-course meals for two
including beverages under $25.

Eden Supermarket, No. 6763; (703) 532-4950.  -- O. W.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: At the China Herbs Shop, one of more than 60 Asian businesses
in Falls Church. Serving at the Viet Royale restaurant. (pg. 6); At the Huong
Viet restaurant, formerly My An 2. (pg. 18)(Photographs by Paul Hosefros/The New
York Times)

Map of Virginia showing location of Falls Church.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CHILD OF THE MOVIES

SECTION: Section 6; Page 6; Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 123 words


Your article on Jodie Foster proves that she is as self-centered and sexist as
every other feminist in this country ("Child of the Movies" by Jonathan Van
Meter, Jan. 6).

Foster says, "In terms of women in history, 95 percent of women's experiences
are about being a victim. Or about being an underdog, or having to survive. . .
. Women didn't go to Vietnam and blow things up. They're not Rambo."

For her information, men had to go to Vietnam because they were born male. They
were the victims and underdogs; they had to survive while she was safe at home,
going to school, becoming rich and famous, winning an Oscar, then complaining to
a major publication how terrible women have it.

ROBERT KEITH SMITH
Follansbee, W.Va.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jodie Foster (Michael O'Neill)

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Black Families Grapple With War

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 1; Column 3; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1780 words

DATELINE: YONKERS


IN small communities and large last week, black Westchester families with
relatives serving in the Persian Gulf sought to resolve their frustration over a
war few people wanted with support for those who are serving.

Rhonda Canteen, 20, the mother of two young children, said her husband, Gary,
and her brother, Elgin B. Morton, both of Yonkers, "joined the Army for the same
reason, to make something better of themselves."

Now, both are serving in the Gulf war, on different bases. Specialist Canteen,
21, is with the 13th Coscom, or Corps Support Command, an administrative unit.
He was to have been discharged last month. His 19-year-old brother-in-law is in
the First Cavalry Division.

Scanning Television Coverage

"They haven't met but they send messages to each other," Ms. Canteen said.
Meanwhile, she said, she scanned television coverage of the war hoping to spot a
familiar face. Her son, Garrett, who is 2 1/2 years old, is learning key words.
"Whenever he hears 'Saudi Arabia,' he stops what he's doing and runs to the TV."

"He says his daddy is over there 'shooting people,' " Ms. Canteen said. Her
6-month-old daughter, She-Vae, says "Dada" now. "I taped it, but Gary missed it,
and that's not right," she said.

Ms. Canteen said she never thought it would come to war. "First I thought it was
about oil, and that somebody would give in. Now I'm confused. I don't know what
exactly they are fighting about."

She said she could not identify with much of the television coverage. "Whatever
they show, they don't show blacks," she said. "We represent 30 percent of the
people who are over there. They should acknowledge us."

Blacks represent 29.8 percent of Army personnel in the desert force and 28.9 of
the Army's overall strength, according to the Pentagon. In the other branches,
blacks represent 21.3 percent of the Navy in the Gulf, 14.8 percent overall;
16.9 percent of Marines in the Gulf, 19 percent overall; 13.5 percent of the Air
Force in the Gulf, 15.2 percent overall.

Black representation in the armed forces altogether comes to 29.4 percent, and
in the current Gulf operation, 20.6 percent. Blacks represent about 12 percent
of the nation's population.

Another Yonkers family searching television coverage of the desert war are the
Davises, Jessie and Gary, whose son, Petty Officer Troy Lamont Edwards, has been
in the Persian Gulf since August aboard the nuclear cruiser Mississippi. "It's
rough," the sailor's father said. "We feel when it's necessary we have to
protect our country."

'It Isn't Our War'

Mr. Davis, a veteran of the Korean War, had hoped President Bush would have
avoided war with Iraq, but is resigned now to the conflict. His wife said, "It
isn't our war," and then added: "I don't mean the black community alone. I feel
a lot of people feel we shouldn't be in it."

She said her son "just decided to go into the service on his own, when he
finished high school" and added that he "never had this in mind."

Other family members interviewed made similar comments. Ms. Canteen said of her
husband: "When he joined the Army he thought nothing like this would happen."
Soldiers now teen-agers or in their 20's are too young to remember Vietnam, even
as children, and earlier conflicts are history to their parents. The Davises and
others with family members in Saudi Araabia say the war is proving to be
devastating.

Mr. Davis said his wife "stays up some nights until 3 A.M., watching war
coverage on television." They have four daughters and one "woke up crying on her
11th birthday," a day that would otherwise have been celebratory. "She missed
her brother, and it struck her especially hard on her birthday," he explained.

The black community in Yonkers was among the first in the nation to feel the
pain and desolation of war when the family of Lance Cpl. Anthony Stewart, a
Marine they said enlisted to escape the drugs and violence of the city's
streets, learned on Dec. 29 that he had been shot, apparently accidentally, by
another Marine cleaning his rifle in a forward position in Saudi Arabia.

Family Has Questions

He was the fourth United States serviceman to be fatally shot by a fellow marine
and among 97 Americans to die in the Gulf area before fighting began on Jan. 16.
A 19-year-old Marine from Manhattan was sentenced to 15 months at hard labor for
the shooting.

Yvonne Hall, Corporal Stewart's mother, has questioned whether racial tension
led to the death of her 19-year-old son. He had complained in letters and phone
calls of confrontations with a white and a Mexican-American Marine. The family
is seeking a review of the case and of the court-martial verdict.

Jacqualine Davis, also of Yonkers, spent six years in the Army, leaving as a
sergeant in March 1988. "I went in because I was looking to get an education,"
she said, "but I learned it ti was not really feasible, at least for me, because
you have other priorities while in the service."

'Escaping What's Here'

She, too, has mixed feelings about the nation's role in the Persian Gulf and of
the black community's role in the Army. "The blacks are a big part of the Army,
more so than any other part of the armed forces. It's more a matter of escaping
what's here: the opportunities are not made available to us here.

"The idea many of us have is to try to get an education, or just a means of
supporting ourselves, until we get that experience. When we come back to the
civilian world it may be -- with that behind us -- that it will be better for
us." But that is not always the case.

She said that after high school she had taken out a $1,500 student loan for a
year at Elizabeth Seton College in Yonkers "because my parents were not in a
position to put me through school." She decided she did not want to go further
into debt, however, so she enlisted in the Army.

The subjects she sought to pursue while in the service, such as accounting and
other business courses, were never available where she was assigned, she said.
Ms. Davis, who said she felt the service "was a good experience," did not use
the G.I. Bill after her discharge and now works for the Postal Service in
Elmsford.

A Worry About the Future

She has a brother-in-law in the Gulf as well as friends she had served with. "I
support what the President did," she said. "But I worry about the consequences
of this when it's over. It's a hostile environment, and we shouldn't have troops
stationed over there forever.

"They can't drink beer or conduct their own religious services or do other
things they're accustomed to, so why are we helping these people?"

As for Saddem Hussein, the Iraqi leader, she said: "He's a dictator who
shouldn't be in control. If we don't do something about him now and he gets
nuclear power we can fear for our lives over here. Something has to happen, and
I'd prefer it happen now and over there."

Stonewall Odom, a black activist who has played a prominent role in the Yonkers
housing-desegregation case, has a 25-year-old daughter, Jacne qulie,-photoegan a
five-year enlistment only weeks ago, after a long talk with her father.

Nothing for Her in Yonkers

"We discussed what was happening in the Gulf, but she still wanted to get away,
to get away from the ghetto," he said. "She felt that Yonkers had nothing to
offer her. She had worked for the county and for a bank, but was not able to go
to school and get the education she wanted because I could not afford to send
her."

"She wanted to change her life style. That's what the military offers all ghetto
kids, a chance to get away. They go in as children and come back as men and
women. But it's disheartening, too. Blacks go off -- it happened in Vietnam --
to fight for this country but they come back and find they face another fight,
for their rights."

Mr. Odom, himself a Vietnam veteran, said: "The military has offered poor blacks
more opportunity to educate themselves and advance themselves than by any other
means. Poor kids desiring an education, desiring a structured life style, find
it in the service, which has done more for integration than any other group.

"But when the black community has some questions, being there in such large
numbers; when it comes to speaking out against a war, we have not been properly
represented in our dissatisfaction with what is going on. This is what's being
said on the street: we have a large number of men and women going to war, but no
one is concenrned about the black community's dissatisfaction with America going
to war."

The Issue of Anti-Semitism

Mr. Odom said that one of the reasons "our voice is not being heard is because
Israel is involved, and the media blocks us out from presenting a seemingly
anti-Semitic view."

"We're not anti-Semitic," he argued, "but we can't address this issue in an
intelligent fashion without being labeled that way."

"If Israel gets involved, where will that leave the Arab community? Our troops
could be fighting for the Arab and against the Arab, including those who have
been supportive. There is a kinship between Arabs and blacks even though Arabs
were once slavers of blacks," he said.

"Blacks feel that if they speak out in large numbers against the war, their
patriotism will be challenged," Mr. Odom added.

'Peace' vs. 'Support'

A similar situation, posed in broader terms, faced members of the newly formed
Military Families Support Group, at their second meeting last week in White
Plains. Many still had questions about President Bush's decision to go to war
but were anxious not to let it undermine support for the sons, daughters,
husbands and other family members in the desert.

A prayer printed on a large placard prompted angry comments from some
participants because two O's were filled in with the 1960's peace symbol. They
said it recalled a still-painful period and agreed that a proposed candlelight
vigil be referred to in terms of "support" rather than "peace."

Several family members said they did not want their children to come home to a
hostile nation, as did the Vietnam veterans. A majority indicated strong
preference for an agenda dealing more with personal than political matters. They
exchanged anecdotes, photographs and tips on a score of procedures, from sending
food packages to using electronic mail.

Henry Miller, a White Plains lawyer who founded the Westchester chapter of the
support group -- which has chapters in Manhattan and on Long Island, said the
next meeting would be at 7:30 P.M. Feb. 12 at 99 Court Street in White Plains,
in the former Jockey Club restaurant. His number is 946-8900. Another chapter
may be formed for northern Westchester.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jessie and Gary Davis with their children in Yonkers. A son,
Troy Lamont Edwards, is in the Persian Gulf; Stonewall Odom, whose daughter
Jacqueline began a five-year enlistment last month, with his two other children,
Marlena and Marcus, in their Yonkers home (pg. 1); Rhonda Canteen with her two
children. Her husband, Gary, and brother, Elgin B. Morton, "joined the Army for
the same reason, to make something better of themselves"; Jacqualine Davis, who
spent six years in the Army (pg. 6) (Photographs by Alan Zale for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART;
When Artists Put Countries on the Map, It's Social Comment

BYLINE: By VIVIAN RAYNOR

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 20; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 979 words

DATELINE: THE BRONX


GEOGRAPHY gets such short shrift in schools that money can be made betting even
the well educated that they don't know where Mauritius is.

Apparently, it takes a war or revolution to put a country on the map and "Maps
and Madness," at the Longwood Arts Gallery here, looks like an attempt to
rectify the situation, because there are maps in most of the works. Alas, the 13
artists involved turn out to be as topical as the media in their approach. Their
concerns are political, environmental, personal -- anything but geographical.
And although the gallery's stock in trade is social comment, its atmosphere has
never seemed so fraught with disaffection and innuendo as it is now.

To begin with the more obscure contributions, there is Fred Tomaselli's
assemblage that is a world globe suspended between two intersecting metal
frames. The sphere is poised at the center and illuminated by six lamps, one at
each pole and the rest at equator level. Although the title, "Imperial," may be
a clue, the work's precise meaning is anyone's guess.

Another enigma is Christopher Chevins's "Gravity's Monogram," a large wood panel
crisscrossed with projection lines and washed with map-like shapes, one of which
could be either New Zealand or Japan. Completing the image are two forms
suggesting bones that are impastoed in Naples yellow.

Elizabeth Enders is even more introspective especially in the two large sheets
of pristine paper that are "interrupted" by tiny pen and watercolor drawings. A
turret and a pair of stick figures, little islands of green dotted with stick
trees, something resembling a bunch of plaintains, rows of zeros -- the shapes
hang in space resisting all attempts at interpretation.

The clouds part slightly in Cynthia Madansky's "Mappings of Jerusalem."
Designated a blueprint, this red-brown image has evidently been taken from a
16th-century woodcut of the city which, labeled "Hierusalem," shows the Templum
Salamonus, the Sepulcru Christi and other landmarks. Visible underneath,
however, are documents of more recent vintage -- a map imprinted with comments
about the status of such areas as the West Bank and lists in Arabic of
Palestinians who have lost their lives in the intifada. Aside from the message,
which could raise hackles, this is one of the few successful marriages of art
and politics in the show.

In his diptych, "Promises and Incontinence," Rupert Ravens takes his cue from
David Salle, imposing, in one panel, gridded shapes of South America and Africa
in pink on leaking oil drums painted naturalistically and, in the other, laying
a green caduceus over the profiles of a kissing couple. No caption is needed for
this or for James Esber's painting of five extinct bird species. Compressed as
if by a distorting mirror, the brightly plumed corpses are laid out diagonally
on a global-map projection.

But mystery soon returns -- in the form of Nancy Chumn's paintings of the Korean
peninsula and the Caribbean island once known as Hispaniola. Who is being blamed
for the division of the first into a mottled pink North and a flat gray South
and for the black chains that dangle nearby?  As for the second image, how come
the chains that bind the Dominican Republic half of the island into a parcel
hang slack over Haiti?

These are among the images that call for verbal footnotes, as is "China, June 4"
by Mary Malott.

Encased in a heavy wood frame of Oriental design, the main canvas is a relief
map of Asia with China a vast stretch of apple green and Taiwan a
disproportionately large red island lying offshore. Below it, in small
compartments, are photographically painted scenes, some of which, like the
title, bear on the student rebellion.

Cartographically, the viewer is on firmer ground with Ming Mur-Ray's
conventional map of Africa emerging from oilstick chiaroscuro. With an emerald
green percent sign slapped in the middle of the continent, "Per-cent Age," as it
is called, makes for an arresting emblem, one that could be read as a symbol for
colonialism and its payoffs. The trouble is that the artist does the same thing
with a map of the United States (not included in the show) -- a discovery that
leaves this viewer, for one, confused.

On the whole, things go better -- or at least more lucidly -- in the gallery
that has recently been added to the Longwood premises. Perceiving a
contradiction between the military and medical aid that is sent to Central
America, Jill Bedgood illustrates it by a tray printed with a map of the region
and laid on the one hand with surgical instruments and dressings and on the
other with a bowl of bullets and a jar filled with tobacco-like fiber. The title
is "AID."

Algernon Miller's wall hanging of scrambled plastic twine is another example of
politics made esthetic. Nesting among the coils are clocks registering the 11th
or 12th hour, whether the zone is South Africa, the Persian Gulf or Brazil,
along with countless fragments of color photographs depicting tribal peoples and
jungle fauna.

More the Conceptualist, Brian Goldfarb documents with maps, diagrams and quotes
the background to the cholera epidemic of 1832. Those were the days when
"experts," Noah Webster among them, espoused the miasma theory of contagion
rather than tackle the problems of overcrowding and bad or nonexistent
sanitation.

But the simplest and most sophisticated contribution comes from John Sprague --
five sheets of black paper, each depicting the shape of a country or continent
and the cliche that goes with it. Lettered in glossy black, "Winning Hearts and
Minds" identifies Vietnam; "Just Cause," Nicaragua; "Dark Continent," Africa;
and so on. This is forthright work that is equal parts truth and opinion.

The show, on view through Feb. 16, can be visited from 1 to 5 P.M. Tuesdays
through Fridays. The gallery is in P.S. 39, at 965 Longwood Avenue.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Percent Age" by Ming Mur-Ray, part of the "Maps and Madness"
exhibition at the Longwood Arts Gallery.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WRIGHTSTOWN JOURNAL;
Tough Economic Times for 'Military Town'

BYLINE: By ALBERT J. PARISI

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 2; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1086 words

DATELINE: WRIGHTSTOWN


WHEN thundering jets climb into the evening and early morning skies here,
residents in this Burlington County community rarely complain. Many who live and
work here say the roar of straining engines brings with it a feeling of
security, just like a ringing cash register.

With war a reality, more and more aircraft arrived and departed,most of them
C-141B Lockheed Starlifters, military air transports assigned to neighboring
McGuire Air Force Base. But the sound of cash registers has faded, in part
because of a sagging economy and the deployment of service men and women in the
Persian Gulf area.

"There's no question in my mind, we're hurting all right," said James S. Davis
Jr., a past president of the Wrightstown Rotary and owner of the Thunderbird
Bowling Lanes on the Wrightstown-Cookstown Road.

"I've seen good times and bad here, but this is different," he said. "We don't
know where this crisis is taking us and whether it's short or long term. People
around here are feeling the effects in more ways than one."

For decades, this mile-square borough of 3,700 residents has depended on
military spending for its economic survival, local merchants and elected
officials say. Whether it's off-duty service men and women frequenting taverns
and fast-food shops or civilians employed at both McGuire and nearby Fort Dix,
an Army training center, the sight of uniforms and military-style haircuts has
been as common here as summer vegetable stands along rural roads.

'You Have Our Prayers'

Placards and storefront windows proclaim "We are with you" and "You have our
prayers" and far outnumber graffito inscriptions of "No blood for oil." Yellow
ribbons adorn many trees on front lawns.

"During Korea, during Vietnam, things were tough, but we thrived because there
were a lot of people stationed here," said Mr. Davis, whose family has operated
the Thunderbird Lanes for 31 years.

But in recent years, he said, the personnel at Fort Dix have been drastically
cut back as part of a national effort to decrease military spending. Currently,
the deployment of McGuire active-duty and Reserve air crews in and out of the
Saudi Arabian desert "means that there are that many less people spending their
money on weekdays and weekends," he said.

All told, Mr. Davis and other merchants said, business is off by as much as 20
percent since United States forces began leaving for overseas duty last August.

"A lot of it has to do with the economy and the state that it's in -- we know
that here," Mr. Davis said. "But what's happening in the Persian Gulf is
affecting everybody, each in their own way."

While some businesses are hard hit, others are holding ground.

"About the only businesses not affected by what's going on are the beauty
parlors," Mr. Davis said. "While most of those who have shipped out are the
guys, their wives and girlfriends are still here waiting for them to come home,
and making appointments to get their hair done."

While officials at McGuire are reticent about revealing the number of aircraft
and crews deployed overseas, they admit that the absence of military personnel
has affected a way of life both on and off the base.

"It's been busy here and we've had a lot to do," said Art Covello, a spokesman
for the 514th Military Airlift Wing, an Air Force Reserve unit based at McGuire.
He said that the economic downturn was not restricted to Wrightstown, but
affected other neighboring communities frequented by off-duty service people and
their families.

In his unit alone, some 400 reservists are either overseas or manning continual
flights to and from the Saudi desert ferrying in troops and supplies as well as
providing air medical evacuation for the wounded and ill. In addition, McGuire
is a key staging area for the delivery of some 200,000 pounds of mail daily
destined for the gulf.

For Margaret Steere, manager of the Goodyear Auto Service Center on Fort Dix
Street, a tough economy and regular customers' going overseas mean a significant
drop in business.

"Compared to last year, my decline in business from customers on both bases is
pretty obvious," she said, "and I'm sure it's going to get worse before it gets
better."

While she did not give specific figures on her lost volume, she said it was more
than the average 20 percent decline being experienced by the local business
community.

But such times have also helped to strengthen ties between shop owners and their
military customers and families. The crisis has served to bring out compassion
in many besides a sense of business as usual.

"I can feel for what these families are going through because I come from a
military family," Mrs. Steere said. "My husband spent 27 years in the Air Force,
and I know what it means to live on a limited budget and have someone you love
far away. People in business around here go out of their way to help others, but
with this crisis we all have to be more accommodating, caring and thoughtful for
those living on the edge whose wives and husbands are in the gulf."

Mrs. Steere said she and her employees had gone out of their way to provide
transportation back to military housing for spouses needing car repairs and
"have helped to change a few diapers" along the way. They have also tried to
alleviate the tension and anxiety felt by many families.

Wrightstown's history was agricultural until 1917 and involvement in World War
I. Fort Dix's role as an Army recruit training and embarcation center for troops
moving overseas "was this town's rebirth" and has helped its economy through the
Depression, World War II and United States participation in ensuing conflicts,
Mr. Davis said.

'We've Come a Long Way'

As a "military town," the borough has retained some of the seedier aspects of
catering to a service community, like raucous bars and a tattoo parlor, but
business leaders also point to a 15-store mall built in 1959 designed to cater
to service families.

"We've come a long way and we've still a long way to go, depending on what
direction the gulf crisis takes us," Mr. Davis said.

Mrs. Steere said, "People are afraid here, and that fear has made this community
a stronger family." Her son and daughter are both in the service and awaiting
orders to the Persian Gulf.

"I've got a nephew who is a helicopter pilot out there right now and like
everybody else, we live from headline to headline," she said. "In the meantime,
I wear my Desert Shield heart on my blouse and do what I can do to help."


LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: James S. Davis Jr., owner of the Thunderbird Bowling Lanes in
Wrightstown. "I've seen good times and bad here, but this is different," he
said. (William E. Sauro/The New York Times)

Map highilghting location of Wrightstown

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Wall Street;
War Plays Bring Their Own Dangers

BYLINE: By Alison Leigh Cowan

SECTION: Section 3; Page 15; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 977 words


As long as there are wars, there will always be a profit-minded few whose
fortunes are made by ministering to the needs of war. The 12-day-old war in the
Persian Gulf is no exception.

The Raytheon Company, the defense supplier whose Patriot missiles stole the show
early on by intercepting several of Iraq's deadly missiles in midair, is only
the latest example of a company whose business outlook has fundamentally
improved because of the war's progress in the Persian Gulf.

But for every Raytheon, whose stock has risen nearly 10 percent since the war's
outbreak, there are wartime wannabes, pretenders that would like to latch on to
the huge stock-market rewards available to those who are seen contributing to
the war effort, or benefiting by it. The opportunists range from the outright
swindlers, whom investors should avoid altogether, to the overzealous, who may
receive some windfall from the war but whose premature hype investors should
greet skeptically.

Take Sunrise Medical Inc., an otherwise attractive stock that closed Friday
over-the-counter at $22.75 a share. The Torrance, Calif.-based company makes
beds and mattresses for hospitals and nursing homes and custom wheelchairs and
crutches for the retail market.

No sooner had war erupted than the company's public relations firm in New York
was calling reporters, breathlessly pitching the company as a war play, one
whose fortunes could rise dramatically with events in the Middle East. "This
company will not be stymied by a recession and also would benefit from any war
situation because it's in the wheelchair and crutches business," said Anthony J.
Russo, the chief executive of Noonan/Russo Communications Inc., the public
relations firm. Of course, he added, that scenario, "is all contingent on how
many casualties there are."

Richard H. Chandler, the company's chairman, admitted that he was a little
uncomfortable with Mr. Russo's sales pitch. "These are heroes, and we don't like
to be connected with profiting from other people's misfortunes," he said.

But he added that to the extent war would increase the number of disabled
Americans, his company would do its part to help out. "Our war wounded don't
have to experience the haunting images of 'Born on the Fourth of July,' " he
said. "Just like high-tech weaponry is different than in Vietnam, you've also
got high-tech products for the disabled that can make a difference in the
quality of life."

The company's stock has soared 17.4 percent since the war broke, about 7
percentage points more than the Nasdaq Composite Index over the same period.
Some of the run-up is probably because second-quarter earnings are expected to
be up nearly 50 percent when they are announced on Tuesday.

Nonetheless, investors should be cautious about factoring any war windfall into
their calculations about Sunrise's future worth.  Military and securities
experts point out that there are several reasons why it may be harder for
companies and investors to cash in on the crisis in the Gulf than they may
realize. For one thing, the war is going fairly well. With inventories flush and
few allied planes being shot from the sky, the military may not have to go
shopping anytime soon.

In that light, obvious war plays may look less alluring once investors run the
numbers. OEA Inc., a Denver company that makes explosive devices, would have
been a logical beneficiary of the war. After all, its devices not only go into
the air bags found in cars, but also into the ejector seats in fighter planes.

Has it been? "At most, you're talking about a one-time contribution to earnings
of a penny a share," said Ronald Glantz at Dean Witter Reynolds in San
Francisco.

Even the companies that have landed huge contracts to supply everything from lip
baum to Gatorade to the troops may see little, if any, long-term impact on
profitability. A spokeswoman for the Defense Personnel Support Center, an arm of
the Defense Department, said the military has awarded $1.9 billion worth of
contracts since Desert Shield began in August.

Those dollars, earmarked for food, medical supplies and clothing, are spread
over some 300 vendors, and have generally not altered the thinking of Wall
Street analysts about the earnings potential of any individual companies. The
contracts may not be priced as attractively as commercial contracts. And
assuming the war ends shortly, they also may turn out to be one-time
contributors to income -- not the sort of earnings that the market tends to
notice.

"Wall Street pays for earnings that come from a sustainable trend," said John
McMillin, a food analyst at Prudential Bache Securities, "and maybe this is
going to be a sustainable trend. But one would hope that we'll get the boys back
and this will not be the next Vietnam. That's why I, for one, am not jumping up
and down about these sales."

Geo A. Hormel & Company is a good example. It won a $44.4 million contract to
sell 25 million entrees to the troops. Mr. McMillin figures that the contract
might generate $3 million in after-tax profits, given the product's usual
margins. That would add 4 cents to the $1.20 a share that the company is already
expected to earn. "It might give them a little kick," said Mr. McMillin. "But
you've got to question the sustainability of the business. Nobody will pay a big
multiple for one-time events."

And investors should pay nothing at all for the dubious wares being hawked by
unscrupulous promoters who spring into action anytime market sentiment shifts.
The North American Securities Administrators Association warned consumers in
August about telephone solicitations pushing phony oil and gas partnerships or
precious-metal investments.

"Almost always, they latch on to what's hot," said John Perkins, the president
of the Washington group. "It's their form of advertising."

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "What the Troops Need," showing a breakdown of the value of
supplies ordered since August 1990 to maintain U.S. personnel in the Persian
Gulf, through Jan. 24, 1991 (Source: U.S. Defense Personnel Support Center)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
Miami's Cubans and Family Conflict

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 44; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 584 words


Raul de Cardenas's play "In Miami as It Is in Heaven" examines the generational
conflicts among Cuban refugees living in Miami, and finds a spiritual void amid
prosperity and cultural assimilation. The opening production of the Puerto Rican
Traveling Theater's 24th season, the drama is set in 1985 and follows one
tempestuous day in the life of a family that fled Cuba 20 years earlier.

Primitivo (Emilio del Pozo), the head of the household, is a hard-nosed used-car
dealer from working-class roots who has built up a successful business in
southern Florida. He and his wife, Lola (Suzanne Costallos), are divided souls
despite their comfort. On the one hand, they are conservative bourgeois,
upwardly mobile and concerned with appearances. On the other, they are nostalgic
for their poorer former life, which in retrospect had a vitality and romance
that are missing from the present. Primitivo is proud and fiery tempered and
places great store in being a man's man. Both parents worship the memory of
Ernesto, their oldest child, who died in Vietnam and whose room is kept as a
shrine.

Their two surviving children are comparative disappointments. A daughter, Vivian
(Eileen Galindo), does well selling real estate. Mario, their youngest child
(Orlando George), is an aspiring pianist. As the play unfolds, he confronts his
father with his homosexuality and then with the news that he has AIDS. Also
living with the family is a relative (Cari Gorostiza) who left Cuba five years
earlier during the Mariel exodus.

"In Miami as It Is in Heaven" holds many seeds that might make for high drama,
yet it is a curiously flat and unmoving play. The characters' histories and
conflicts are revealed in expository speeches that have none of the spontaneity
of actual conversation. The playwright coyly withholds information, like the
circumstances of Ernesto's death and the details of Mario's personal life, to
generate a suspense that is far too contrived to have a dramatic pull.

The problems of the writing are underscored by Alba Oms's leisurely direction,
which keeps a mute on the play's explosive emotions. Time and again, the
characters complain about how tired they are of living in a house where everyone
is arguing all the time. Yet the tone of performances rarely rises above one of
heated conversation, and the performances are so physically inhibited that at
moments the production has the static quality of a drawing-room comedy.

The only signs of animal ferocity in Mr. del Pozo's Primitivo are his flashing
eyes, and Mr. George delivers Mario's anguished confessions in a somnolent
singsong. Although Ms. Costallos conveys some of Lola's gallantry, the
character's conflicts remain mostly beneath the surface.

A serious and well-meaning play, "In Miami as It Is in Heaven" deserves a
rewrite as well as a more spirited production. It has performances in English on
Wednesday, Thursday and Friday and in Spanish on Saturdays and Sundays. The
performance reviewed was in English.

IN MIAMI AS IT IS IN HEAVEN

By Raul de Cardenas; English translation by Asa Zatz; directed by Alba Oms; sets
by Michael Sharp; lighting, Rachel Budin; costumes, Mary Marsicano; production
stage manager, Lisa Ledwich; producer, Miriam Colon Valle. Presented by the
Puerto Rican Traveling Theater. At 304 West 47th Street.

Primitivo . . . Emilio del Pozo
Lola . . . Suzanne Costallos
Maruja . . . Cari Gorostiza
Vivian . . . Eileen Galindo
Mario . . . Orlando George

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Orlando George, left, and Emilio del Pozo in a scene from Raul
de Cardenas's "In Miami as It Is in Heaven." (Peter Krupenye/Puerto Rican
Traveling Theater)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hickel Wants New Alaska Gold Rush

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1452 words

DATELINE: JUNEAU, Alaska, Jan. 24


Flush with oil money gained since the start of the Persian Gulf crisis, Alaskans
are once again dreaming aloud of grand schemes to extract riches from the
nation's largest and least developed state.

Leading the charge is Alaska's new Governor, 71-year-old Walter J. Hickel, who
was elected in November as an independent representing a party whose platform
called for seceding from the Union.

Mr. Hickel disavows that particular plank of the Alaskan Independence Party. But
Alaska's revived oil wealth has given him new impetus to pursue old dreams.

This week, in his State of the State Message before the Alaska Legislature, Mr.
Hickel called for oil drilling in North America's biggest wildlife preserve,
urged construction of an $11 billion natural gas pipeline down the length of the
state and proposed laying railroad tracks across the tundra in central Alaska
and building roads into towns that are currently unreachable by cars and trucks.


Water Pipeline to California

He also envisions exporting fresh water, through an ocean pipeline, from Alaskan
rivers to drought-plagued Southern California. The Governor's proposals have
attracted so much attention that people here are referring to the grand design
as "Wally World."

Some of these ideas were first promoted by Mr. Hickel more than 20 years ago,
when he was Governor for two years until President Richard M. Nixon named him
Secretary of the Interior in 1969. But even though Mr. Hickel began his second
term after winning only 39 percent of the vote in a three-way race, he says he
represents the larger-than-life temperament that has long epitomized Alaska.

While critics deride Mr. Hickel as one of the last of the "boomers," as the
pro-development forces in Alaska are known, the idea of using billions of
dollars in oil money for big projects is welcomed by many in this land, which
came of age in an epic gold rush and has been enriched by the continent's
biggest known oil field.

"Sure, I'm a dreamer; that's what Wally Hickel is all about," the Governor said
in an interview. "Our goose that laid the golden egg, the North Slope oil, is
running out, so we've got to build more geese."

Some Significant Opposition

Mr. Hickel's ideas have run into significant opposition from Alaskan Eskimos,
Aleuts and Indians, environmentalists and legislative leaders in both the
Democratic and the Republican parties.

The Federal Government, which owns about 60 percent of Alaska's land, would have
to approve many of the projects, particularly any oil development in the
19-million-acre Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. In recent years Congress has
passed Alaska land legislation over the objections of the state's
pro-development political leaders, a pattern that fuels secessionist talk, most
of it in jest.

But with projections of a $2 billion surplus in the state budget this year, Mr.
Hickel's enthusiasm is contagious here in Alaska's capital, even though he was
elected with the support of neither major party.

"We don't want to spend money on pyramids," said Ben Grussendorf, a Democrat
from Sitka who is Speaker of the State House of Representatives. "But when
Governor Hickel says civilization needs big projects to grow on, everybody
around here is interested. We just have to make sure we don't end up with
something that's only good for looking at."

Annual Dividend Checks

Alaskans pay no state taxes. Instead, every resident receives an annual dividend
check from the Permanent Fund, an $11 billion trust made up of royalties earned
by oil pumped from the North Slope region of northern Alaska. Last year the
checks were nearly $1,000 for each of the 512,000 men, women and children who
had lived in the state for at least a year.

As oil prices fell in the 1980's and the volume of crude pumped through the
Trans-Alaska Pipeline started to decline, state revenue dried up. With 85
percent of its budget dependent on oil money, Alaska was facing a $300 million
deficit last summer, and looking at cutbacks in services, dividend checks and
dreams spawned by the price of oil.

For the first time in years, Alaska politicians were talking seriously about
trying to reduce the state's dependence on oil. Such talk became even more
urgent in March 1989, when the tanker Exxon Valdez struck a reef in Prince
William Sound and spilled nearly 11 million gallons of oil, the largest spill in
the nation's history.

But last August, when Iraq invaded Kuwait, oil prices shot up and Alaskans found
themselves in the position of benefiting enormously from the crisis.

"I think we are all very sensitive to the fact that the state is getting rich
off what's going on in the Persian Gulf," said Chuck Logsdon, a state petroleum
economist.

Increase in Oil Output

In response to President Bush's call on oil suppliers to increase production,
the Alaska pipeline, which provides 25 percent of the nation's domestic oil,
raised its daily output by more than 100,000 barrels, to 2.1 million barrels. As
long as oil remains above $15 a barrel, a price that has not been seen since
before the gulf crisis, the state surplus rises by millions of dollars a day.

Mr. Hickel says most of the surplus should be used on his plan to "let Alaska
recapture its glory." With the Federal Government controlling vast tracts of
national park land and wilderness, he said, "the state has been on the brink of
colony status once again."

In his state of the state speech, the first major public statement of his
administration's intentions, the new Governor said, "We will not tolerate
further insults born of ignorance in Congress, the national media or national
interest groups." He was referring to statements in Congress and the press
implying that Alaskans have not always been the best stewards of their natural
resources.

Mr. Hickel moved to Alaska from Kansas in 1940 -- arriving, he said, with 37
cents in his pocket. After taking odd jobs ranging from bartending to logging,
he became a developer and builder in World War II, and was so successful that he
spent $750,000 of his own money getting elected last year.

Themes From the Old West

In keeping with his self-made status, Mr. Hickel evokes the themes and heroes of
the 19th-century American West. He favors railroad development, even at a
construction cost estimated at $3 million a mile, because that was how the West
was developed. He says the state's Eskimos, Aleuts and Indians, which make up 15
percent of the population, should have no special hunting or fishing rights. And
he loathes having vast tracts of land designated as official wilderness, because
of the restrictions that go with it.

"When Lewis and Clark went across the country, they didn't do it on a National
Scenic Road," he said. "We Alaskans must be allowed to catch up. We're young."

Environmentalists are counting on a change in attitude, brought on in part by
the Exxon Valdez spill, to generate opposition to many of Mr. Hickel's plans.

An Unpredictable Politician

"Walter is stuck in the past, giving us these Gilded Age pronouncements as the
last great leader of the boomer school," said Jack Hession, the Alaska
representative of the Sierra Club. "I think he'll find there has been a great
change here. People see Federal protection as a good thing. They protect some of
the most valuable areas in the world."

Mr. Hickel is unpredictable. As Interior Secretary he fought oil companies over
their environmental records, and was dismissed in 1970 after disagreeing with
Mr. Nixon on the Vietnam War. Since then, Mr. Hickel has built an empire of
hotels and shopping malls, run from his headquarters in the Captain Cook Hotel
in Anchorage.

Congress is not likely to approve oil drilling in the wildlife refuge any time
soon, leaders of the House Interior Committee say. The natural gas pipeline, an
820-mile project that was first proposed by Mr. Hickel as an investment for his
company, the Yukon Pacific Corporation, is not feasible in current market
conditions, economists say.

The proposed railroad, an extension that would open up some of the state's
harshest terrain, is opposed by wildlife advocates. They note that trains on the
Alaska Railroad, which runs 525 miles from Fairbanks to Seward, are one of the
biggest killers of moose in the winter.

And, because many Alaskans delight in their isolation, the new roads proposed by
the Governor are getting a cool reception by some people in the very towns that
would be connected to the outside world by them.

Despite the odds, Mr. Hickel says all his dreams will eventually become part of
Alaska's landscape. "These are not idle visions," he said. "They are the keys to
our independence."


LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Caribou grazing near a drilling rig on the North Slope of
Alaska, site of continent's biggest known oilfield (Anchorage Daily News) (pg.
1); Walter J. Hickel, the Governor of Alaska, promotes development (Mark Kelley
for The New York Times) (pg. 20).

Map shows Gov. Walter Hickel's proposed projects for Alaska (pg. 20)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Antiwar Rallies;
DAY OF PROTESTS IS THE BIGGEST YET

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 938 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 26


Invoking a specter of spiraling human and environmental costs, tens of thousands
of demonstrators here and on the West Coast today engaged in the largest
protests yet against the Persian Gulf war.

The protest in Washington drew 75,000 people, the United States Park Service
said, but organizers said that estimate was too low by more than half. Thousands
more marched in San Francisco. As the protests proceeded, smaller demonstrations
in support of President Bush's gulf policy were held in dozens of cities and
towns across the country.

Unlike last week's antiwar march here, which was dominated by left-leaning
groups and drew about 25,000 people, today's demonstration in the capital,
conducted amid a blizzard of American flags, seemed intent on conveying a
mainstream message that Americans can best support their troops by stopping a
war that is not in the nation's interest.

"We learned a lot of things from Vietnam," said Joe Miller, a Vietnam veteran
from Champaign, Ill., who, under the banner of the Veterans Task Force on the
Middle East, marched at the front of a parade from the Mall to the White House
and onto the Ellipse. "One thing is that we have to separate the warriors from
the war and that you don't blame the troops for the policy they're carrying out.
I support the troops by wanting them home alive."

Throwback to the 60's

Much of the protest seemed a throwback to the 1960's. For instance, students
from Oberlin College in Ohio marched under the same white cloth banner, "Oberlin
for Peace and Justice," that an earlier generation of students carried in 1968.

But much was distinctly contemporary, like the 20-foot high model of an
imperiled globe by the environmental group Greenpeace and the sign carried by
Alan Cobrin of Miami, which read, "If you really want to destroy Iraq, send over
a team of our experts to set up an S.& L. for them."

Uniting the demonstrators was a sense that this was a war that could have been
avoided, a war that carried enormous risks but had no clear national purpose.

"I think this became Bush's ego against Saddam Hussein's ego," said Marian
Solomon, a 60-year-old public health nurse from Ames, Iowa. "I don't think
either is worth dying for."

'War Is a Mistake,' One Says

As the protest wound down here, antiwar demonstrators in San Francisco got under
way. Police officials said 30,000 people participated in a rally against the war
at the Civic Center, while organizers put the number at 225,000. One speaker,
Rabbi Burt Jacobson of Berkeley, said the issues behind the war should be
resolved peacefully.

"The best course now is to call a cease-fire and begin a negotiation before more
destruction takes place," he said.

Among the San Francisco protesters was Matt Thomas, one of 78 Montanans who had
traveled 24 hours on a bus to participate in the march. Mr. Thomas, an
environmental science student, said Iraq's apparent release of millions of
gallons of crude oil into the Persian Gulf was "just another example of why the
war is a mistake."

The protests came at a time when polls showed overwhelming support for Mr.
Bush's policy in the war's early stages, and some backers of that policy said
this meant the antiwar demonstrations were of dubious significance.

"If you're trying to reach policy makers, the fact that you can produce bodies
in the streets is a lot less convincing than whether you truly represent public
opinion," said Ann F. Lewis, a former official of the Democratic National
Committee who is now a member of the Committee for Peace and Security in the
Gulf, an advocacy group of both liberals and conservatives who support the
President's policy.

Truckers in Support of War

Around the country today, Mr. Bush's policy also found support in any number of
cities and towns. A total of 125 tractor-trailers, festooned with American
flags, yellow ribbons and banners stretched out along the Massachusetts Turnpike
in support of the American war effort. Rallies were held in Goldsboro, N.C.,
home of Seymour Johnson Air Force Base, and in the small Oklahoma town of
Heavener, where the organizers were mothers of soldiers now serving in the gulf.
There was also a parade in Philadelphia, and about 5,000 people attended a rally
in Syracuse, although some of them said they were neither pro-war nor antiwar
but simply pro-troop.

The broad public support for the war effort may have accounted for the scarcity
of officials and public figures who attended the protest in Washington today.
One who did attend was Representative Charles B. Rangel of Manhattan, and
another was the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who said that efforts to drive Iraq from
Kuwait through diplomacy "must not be abandoned, even if that means to stop the
bombing and start talking."

The protesters here said that support for the war was more an instinctive surge
of support for the troops than an approval of policy, an approval that they said
was likely to fade.

"At this point we're a minority because casualties haven't started to build up,"
said Margaret Hummel, a 50-year-old community organizer from Underhill, Vt. "I
think this will all change when we start bringing them home in human pouch
containers."

Hilda Mason, a member of the Washington City Council, said the war was diverting
scarce resources desperately needed at home.

"People in the District of Columbia and the whole country are in great need of
services that need to be met by the money that is being wasted on this war," she
said. "You look at the people who are homeless, with no food, no clothing. It
breaks your grandmother's heart."


LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tens of thousands of demonstrators around the country protested
yesterday against war in the Persian Gulf. In Washington, where protesters urged
that the troops be supported by stopping the war, a group of demonstrators
encountered a backer of the war, left, near the White House. (Andrea Mohin/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 795 words



War in the Gulf 12-17

The oil slick in the gulf has spread, threatening vital desalting plants on
Saudi Arabia's coast. Iraq fired missiles at Israel and Saudi Arabia again but
they were intercepted by American Patriot missiles. Page 1

Saudis ask American companies for technology to halt spill 12

Airpower alone will not win the war, intelligence officials have concluded. The
decision to launch a ground assault to drive Iraq from Kuwait will be President
Bush's most important and difficult of the war. 1

As allies use its bases, Turkey faces implicit threat from Iraq 14

Are fake weapons confusing pilots in attacks on Iraq?  16

The Kremlin expressed reservations about the war led by the United States
against Iraq, saying the conflict was extending beyond the United Nations'
mandate and presenting "a growing danger" to Iraqi civilians. 8

President Hussein's closest advisers are like-minded aides who are bound to him
by blood, either through family ties or shared responsibility for killing. But
the last word on poltical or military strategy is his. 16

Islamic Asians are solidly behind President Hussein 17

Two dozen Iraqi aircraft have reportedly fled to Iran 16

Flaws in the Patriot air defense have become apparent. The warheads of some
Iraqi missiles are getting through the defense system and exploding even though
the missiles bearing them were shot down. 14

Reporter's Notebook: Keeping score in the desert 13

Despite missiles, hundreds of volunteers to work in Israel 14

U.S. evacuates Americans after missile attack on Riyadh 14

Tens of thousands protested the war in the gulf, invoking a specter of spiraling
human and environmental costs. The protests, which were held in Washington and
on the West Coast, were the largest so far. 17

Thousands converge in Germany to protest the war 17

Liberals in search of values run into discord over war 17

 International 3-11

The KGB has been given new powers to search private businesses and to seize
documents. President Gorbachev's order was another sign of his campaign to
restore central control over the economy. 1

Yugoslav army retreats from threat to disarm police units 3

Europeans meet to discuss impact of emigration to the West 9

Czechoslovakia auctions stores to private buyers 10

American business groups call for new farm trade talks 6

Beijing sentenced eight dissidents, including the nation's leading human rights
advocate and its foremost student leader, to relatively lenient sentences for
their role in the Tiananmen Square democracy movement. 3

More rebels in Colombia agree to lay down their arms 4

Ecuador fights to keep out the region's drug traffickers 11

White House moves to end feud at information agency 10

National 18-21

Urban poverty remains entrenched in American society. After a decade of relative
prosperity, the suffering has spread, and as Vietnam stalled the war on poverty,
the gulf war will leave more problems unattended. 1

Minnesota's Teacher of the Year had just been layed off 20

A.C.L.U. elects a new president -- the first woman to serve 20

The nation's new child care measure was intended to help low- and middle-income
families find care they could afford, but advocates say the Administration has
delayed writing regulations needed to put it in effect. 18

Is another boon coming to Alaska? Gov. Walter Hickel of Alaska, who was elected
in November as an independent, wants to use the state's revived oil wealth to
prospect for new riches and build the state's infrastructure. 1

Deaths at rock concert renew a debate over seating safety 18

Hollywood Journal: The lingerie of the rich and famous 18

 Regional 22-28

The Daily News strike has been a test for American labor, which has been losing
ground for decades. The visibility of the paper in a city with strong labor
traditions gives it the opportunity to display its will. 1

The collapse of Eastern Airlines has cost the jobs of 1,350 employees at La
Guardia Airport, some of whom had worked for the airline for years. Another 350
workers lost their jobs at Newark International Airport. 22

$10 million gift to Yale honors founder of Time Magazine 22

East Harlem mourns teen-ager whose killing baffles the police 24

Suspects are sought in a series of rapes in the Bronx and Queens 24

Transit Museum, at the end of the line, is given a reprieve 25

Fungus disease attacking maple trees is spreading in New York 28

Neediest Cases 22

Obituaries 26

Jack Schaefer, author of westerns, including "Shane"

Arts/Reviews 44

Photo portraits at National Gallery

Campus Life 31-33

Fashion 36-37

Life Style 34

Pastimes 45-46

Weddings 40-43

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Suffering in the Cities Persists As U.S. Fights Other Battles

BYLINE: By JASON DePARLE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2954 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 26


Nearly three decades after the Great Society, and after eight years of record
economic growth, urban poverty remains an entrenched force in American life and
an increasingly destructive one.

Homelessness, underclass, crack, AIDS -- the past decade has challenged
dictionaries to keep pace as it redefined city suffering. Some wonder whether
such words spell a permanent change in the definition of America itself.

Programs and policies have failed to halt this sinking spiral even in a decade
of relative prosperity like the 1980's. Some Administration officials have been
urging President Bush to use his State of the Union Message on Tuesday to
announce a sweeping new policy to tackle the problem. But as the country wages
war and sags into recession, there is even less reason to believe it can summon
the will or the wallet to fight this internal enemy.

'Not on the Agenda'



"Very few people in a responsible position are dealing with, or even debating,
what to do," said Representative John Lewis, the Georgia Democrat who was an
early leader of the civil rights movement.

"It's not just this Administration," he said. "In the Congress or in the private
sector, the problems of the poor are just not on the agenda. They're becoming
more visible and yet invisible."

And just as Vietnam stalled the war on poverty of the 1960's, Mr. Lewis said,
the Persian Gulf war will leave even more domestic problems unattended. "You
cannot spend $1 billion a day to fight a war and still deal with the problem at
home," he said.

The explanations for America's policy failures are complex, numerous and hotly
contested. Some say the nation has spent too little; others say it has spent too
much. Some argue that ideas are lacking; others say commitment is what the
country needs most.

A Worsening Problem

Race, too, is a complicating factor, as the problems of the inner city fall
disproportionately on minorities.

Whatever the causes, an overwhelming majority of the American public says that
urban poverty is growing worse and that President Bush has done little to
improve the situation.

Seventy-two percent of those interviewed in a New York Times Poll said poverty
and its related problems were worse today than 10 years ago, while only 4
percent said the problem had become less pressing. And when asked to choose from
description of Mr. Bush's attempts to address the problem, 77 percent answered
"not much" or "nothing at all."

The poll of 1,028 adults, including 93 blacks, was conducted Dec. 12 to 14 and
had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points over all,
and 10 points for blacks.

Over the past two years, there have been some signs that poverty has been
inching up the nation's list of priorities. Despite the climate of austerity,
Congress last year voted to expand tax benefits for the working poor by $18
billion over five years, and added several billion for Medicaid and Head Start.

Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp, the Administration's chief antipoverty
strategist, has written Mr. Bush, urging him to use the State of the Union
speech to offer "audacious" solutions to the problems of the poor. Six months
ago there was even talk of a "peace dividend" that might make money available
for social spending.

But now, with the recession and the war dominating the nation's attention, many
believe that this modest momentum will produce little.

"We will lunge at these international problems, but we have stopped trying to
solve domestic issues," said H. Ross Perot, the Texas entrepreneur who was a
force in that state's efforts to improve its educational system several years
ago. "Let's say you're President and you're concerned about rape, plunder, and
pillage. You don't have to go to Iraq; you can find it in New York, Detroit and
Chicago."

Mr. Perot added, "The thing we lack in this country more than anything is
Churchill's dictum: 'Action this day.' "

The Effects
All of Society Pays a Price

In the past decade, two words have become central to discussion of American
cities: homeless and underclass. They can be hard to define and the groups they
describe harder to count.

But both have implications beyond their size. They suggest a second, separate
America, a nation within a nation whose health, welfare, and social mobility
evoke the Third World. Indeed, visitors startled by the rows of homeless lying
in Grand Central Terminal in New York strain for analogies and produce the word
"Calcutta."

When speaking of an underclass, researchers are not simply talking about poor
people, which America has always had in abundance. They are talking about a
development more alarming, something many regard as a new and hardened
population of poor people, disproportionately black, who live in subcultures
where unemployment, female-headed families, welfare dependency, violence and
drug abuse flourish.

Part of the reason the very concept has been so controversial is that its
implication of permanent classes rubs raw the notion of equal opportunity.

Deep Change in Cities

Estimates put the number of the underclass at less than 10 percent of the 31.5
million Americans whose incomes are below the Government's poverty line, $12,675
a year for a family of four. And some argue that the problems are most apparent
in New York and a few other large cities in the Northeast and Midwest.

But Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who is Congress's
foremost expert on urban poverty, says such figures underestimate the depth of
change in cities.

From the seas of available statistics, Senator Moynihan fetches one to announce
his dismay. In a study by the University of Michigan, researchers found that 72
percent of the blacks born in 1967 spent at least a year on welfare before their
18th birthday. The figure for whites was 25 percent.

"When three-quarters of your children are on welfare, do you have any idea what
that means?" he said. "It's almost a complete collapse."

He added: "When you're on welfare, you're a pauper. Your whole life is broken
up. You're dealing with brain-dead, artery-clogged bureaucracies that hate you."


Effects are Widespread

No one suffers more for the decline of the inner city than the people who live
there, but the rest of society pays a price as well, in ways both obvious and
subtle. Among the tasks facing modern urban parents is explaining to innocent
young minds why so many men and women sleep in American streets.

Moreover, urban disintegration brings economic consequences for all: in laborers
removed from the work force and the government costs of prisons and programs.

Beyond economics, the poverty and disorder of the inner cities lacerate a larger
civic fabric, driving people from shared institutions like subways, buses,
parks, schools and even cities themselves. For example, in 1960, families within
New York City had 93 percent of the median income of families in the suburbs.
But according to the Census Bureau, by the mid-1980s, that figure had fallen to
55 percent, a trend that could also be seen in city after city.

The increasing concentration of urban poverty undermines faith in Government as
the instrument of the popular will, producing an epic tale of governmental
breakdown told in terms of crowded clinics, failing foster care, ineffective law
enforcement and burdened or neglected social services.

Perhaps most damaging of all is the effect that urban poverty has on race
relations. It is like a poison in the national ground water that is producing a
thousand deformed fruits, from race-based campaigns for public office to
taxicabs that do not stop for black men at night.

White politicians like David Duke, the Louisiana State Representative and former
Ku Klux Klan leader, seize on the inner city to conduct entire campaigns
denouncing welfare and street crime. Black newspapers look at the same
neighborhoods and ask whether whites are plotting to kill them. Last year, when
the Black Entertainment Network inaugurated a public affairs program on cable
television, producers said they built their first show around a topic on black
viewers' minds. They titled it: "Black Genocide: Myth or Reality?"

In The Times's poll, 52 percent of blacks said it was harder today than 10 years
ago for a black person to get out of poverty by starting poor and working hard,
and 40 percent said it was easier. Among whites, only 29 percent thought that a
black person would have a harder time now than 10 years ago and 57 percent
thought it was easier.

"The nation pays a huge price for the existence of the underclass," said
Nicholas Lemann, author of "The Promised Land," a book on black ghettos to be
published by Alfred A. Knopf in March. "It makes the whole atmosphere of the
country more sour."

The Policy Failures
Promises Yield Limited Results

How did America get this way?

Discussion of future offensives against urban poverty inevitably turn to the
lessons of efforts past.

In effect, the deepening of poverty has defied the promises of two Presidents.
The most famous was Lyndon B. Johnson's 1964 announcement of a war on poverty,
which Ronald Reagan answered with a frequent quip: "poverty won." Mr. Reagan
made his own antipoverty promise when he promoted his economic policies by
saying that "a rising tide lifts all boats" -- and saw the inner cities continue
to sink.

But the fault was shared among ideologies, said Theda Skocpol, a Harvard
University sociologist who is writing a history of American social policy.
"Neither liberals nor conservatives, as they battled from the 60's to the 80's,
adequately conceptualized the problems of the ghetto poor," she said.

Some experts argue that past policies accomplished more than current discussions
typically acknowledge, and offer a base of encouragement.

"If Johnson had said, 'We're going to cut poverty in half within 10 years,' then
he would have been wildly successful," said Sheldon Danziger, a professor of
public policy at the University of Michigan. Noting that the percentage of
Americans below the poverty line dropped from 22.2 percent in 1960 to a low of
11.1 percent in 1973, he added, "But he overstated it; he said we're going to
eliminate it."

The poverty rate then rose to its recent high, 15.2 percent, in 1983 and has
been slowly declining since, to 12.8 percent in 1989, the latest year for which
figures are available. The Government's poverty line arises from a crude measure
established in the 1960's that simply multiplies a family's minimum food budget
by three, adjusting it for inflation each year.

Social spending in the past 25 years has gone disproportionately to programs for
the elderly, most prominently Social Security and Medicare.

In 1990, for instance, the Government spent $353 billion on Medicare and Social
Security, but only $100 billion on things like food stamps, school lunches, tax
credits, Medicaid and welfare that help the non-elderly poor.

For the elderly, the spending has made a difference. The poverty rate for the
elderly dropped from 35.2 percent in 1959 to 11.4 percent by 1989. As it fell,
it crossed the poverty rate for children, which has risen from 15.1 percent in
1970 to 19.6 percent in 1989.

"The war we did fight, we won," said Senator Moynihan, "and the war that wasn't
won, we didn't fight."

Professor Christopher Jencks, a sociologist at Northwestern University, carries
the observation further. Not only does most social spending go to the elderly,
he said, but most of the remainder goes to programs like food stamps or Medicaid
that aim only to smooth poverty's rough edges, rather than to programs like job
training that aim to end it.

But many conservatives argue that billions have been spent on inner-city
problems, with results that have been limited at best.

Where liberals and conservatives increasingly agree is that earlier antipoverty
efforts failed to envision the complex problems of behavior and motivation.
"They both assumed the poor were straining on the leash, striving to get ahead,"
said Lawrence Mead, a political scientist at New York University.

Eleanor Holmes Norton, just elected to represent the District of Columbia in
Congress, noted, "These are the discouraged poor who have sometimes lost the
incentive to rise out of poverty in traditional ways, and therefore sometimes
take ways that are most available -- the drug culture, the underground economy."


The Political Failures
Lack of Direction And Lack of Will

The problem is not just one of policy but also one of politics. A minority of
members of Congress come from districts directly affected by urban
disintegration. The poor have few PAC's.

And sweeping initiatives like Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal and Johnson's
Great Society are the exception in American life. "We always have an
incremental, do-some-of-this, some-of-that approach," said Richard P. Nathan, a
domestic policy expert at the State University of New York in Albany.

Moreover, the public image of the disadvantaged has changed in ways that cost
much American sympathy.

The civil rights movement had provided a barrage of sympathetic images: young
men in ties sitting at segregated lunch counters, children willing to face fire
hoses. But in the decades that followed, argues Douglas Besharov of the American
Enterprise Institute, the dominant image of America's social problems turned
more toward idleness: young men standing around empty oil barrels, welfare
mothers whiling away their days in front of televisions.

"I think the public draws a clear line between the deserving poor and the
undeserving poor, between adults who work and those who don't," he said.

A Delicate Balance

What many experts think has been missing from the poverty debate for many years
is a language that is frank while also being empathetic.

"Liberals have been terrified that if you're saying there's a behavioral
problem, you're saying it's the poor's fault and the hell with them," said
Mickey Kaus, an editor at The New Republic who is writing a book on poverty.
Republicans, he said, "have been unwilling to spend the money."

Would the country know how to spend more antipoverty money, even if it wanted
to? The question is complex, and produces qualified answers.

Certainly some antipoverty programs produce consistently good results. And the
country spends large sums on many other programs, like fighting drugs or
building weapons, whose success is no more guaranteed. Today's urban poverty has
indeed proved more vexing than that of the past, yet a wealth of research has
produced many proposals that experts say are promising. And despite budget
deficits and past disappointments, there is considerable public support for new
efforts and confidence that they could succeed.

The Times poll found that twice as many people believed that the nation's fight
against urban poverty was limited more by lack of concern than by lack of money,
with 42 percent saying lack of concern was the problem and only 21 percent
saying lack of money. Thirty-two percent said the country most lacked know-how.

Almost two-thirds of those surveyed said a major Government effort to fight
poverty was likely to have some success, with 13 percent saying success was very
likely and 51 percent saying it was somewhat likely. Twenty-two percent said
success was not too likely and 11 percent said it was not likely at all.

The Lessons of History
New Complications To an Old Problem

Today's alarm over the inner city may be widespread, but it is not without
precedent. American history contains many examples of middle class fears about
an urban population whose poverty was seen as intractable and whose values and
behavior were considered at odds with the norms. Yet the country has repeatedly
innovated to accommodate those who seemed destined to be permanent outsiders.

At the turn of the century, for instance, New York City slums were filled with
European immigrants whose presence inspired fears. "There were plenty of people
at the turn of the century who thought the problem of poor people in urban
neighborhoods was intractable," said Roy Rosenzweig, a historian at George Mason
University who is completing a history of Central Park.

Mr. Rosenzweig said he sees similarities in attitudes toward the inner city
today. "People saw it as a moral failing on the part of the poor," he said.
"They drink; they're not responsible; they're morally lax."

Among historians, opinion is divided on whether today's urban problems pose a
more daunting challenge than those of the past. Most agree there is less actual
physical need: less hunger and malnutrition, more government support in the form
of various safety nets, however imperfect.

On the other hand, many argue that today's economy is less accommodating to the
unskilled, that the drug economy is more captivating and violent and that
today's poor are more physically and culturally isolated from the rest of the
city.

In addition, many analysts say the racial composition of today's inner cities is
cause for further pessimism. They argue that blacks have traditionally faced
fiercer barriers to advancement than other ethnic groups.

"It's helpful to know that in the past we've felt so terribly low about
minorities entering cities and being impoverished," said Prof. David Ward, a
historian at the University of Wisconsin. "But I think the conditions today are
very different. I don't think past comparisons offer much hope."

One person undaunted by the look back is Mr. Perot in Texas. "Would you want the
challenge of solving this problem or of getting the United States out of the
Depression?" he said. "This is a piece of cake."


LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Missing Agenda: Poverty and Policy/First of three articles.

GRAPHIC: Graphs: "Below the Poverty Level Assistance Is Shrinking," tracking all
people in each racial group below the poverty level each year, 1960-1990;
percent of each group living below poverty level in 1989; federal assistance
from Aid to Families with Dependent Children for a mother with two children, in
1988 dollars, 1976 and 1988, for those with no wages, wages 50 percent of
poverty level and for wages 75 percent of poverty level (Sources: Census Bureau;
House Ways and Means Committee)

Table: "A Visible Problem: 3 Signs," detailing percent of each group who say
they see homeless people in their community or on the way to work; who say they
see people buying and selling drugs in their community or on the way to work;
who say they've taken precautions against crime in the past year, broken down by
race, residence and income. (pg. 21)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Headliners;
The Clustering of America, Part II

BYLINE: By FELICITY BARRINGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 324 words


THE 1990 census figures for every city, county and crossroads in the United
States -- more than 39,000 communities -- were released last week, giving the
first fine-grained look at where Americans lived and moved in the decade that
saw Wall Street boom and the farm country bust.

Like scattered drops of mercury drawing together, Americans clustered in larger
and larger communities. The list of cities whose populations exceeded 100,000
grew to 195, with 18 of the 29 newcomers in California alone.

While the urban cores of regional population centers generally continued to
decline, major metropolitan areas expanded in all but a handful of cases -- most
of these hard-hit mining and manufacturing regions like Pittsburgh and
Cleveland. But every trend is made to be defied. New York City was the only
major Northeastern city to expand instead of contract. Although preliminary
population counts indicated the city's population might have declined, census
programs to complete the count found another 289,385 New Yorkers. That brought
the total to 7,322,564, a 3.5 percent gain for the decade. City officials say
the figure should be 300,000 higher.

Immigration helped refill emptying city neighborhoods. Asian immigrants from
countries like China, Vietnam and Cambodia helped change the face of communities
like Falls Church, Va.

The 10 fastest-growing cities in the 100,000-plus group were all in California,
Arizona or Texas, illustrating the surge of the small cities and suburbs of the
Southwest. California offered the best example of the rapid urbanization of land
that a few decades ago grew crops, not homes. In Orange County, there are five
cities with populations of more than 100,000.

And along the Mississippi River, the nation's biggest highway in the 19th
century, slow barges now ply their way past counties that are becoming as empty
as they were in the days when Huckleberry Finn might have floated by.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Devil Of a War;
It May Not Be Vietnam, but Parallels Are Inescapable

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1076 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN , Saudi Arabia


FOR all of President Bush's passionate insistence to the contrary, the war in
the Persian Gulf has more than a few similarities to the war in Vietnam, in the
sort of problems that it poses if not in the probable outcome.

To begin with, the United States is trying, as ever, to substitute firepower for
manpower. Outnumbered by an enemy who sees himself battling for his life, and
who is therefore willing to fight to the last 16-year-old, the United States is
not even considering national mobilization. Nor are its allies. So warplanes and
ships and bombs and missiles will have to even out the equation here, as Lyndon
B. Johnson meant them to do in Vietnam.

"We shall cut the limbs and the branches from the Iraqi war machine so that it
no longer casts its shadow over Kuwait," said Air Marshal Sir David Craig, chief
of the British defense staff, promising there would be no ground assault by the
allies "until a successful land battle is assured."

But assuring that is not easy, which is why Mr. Bush, Secretary of Defense Dick
Cheney and others in Washington talked of the struggle that lies ahead in such
sober terms as they reviewed the first week's action.

History is littered with the bones of the overconfident, not least in this
region. No less a strategist than Winston Churchill was very nearly ruined by
the British defeat at Gallipoli in 1915, when a supposedly backward power, the
Ottoman Empire, overcame a dominant one, the British Empire, on the beaches of
the Dardanelles.

Put in its simplest terms, the allied strategy is to bomb Baghdad and the rest
of Iraq into military impotence, or something approaching it. As in Southeast
Asia, the notion is to so thoroughly disrupt the enemy's capacity to
communicate, to resupply, to maneuver and to fight that he either gives up or
comes unglued in battle.

But as in Vietnam, the enemy is not without resources to combat this strategy.
If Saddam Hussein lacks the protective cover of the jungle, the active support
of a patron nation like the Soviet Union and the ability to bring in supplies
through neighboring countries -- things that helped to sustain Ho Chi Minh
through the long years of battle -- he has some others: what he himself called
this week "the superior willpower and patience" of a country that sees itself
menaced by a huge, alien force; years of preparation for the kind of pounding
Iraq is now taking, in the form of back-up communications networks, subterranean
command posts and steel-and-concrete bunkers for its planes; and the ability to
patch up, adapt, make do.

Already, American intelligence officers say, the Iraqis are managing to repair
roads and railroads and runways and even some radars, just as the Vietnamese
repaired the Paul Doumer Bridge in Hanoi again and again. Their facilities are
being "degraded" -- Pentagonese for worn down -- but not eliminated, but then
facilities matter less to Baghdad than manpower.

Vietnam taught the lesson that if there are no shoes, bits of old tires will do,
and Iraq could manage better than expected by husbanding its resources and
maintaining its morale in the face of adversity. There is something about living
under persistent, prolonged air attack, as the people of London and Hanoi
demonstrated, that brings out human grit.

Not enough, say the allies, and they are surely right, although measuring these
things is difficult, especially given the paucity of information from Iraq or
from the Pentagon.

The American-led coalition, with sophisticated weapons and a more sophisticated
approach to this war than the last, scored significant early victories by
knocking out nuclear-weapons plants, blasting power stations and battering the
elite Republican Guard on whom Mr. Hussein counts heavily.

Then, too, Saddam Hussein is fighting a conventional war, not a guerrilla war,
and he is fighting it on a desert plain, not in jungles, rice paddies and
mountains. All the better for the foreigners, always at a disadvantage in rough
and unfamiliar terrain.

But he is fighting a conventional war with unconventional means. As the bombs
rained down on Iraq last week, and allied commanders searched in the aerial
photographs for evidence of how badly they had bloodied Mr. Hussein, he sought
to hurt them, and to demonstrate his own capacity to strike back, by indirect
means. If the allies would not oblige by charging directly into his dug-in
defense, if he could not bomb them as they bombed him, he could try to weaken
their coalition, sow perplexity and savage their emotions.

Hence the Scud surface-to-surface missile barrages on Israel and Saudi Arabia,
barrages purposely directed at civilian targets, to try to bring the Israelis
into the war and to drive at least some Arabs out of the anti-Iraq coalition.
Hence the propaganda interviews with allied prisoners of war, designed to weaken
resolve in the West. Hence the appalling oil discharge into the Persian Gulf,
designed to complicate any amphibious assault, to disrupt military and civil
water supplies and to discombobulate allied thinking.

President Bush, a Marquess of Queensbury man all the way, said that the Iraqi
dictator had a sick mind. American generals huffed and puffed and said none of
his actions had military significance. But each of the things that Westerners
considered dirty tricks or low blows make life harder, in one way or another,
for Mr. Bush and his commanders, and they all make Saddam Hussein look like a
dukes-up guy, unafraid of the American bully. That's what he looks like to many
ordinary hero-starved Arabs, if not to their governments.

"By God, tell me whether you are not pleased to have brothers who enjoy such
strength and such determination," Baghdad Radio said in a broadcast on Saturday.
"Do you not feel proud to see us stand up against all the Arabs' enemies, not
scared or frightened? Then why do you not join us? We now represent the Arabs'
awakening from the ocean to the gulf."

An overstatement, at best.

But what was evident at week's end was that Mr. Hussein is not going to go
quietly, and that almost certainly means a much longer war than many in
Washington had been hoping for, punctuated by more unpleasant surprises like the
spreading oil slick.

If, as Mr. Cheney said, the Iraqis are powerless to change the ultimate outcome
of the war, they seem to retain ample scope for altering its shape and timetable
and, most of all, its aftermath.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Saudi Arabia -- American troops of the 101st Airborne Division
boarding a transport plane last week to be flown to positions nearer the border
with Iraq. (Pool photo via Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Across the U.S., The War Is Remote and Inescapable

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1010 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA


BY its nature war is a journey down a dark, uncertain path, with the road ahead
often becoming more twisted and unnerving the farther the journey progresses.

But as the war in the Persian Gulf last week began to look less like a jaunty
cross between Nintendo and "Top Gun" and more like an extended foray into an
ominous desert environment, the level of uncertainty throughout the nation was
almost palpable.

In the short run, the deep divisions that wracked the nation before the start of
the war have been submerged in patriotic fervor as reflected in soaring poll
ratings for President Bush and in a flurry of impromptu expressions of patriotic
support around the country.

But in fact the war that Amercians see is marbled with conflicting images that
give rise to competing feelings.

People at dinner, at the office, in sports bars the alarm sirens wail as people
hear them in Riyadh or Tel Aviv, but what television shows is a curious,
disembodied war that is seemingly all menace but no death.

There are other disconnections. Only months ago, the nation was said to be
virtually broke, with more will than wallet. Now, the war costs a half-billion
dollars a day, and there's less talk of who pays the bill.

This is a conflict in which a group formed to support the war effort answers its
phones by saying, "Peace committee," and an antiwar group calls itself the
Military Families Support Network and in which the traditional political labels
often provide no clue as to who supports the war and who opposes it.

"The American people are starved for a victory, but aside from that, it's
probably easier to predict what Saddam Hussein is going to do than how the
American people are going to react to every jiggle and turn over the next few
months," said Harrison Hickman, a Democratic poll-taker. "It's like reading tea
leaves that are almost the color and texture of the tea."

Still, responses to the war provide some clues to how the country has changed in
recent years, and how it has remained the same.

Although antiwar demonstrations have attracted the most attention, a more
representative phenomenon may have been a groundswell of small, spontaneous
demonstrations in places like Alvin, Tex., Gainesville, Ga., and Alameda, Calif.
that were meant to support the troops.

"This will not be like Vietnam; the support will grow and grow no matter how
long the war drags on," said Stevie Johnson, a 32-year-old court reporter who
organized a rally on Monday that brought out about 1,000 persons in Alvin.

In fact, even as millions of Americans turned from the war news last week to
watch a Public Broadcasting System series evaluating the sea changes in this
country in the 1960s, it was clear that much of what is happening in this war is
a reminder of how much seems utterly unchanged in the nation's culture.

Like all our wars except the Civil War, this one is fought by a nation that
expects to do battle abroad and then return home to a land that's removed from
the hostilities and physically unscarred. Similarly, it conforms to the nation's
sense, accurate or not, that it fights wars that are struggles between good and
evil more than instruments of geopolitics.

"Religion is such an essential ingredient of the American character, that when
you get into a war, as during times of peace, Americans will want to have a sort
of moral enterprise, moreal imperative, which stands at the center of what they
do," said Robert Dallek, a professor of history at the University of California
at Los Angeles.

Still, there is much that is extraordinary and revealing in the edgy, jangled,
omnipresence of the current war and much that reveals disturbing things about
where we are as a nation.

Clearly, this war is unlike any in history in the way it is brought home, live,
minute-by-minute on the Cable News Network with its running tally of winners and
losers and its schizophrenic mix of insistent immediacy, doomsday scenarios and
distance from real death and destruction. Patrick T. Malone, an Atlanta
psychiatrist, says he finds something profoundly disturbing in the way the war
is being conveyed by television.

"It's the ultimate in life-as-entertainment instead of life-as-reality, and as a
therapist I find this extremeley disturbing about our culture," he said.

"This unreality is manifesting itself in that vague underlying fear that many
feel about the war, that sense of uncertainty. You can get a blow-by-blow, a
running tally of the war, while being advised on how you can invest in it. It's
psychotic."

Also unprecedented is the degree of skepticism surrounding the nation's ability
to carry out the mission with which the war began. The nation's attention span
is short enough that we've all but forgotten the budget meltdown and
throw-the-bums-out rhetoric of a few months ago or the questions about whether
the nation can do anything right.

And unlike in Vietnam, there is an extraordinary common ground between those
supporting the war and those opposing it and a sense of common peril.

War opponents for the most part are horrified by Saddam Hussein.  Polls indicate
that many of those now voicing support for war opposed military action before it
began.

"Saddam Hussein is a wicked and dangerous man who ought to be stopped, and we
certainly should uphold fundamental principles of international law, but not at
any cost," said Richard W. Nathan, a 52-year-old Los Angeles businessman who
arranges acquisitions of health care facilities.

The questions this time are more about means than ends, more about wisdom than
virtue, more about costs than goals. It will be a long time before they are
sorted out.

"Everbybody I know, clergy included, has conflicting feelings," said the Rev.
Harry Pritchard, the minister of All Saints Episcopal Church in Atlanta.

He said that he preached against going to war before the hostilities began, but
that he now feels a need to support the troops and their families. "There's a
sorrow in the bones it has to come to this," he said.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Protesters, Heard

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 692 words


Iraq is not Vietnam, and yesterday's antiwar demonstrators in Washington mostly
shunned crude slogans like "No blood for oil!" Most of them would agree with
Vice President Quayle about the need to support America's troops in the gulf. As
the country braces for a longer war, there is no shouting down these protesters.
Their arguments need to be answered.

Many Americans now support the war without reservation. Others believe, as does
this page, that it is, in Anthony Lewis's words, a just war though not a wise
one. No matter where one stands, however, thoughtful protests merit respect and
response.

Here is what the protest placards say, and what they ignore:

Say No to Mr. Bush's War

Protesters assert that this is essentially an American war, waged by an imperial
President who failed to give diplomacy time to work. Granted: President Bush
surely does lead the coalition opposing Iraq; only the United States could have
assembled it. If he is to be faulted, it is for pressing so rapidly to war. His
very success at organizing the international embargo against Iraq made it a
plausible weapon that needed more time to work.

But often, the protesters' opposition inescapably makes Saddam Hussein out to be
the victim, turning reality on its head. If anything, the Bush Administration
went way too far to placate Iraq, until the very eve of August's occupation of
Kuwait. The blame for this crisis rests squarely on the instigator; his name is
not George Bush.

How Many Deaths Per Gallon?

Oil certainly lies at the heart of the gulf crisis, and demonstrators claim with
some reason that Iraq's conquest of Kuwait need not mean soaring prices. Even if
Saddam Hussein had a stranglehold on the oil lifeline, he would still need to
find buyers on a world market. Besides, they contend, America has done too
little to become energy independent.

But those views ignore Saddam Hussein's political ambitions, his drive to
dominate the Persian Gulf and thus control 65 percent of the world's known oil
reserves. Iraqi mastery would give a dictator without scruple vast strategic
power. Beyond that, he could gather in the billions needed to build a nuclear
arsenal, and deal with his neighbors, including Israel, as he has dealt with
Kuwait.

Nor is the conservation argument persuasive.  As the oil historian Daniel Yergin
points out, in 15 years the United States has become 25 percent more energy
efficient, and 31 percent more oil efficient -- a record that needs improving,
but scarcely betokens indifference.

Blacks Are Killing Browns for Whites

Protesters assert that American blacks pay twice for the war because they
represent almost 30 percent of the Army's troops in the Middle East but only 14
percent of the draft-age population -- and because billions spent on the war may
be diverted from social programs at home.

That American blacks may suffer disproportionate casualties is indeed troubling;
so is the potential loss of social welfare funds. But it is also true that the
proportion of blacks in the armed services reflects how the services have become
instruments of remarkable change, giving minority groups fairer chances to rise,
right to the chairmanship of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

War Never Solves Anything

Church leaders express concern that violence feeds on itself, and that the war's
effects may be more ruinous than its causes. Theologians contend that a war is
just only as a last resort and when punishment is proportionate to the offense.

There's no ambiguity about Iraq's violation of Kuwait; it affronts morality and
law. Whether more time should have been allowed for embargo and diplomacy is a
matter for reasonable argument. But the final point, of proportionality, needs
to weigh heavily on coalition strategists.

As Saddam Hussein raises the stakes -- with terror missiles, abuse of prisoners
and by sending torrents of oil into the gulf -- the pressure will build to
follow suit. The protesting voices may well be a vital restraint on reprisals
whose fury would mock the idea of a just war, and give a martyred Saddam Hussein
an enduring victory in defeat.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Cracking the Whip

BYLINE: By Michael R. Gordon; Michael R. Gordon covers national security issues
for The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4174 words


SEVERAL DAYS BEFORE the United States went to war with Iraq, Dick Cheney took a
break from the final preparations for battle to discuss the crisis, the Pentagon
and his improbable career. Toward the end of the conversation, he was asked
about his visits to American troops in the desert.

"It is something that I will live with for a very long time," the Defense
Secretary said, referring to his encounters with the soldiers in Saudi Arabia.
The comment cracked open a window on the emotions of the man who has guided the
largest American military operation since the Vietnam War.

And then the window closed. "I think that is all I am going to say on the
subject," he said. "It is personal."

The television in his office overlooking the Potomac flickered with the latest
reports of the failed meeting that day between Secretary of State James A. Baker
3d and Iraq's Foreign Minister, Tariq Aziz.

There was a long silence. Our hourlong conversation was over.

From the very beginning of the crisis in the Persian Gulf, the 49-year-old
former Wyoming Congressman was an Administration emissary to the Arabs and a
trusted spokesman, valued for his cool demeanor and measured testimony. He
repeatedly reinforced the President's gut instincts for military intervention
and helped to translate them into a deployment of 425,000 troops by mid-January.

On Aug. 4, two days after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the Defense Secretary
pushed for use of American troops to protect Saudi Arabia. In October, with
Saddam Hussein not budging, Cheney recommended that the President send
reinforcements to provide a credible "offensive military option." The aim was to
intensify the pressure on Saddam Hussein to withdraw and lay the groundwork to
defeat him in battle if he didn't. Cheney later told Congress that only military
force, not economic sanctions, could insure that Iraqi troops would leave
Kuwait.

The Defense Secretary, who never served in the armed forces, took a more hawkish
stand than several of his predecessors and many military officers. Harold Brown,
James R. Schlesinger and Caspar W. Weinberger, the hard-line Reaganite, all
argued that sanctions be given more time before any military attack began. That
was also the public position of Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the American
commander in the Persian Gulf.

"I would not go so far as to say Cheney is egging the President on, but he is on
the same wavelength," a senior Administration official said in December. "Much
of the military seem more reluctant. They are way behind Cheney."

Why is he such a hawk? The answer rests partly with his innate conservatism and
partly with his loyalty to George Bush.

If Cheney had doubts about the United States march toward war, he contained them
behind his iron reserve. He gave no hint of the worries openly voiced by
military experts like Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who favored the
sanctions approach and warned before the American strike on Iraq that Washington
might be caught in a prolonged, costly and unnecessary war.

On Sunday morning news programs, week after week, Cheney coolly presented the
Administration's case. And at press conferences before and during the war, he
and Army Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, made a
stoic team.

"He is calm inside," Lynne Vincent Cheney, his wife of 26 years and chairwoman
of the National Endowment for the Humanities, said of her husband's mood a few
days before the United States launched its attack. "He is a man with a deeply
held conviction, and he does sleep well. But he is not dispassionate. He never
talked much. But he is even quieter now. He is quieter and thinking more."

FIGHTING IN THE Persian Gulf was about the last thing anybody expected when
Cheney came to the Defense Department in March 1989. In the months that
followed, it looked as if his main challenge would be to scale down and
reorganize the post-cold war military in line with new White House policies
toward Moscow. Change in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe was overturning
decades-old precepts of strategic planning. When Defense Department officials
weren't on Capitol Hill, they were worrying about third-world trouble spots like
the Philippines and Central America.

The defense of the Arabian oil fields, a priority that had long been second only
to the security of Europe, was suffering from benign neglect in light of the
cease-fire between Iraq and Iran and a perceived lessening of the Soviet threat
to Iran. The Persian Gulf was mentioned only in passing in National Military
Strategy, a classified report issued in August 1989 by Adm. William J. Crowe
Jr., then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The report mentioned protecting
the gulf in the same breath as maintaining access to the "critical natural
resources of South American and Africa."

Before August, the Defense Secretary's chief accomplishment -- with help from
General Powell, his trusted ally -- was a plan for reducing the military by 25
percent. The Defense Secretary has also been credited for his efforts, belated
though they were, to shake up the Pentagon's procurement bureaucracy. His
cancellation of the Navy's $57 billion A-12 Avenger attack plane this month
followed complaints that military contractors misled him about the cost and
progress of the project. Nonetheless, his decision stunned the weapons industry,
which had grown accustomed to cost overruns and Government bailouts.

One of Cheney's first tests as a crisis manager was the American standoff with
Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega of Panama. In 1989, he plucked a hard-charging Army
general, Maxwell R. Thurman, from the verge of retirement, installing him as the
head of the United States Southern Command in place of Gen. Frederick A. Woerner
Jr., who opposed American intervention in Panama. More important, Cheney
recommended the appointment of General Powell as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs,
rejecting Admiral Crowe's chosen successor, Gen. Robert T. Herres of the Air
Force.

General Powell, who had been President Reagan's national security adviser, was
more open to military intervention than Admiral Crowe. Generals Thurman and
Powell moved quickly to rework plans for invading Panama, laying the basis for
Bush's decision to send troops after Noriega in December of that year.

Only in Soviet relations did Cheney appear to be out of step with the White
House and State Department. He advised caution in discounting the Soviet threat,
and expressed skepticism of the permanence of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's reforms.
With the recent resurgence of military influence in the Soviet Union and the
crackdown in the Baltics, his deep-seated doubt has lost its taint as the
anachronistic mind-set of a cold warrior.

But the Defense Secretary, along with Powell, will be measured primarily by one
standard: his skill in supervising the war in the Persian Gulf. That
indisputably has made Cheney the most important Pentagon chief since Robert S.
McNamara during the Vietnam years. Starting as a Secretary for Peace, he became
a Secretary for War.

THE LAST TIME THE United States was at war, Cheney was studying for his
doctorate in political science at the University of Wisconsin in Madison.
Protests against the Vietnam War disrupted the campus in the 1960's, but Cheney,
who was working part time for the Republican Governor of Wisconsin, was not
swept up in the turmoil. He says he was "generally supportive" of the war and
opposed the demonstrators. He had a deferment and was able to avoid military
service. "As did most other Americans, I watched the war from afar," he says.

Born in Lincoln, Neb., Richard Bruce Cheney was raised in Casper, Wyo., where
his father worked for the Agriculture Department. It was "an 'American Graffiti'
kind of place," says Lynne Cheney, who was his high school sweetheart. "The big
thing to do was to drive cars up and down, and go from one root beer stand to
another," she recalls. "Dick never did that, which was a great disappointment to
me. He worked. He always had a job. He read a lot." He had his own idea of fun;
he was the captain of the football team and an outdoorsman.

Cheney went to Yale on a scholarship, but dropped out in his second year because
of poor grades. "He probably did a few things I'd just as soon not read about in
The New York Times," his wife says.

He rambled around the Western United States for a while, working for an electric
company laying power lines, before settling down at the University of Wyoming.
There, the Ivy League dropout bore down, earning bachelor's and master's degrees
in political science and marrying Lynne Vincent. He then entered graduate school
at the University of Wisconsin and, at 27, was selected for a one-year
internship in the Capitol Hill office of Representative William A. Steiger, a
Republican.

From this launching pad, Cheney began his meteoric career in Washington. When
President Nixon chose Representative Donald H. Rumsfeld of Illinois to head the
Office of Economic Opportunity, Cheney brashly sent Rumsfeld a 12-page memo on
how to run the agency. Rumsfeld liked what he read, and the college intern
became the director of Congressional relations for the agency, never returning
to Wisconsin to finish his studies.

For much of the next decade, he lived in Rumsfeld's orbit, one of the legion of
Washington special assistants who hitch their fortunes to a political star. It
was a career marked by total loyalty, dedication and a certain subjugation of
ego -- qualities that he still exhibits and demands of his subordinates at the
Pentagon.

When Gerald R. Ford became President, Rumsfeld was named White House chief of
staff and Cheney assumed his familiar role as Rumsfeld's deputy. When Rumsfeld
was appointed Defense Secretary, his loyal lieutenant, then only 34, replaced
him in the White House.

President Ford's loss to Jimmy Carter in 1976 was a turning point for the
quintessential Washington staff man. Deciding that it was time to create his own
political identity, he returned to Wyoming and ran for Congress.

Kenneth L. Adelman, former director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
and a friend of Cheney's from their days together at the Office of Economic
Opportunity, remembers that period: "He had politics in his blood. After leaving
the job of chief of staff, he had many lucrative offers but decided to run for
an unsure seat. He went from the top of the top in politics, namely chief of
staff for the President of the United States, to the bottom of the bottom, a
candidate from a minority party running to become a freshman member of the
House."

No sooner was his Congressional campaign under way than Cheney, then 37 years
old, suffered a heart attack. He briefly considered dropping out of the race.
But six weeks later he had quit his two-pack-a-day smoking habit and was back on
the campaign trail.

"I finally concluded," he says now, "and this may be a little bit of
rationalization, that it was more stressful to contemplate spending your life
doing something that was not what you want to be doing and found a cardiologist
who believed hard work never killed anybody." (Cheney had two more heart
attacks. In 1988, he had a coronary bypass operation, was pronounced fit and now
exercises regularly.)

After winning a seat in the House in 1978 as Wyoming's only Representative,
Cheney rose rapidly in the Republican ranks. He was elected House minority whip
in 1988 and became heir apparent to Robert H. Michel, the House Republican
leader. He was seen as a pragmatic conservative who was more conservative than
pragmatic, and as a hawk who admitted that he never met a weapon system he
didn't like.

Unlike other leaders of the legislative branch, notably Senator Nunn, who heads
the Senate Armed Services Committee, Cheney was not interested in protecting
Congressional prerogatives from White House incursions. He repeatedly argued for
giving President Reagan wide discretion in using military force and making
foreign policy.

"He was the guy whom the Administration depended on to defend its interests on
the hill," says Tony Coelho, the former Democratic whip in the House. "Part of
his demeanor was that he would not be the one to talk to the press on the record
about it. If others wanted to take credit, that was fine with him."

With the Senate's rejection of John G. Tower, Cheney quickly became the
Administration's choice to be Defense Secretary. For the White House, he
appeared to have the right mix of characteristics. A team player, he would not
aggressively contest Secretary of State Baker's pre-eminent foreign policy role
as Caspar W. Weinberger tried to do with George P. Shultz in the Reagan years. A
popular Congressman, Cheney was eminently confirmable.

And his personal life was a contrast to that of Tower, who was accused of
womanizing and heavy drinking. Cheney and his wife have not been fixtures of
Washington night life, though they have attended cultural functions related to
her job at the National Endowment for the Humanities. The couple's two
daughters, Mary and Elizabeth, are grown.

On the morning of the vote against Tower, John H. Sununu, the chief of staff,
called Cheney and asked him to come to the White House. The ostensible purpose
of the visit with Sununu and the national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, was
to solicit his ideas on suitable replacements for Defense Secretary. After some
desultory conversation, however, Scowcroft asked if he would accept the job
ifthe President offered it.

The Congressman wanted a night to think it over. That evening, Baker called to
urge him to take the job. The two men, friends since the Ford Administration,
consult often on political matters and go on wilderness trips together. (Last
November, Cheney and Baker, along with Baker's sons, took a respite from
Washington and flew to Wyoming for a hunting and fishing trip.)

When Bush formally asked him to head the Pentagon, Cheney accepted. He arrived
in March 1989, seven months before the Berlin wall came down. "I clearly did not
anticipate, nor did anybody else, the radical changes that 1989 would bring," he
says.

THE SECRETARY'S cavernous office is decorated with old military emblems, as well
as signs of the changing world order. On a far corner wall is a framed cartoon
from a Florida newspaper of Cheney spoiling a toast between Bush and Gorbachev.
In the room's center is an immense wooden desk, first used by Gen. John J.
Pershing during World War I.

Cheney says he feels like a wagon driver trying to control galloping horses. It
is not so much that the horses are running at different strides, he says, but
that the horses "are not all hitched to the same end of the wagon." He has not
hesitated to crack the whip. But in the beginning he was better at gathering
power than at using it effectively.

In his first weeks in the job, he alerted the military that he was in charge
when he reprimanded the Air Force Chief of Staff, Larry D. Welch, for trying to
reach budget compromises with Congress without his authorization. Later, when
Gen. John T. Chain Jr., then head of the Air Force Strategic Air Command,
publicly differed with the Bush Administration's position on nuclear arms,
Cheney ordered him to fly to Washington for a dressing-down. After Welch's
successor, Gen. Michael J. Dugan, made unauthorized comments last September
about Israeli advice on fighting the Iraqis and touted the Air Force as the main
instrument for winning a war in the gulf, the Defense Secretary removed him. An
open war between Pentagon officials, like one that raged between Navy Secretary
John F. Lehman Jr. and Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Thayer during Weinberger's
tenure, is unthinkable today.

But in the beginning, Cheney's efforts to use the levers of his power were
unsure. After ordering a review of aircraft like the A-12, the C-17 transport
plane and B-2 Stealth bomber, the Defense Secretary admits that he paid too much
attention to adjusting the weapons projects in light of the receding Soviet
threat and too little to managing the expensive programs themselves.

His early moves to reshape the military were also somewhat halting. The Defense
Department's report to Congress for its 1990 budget was the briefest in memory
and gave little hint of the possibilities opened up by the cold war's end. In
fact, the report declared that it was "the worst possible time to contemplate
changes in defense strategy."

Cheney and his deputies wanted to buy time to study the changes in Eastern
Europe and to put the brakes on the Capitol Hill budget makers who were eager
for a peace dividend. But the statement sent a message inside and outside the
Pentagon that big innovations were not required.

Cheney's efforts to win support for his budget led to an unnecessary public
dispute with the Director of Central Intelligence, William H. Webster. In his
testimony to Congress last spring, the C.I.A. chief said the changes in Moscow
were "irreversible," a stand that undercut Cheney's argument that Soviet
intentions were too uncertain to justify deep reductions in the military.

In a rare display of irritation, the Defense Secretary told CNN that Webster's
testimony had been "unhelpful." The remark created the impression that Cheney
was trying to stifle an intelligence assessment to protect his budget. (It
turned out that the C.I.A. had sent a draft of Webster's testimony to Cheney's
top deputy on intelligence matters, but because of a bureaucratic snafu a copy
never made it to the Defense Secretary.)

By mid-summer, however, Cheney was ready to act on his own strategic
assessments. Working with General Powell and the Under Secretary of Defense for
Policy, Paul Wolfowitz, he outlined plans to shrink the military by 25 percent,
mostly by cutting the Army and Air Force units set up to defend Europe and by
emphasizing "reconstitutable" partly manned Army divisions that could be brought
up to full strength in a prolonged crisis. Cheney's plan was a major revision of
Pentagon thinking: it was now assumed that the United States would have a year
or more to prepare for a global war with the Soviet Union instead of the two
weeks assumed by war planners for 40 years.

The department planned an elaborate coming-out party for its new blueprint.
President Bush was to unveil it in a speech in Aspen, Colo., and Cheney and
Brent Scowcroft were supposed to be on hand to brief the press. But Cheney never
made it to Colorado. The evening before the trip, the Defense Secretary received
a telephone call at his suburban Virginia home from Adm. Bill A. Owens, then his
military assistant, who has since been promoted to commander of the Sixth Fleet
in the Mediterranean. Saddam Hussein's forces had moved into Kuwait.

THE INVASION CAUGHT the Pentagon in the middle of updating its strategy in the
Persian Gulf. Early last year, Cheney and Powell approved a classified document
that stressed the need for more contingency planning for a war in the region and
placed the Arabian Peninsula on a par with the Pacific in spending priorities.
Cheney gave General Schwarzkopf the go-ahead to work on a new gulf strategy that
put more emphasis on defending Saudi Arabia and less on guarding against a
Soviet invasion of Iran. But the Defense Secretary did not discount the Soviet
threat altogether. "We should retain our capability to defend there against
either a Soviet-led or Soviet-supported contingency or a robust regional
threat," the document said. It did not specifically mention the prospect of an
Iraqi attack on Saudi Arabia.

Though incomplete, General Schwarzkopf's planning aided the Administration in
its initial response to Saddam Hussein. By the time of Iraq's invasion, he had
finished two parts of a plan to defend Saudi Arabia in the event of an attack.
The first plotted the deployment of tactical aircraft; the second detailed the
mobilization of ground troops. But General Schwarzkopf was never directed to
plan for counterattack. Moreover, the Pentagon had not asked for sufficient
funds to support its planning. While Cheney sought billions for "Star Wars" and
new strategic nuclear weapons, he never requested money for sealift ships, which
speed the transport of troops. Indeed, he wanted to reroute funds already
allocated for such ships to other areas. Meanwhile, the Naval Ready Reserve
sealift fleet was not well maintained.

"They kept coming to us with less than enough money for the very type of actions
in which we are now involved," said John P. Murtha, a Pennsylvania Democrat who
is chairman of the House Appropriations subcommittee on defense.

Caught off guard by the invasion, the White House scrambled into action. The
night of Aug. 2, President Bush offered to send a tactical fighter squadron to
Saudi Arabia as a demonstration of support. The Saudis turned down the offer.

Cheney pushed the military hard for an assessment of American options. He was
quick to accept its view that immediate retaliatory air strikes would fail
without backup from ground troops. That fateful judgment set the stage for
months of pressure diplomacy, including economic sanctions.

The large number of troops initially envisaged by Powell reflected the
military's tendency to err on the side of caution. But that sheer mass of air
and ground forces called for in the August plan -- about 240,000 airmen,
sailors, marines and soldiers to be based throughout the gulf -- raised the
question of Saudi sensitivities to such a huge foreign presence.

President Bush accepted the Pentagon's plan two days after the invasion, and it
was left to Cheney and Powell to sell the idea to the Saudis. That afternoon,
Cheney asked the Saudi Ambassador, Prince Bandar bin Sultan bin Abdul Aziz, to
come to his office.

The Saudi response was not preordained. Not only had the Saudis turned down
Bush's offer to send fighter squadrons, but in July Prince Bandar had quietly
protested the American decision to send two military refueling planes to the
United Arab Emirates as part of an aerial exercise.

The emirates had proposed it after being threatened by Iraq. President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt also sent a message to President Bush after the drill, asking
the United States to keep a low profile in the gulf. In the Administration,
there had been initial disagreement over whether to go ahead with even this
small step, and Cheney intervened to overcome early suggestions by the State
Department that the emirates be advised to conduct the exercise with the Saudis.

In his Pentagon meeting with Cheney, Prince Bandar seemed stunned by the
projected size of the American deployment, according to an account by a Pentagon
official. "There was a catching of breath," the official recalls, as Bandar
contemplated the problems of such an overwhelming presence in Saudi Arabia. Then
the Prince's expression changed. "I guess that means you are serious," he said
with a smile. "Now you see why we did not want a tactical fighter squadron. That
is enough to get us in trouble but not enough to do anything."

The Prince urged American officials to fly to Saudi Arabia to present the plan
to King Fahd. But virtually up to the last minute it was unclear whether the
Saudis were prepared to receive Cheney. His departure was delayed twice.
Finally, the signal came.

In King Fahd's marble palace in Jidda, he presented President Bush's offer to
send more than 200,000 troops to the Persian Gulf. Without such numbers, he
argued, Saudi Arabia would risk becoming another Kuwait. Cheney told King Fahd
that the troops would stay only so long as they were wanted and that Washington
would build up Saudi defensive capabilities -- an allusion to an arms sale.

After the presentation, the King conferred with his advisers in Arabic, which
Charles W. Freeman Jr., the American Ambassador to Saudi Arabia and the only
American present with any knowledge of the language, strained to understand.
There seemed to be some argument, when one Saudi royal official asked whether
the Americans would ever leave. Finally, King Fahd said he would accept the
troops.

"I was surprised with how quickly he agreed," Cheney said a few days before war
broke out. "I anticipated that I would be forced to wait a day or two for an
answer. They clearly understood the scope of the problem."

It was the beginning of a long road. In mid-December, as hopes for peace dimmed,
the Defense Secretary, wearing cowboy boots, a blue work shirt and jeans,
inspected an Air Force unit in eastern Saudi Arabia.

He and General Powell gave speeches of support to the troops, preparing them for
battle with Saddam Hussein. "It's far better to deal with him now than 5 or 10
years from now," Cheney said. He also referred to Vietnam. "The only acceptable
outcome is absolute, total victory," he said, vowing that American troops will
not have "their hands tied behind their backs." Later, on a plane back to the
city of Dhahran, he was even quieter and more absorbed than usual.

NAME: Dick Cheney

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cover photo: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin L. Powell,
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, visiting the United States airmen ion
Saudi Arabia in late December. (Bob Daugherty/Associated Press)

Photos: Dick Cheney (Brad Markel/Gamma-Liaison)(pg. 16); From Congressional
committee rooms on Capitol Hill to U.S. military encampments in the Saudi
desert, Cheney rallied support for the Administration's response to Saddam
Hussein. (Bob Daugherty/Associated Press)(pg. 17); At a Saudi base, a U.S.
airman reloads missiles onto an F-15 Eagle. (Pool Photo by Ken Clauso via
Associated Press)(pg. 32); Smoke billows from the Iraqi Ministry of Defense in
Baghdad following a night of allied bombing. (Dominique Mollard/Associated
Press)(pg. 34)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A.C.L.U. CHOOSES A NEW PRESIDENT

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 365 words


The American Civil Liberties Union yesterday elected Nadine Strossen as the
first female president of the 71-year-old civil rights organization.

Ms. Strossen, 40 years old, a professor of constitutional law at New York Law
School, was elected on the second ballot of the group's directors.

In remarks to the board before the election, she said the war in the Persian
Gulf would present more civil liberties challenges. "The conflict and divisions
of Vietnam are haunting us again," she said. "It is in such emergencies the
A.C.L.U. is most needed and makes its most important contributions."

Ms. Strossen, a speaker and author, is expected to be a visible advocate for the
organization.

The other candidates were Judith Ellen Bendich, a founding partner of a Seattle
law firm that deals extensively in civil liberties issues, and Gwendolyn Thomas,
a professor of English and assistant vice president for student affairs at
Metropolitan State College in Denver.

Part-Time Position

The president leads an 83-member policy-making board of representatives of local
affiliates and at-large members. The body decides what issues involve civil
liberties and allocates the nearly $20 million annual budget. The post of
president is not a full-time position, and policies are carried out by a staff
led by an executive director, Ira Glasser.

Ms. Strossen succeeds Norman Dorsen, a law professor at New York University who
has led the group since 1976.

In his tenure, the organization increased its membership and its areas of
concern, including homelessness and poverty, despite attacks from some quarters
and a cool reception by conservative Federal judges. The group took more cases
before state courts and, in some instances, sought alternatives to litigation.

Colleen O'Connor, director of public education programs, said the A.C.L.U. had
become more active in lobbying legislators on issues like abortion, immigration
and censorship in the arts. The organization also mounted a recent drive on
workers' rights and has sought a higher profile in television interview
programs, college campuses and public debates as well as joining forces with
grass-roots groups.

NAME: Nadine Strossen

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Bronx Mourns First Death From Gulf War

BYLINE: By LISA W. FODERARO

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 978 words


At St. Anselm's Church in the South Bronx, hundreds gathered yesterday to mourn
the war made real.

For friends and neighbors of Capt. Manuel Rivera Jr., a 31-year-old Marine pilot
from the parish who last week became the first New York City fatality of the
Persian Gulf war, his death brought television images and Pentagon briefings
home and layered doubts and anger on top of their pride.

"You think of war as being so far away, but now somebody in your own building
dies and your neighbors suffer," said Nilda Carrasquillo, 31, a city social
worker. "When you talk to your kids about the war, you say, 'Don't worry, you
won't be affected.' You can't say that anymore."

Jose Martinez, a 41-year-old fisherman, awoke early yesterday to finish his
laundry in time for the afternoon memorial service for Captain Rivera, who died
on Tuesday when his Harrier jet crashed during a training run over the gulf.
Pushing a wire basket of clothes across the asphalt paths connecting the towers
of the John Adams Houses, where Captain Rivera grew up, Mr. Martinez paused to
consider the impact of the pilot's death on his own estimation of the war.

'Maybe We Should Have Waited'

"At first I was gung-ho because I didn't think a country like ours should be
pushed around by a dust-spot of a nation," said Mr. Martinez, whose eldest son
is in the Navy, stationed on an aircraft carrier in the gulf. "Now I think maybe
sanctions would have worked. Maybe we should have waited a little longer."

In the Romanesque church on Tinton Avenue, Captain Rivera was remembered as a
proud son of the South Bronx, a young man who beat the odds handed out by his
fierce, faceless neighborhood of public housing to become a pilot in the United
States Marine Corps.

Among the more than 500 people who pinned swatches of yellow ribbon to their
coat lapels before filling the pews in the Roman Catholic church yesterday were
friends, relatives, politicians, Vietnam veterans and strangers. The words of
support for the troops in the gulf and praise for the pilot's sacrifice were
tinged with resentment.

"There are too many from the Bronx," the Bronx Borough President, Fernando
Ferrer, said of the soldiers in the Persian Gulf force. "Too many from the South
Bronx and from all the Bronxes of this land."

Representative Jose E. Serrano said his "pain and sadness" were mingled with
anger -- "anger at myself, because perhaps I didn't do enough to stop this war
from happening."

Like many teen-agers who grow up in parts of the United States where educational
and job opportunities are few, Captain Rivera looked to the military as a ladder
out of urban decay. At one point during the service yesterday, a nun read off at
least 50 names of men and women now on active duty in the Persian Gulf from
parishes across the South Bronx.

Captain Rivera came of age in the John Adams Houses, a tan brick public housing
complex in the Melrose section of the Bronx, a place of rubble-strewn lots and
haggard trees that hardly evokes community.

But even those who did not know him personally said they certainly knew of him.
"Considering the area, his family had that great desire to make something out of
him," said Mrs. Carrasquillo, a community advocate with the New York City
Department of Health who lives in the same building as Captain Rivera's parents.


'He Became Someone'

"Manny was a hero of this community," said Mr. Ferrer. "He became someone, as we
say. No matter what your individual feeling on this war is, you're all in it
when one of our friends is lost. We all hurt." Mr. Ferrer also read letters of
support and consolation from Mayor David N. Dinkins and Gov. Mario M. Cuomo.

Members of the congregation seemed bound by a spirit of unity as they all joined
hands and raised their arms high while singing the Lord's Prayer.

Outside the church, young men fervently debated the worthiness of the cause that
brought American forces to the gulf. Older residents expressed a fear of
terrorism, and some cast the conflict in apocalyptic terms drawn directly from
the Bible.

The greatest fear, however, seemed to be that the war could take longer, and
claim more lives, than people had first believed. "Already it's taken too long,"
said Rory Turner, 20, a cook. "We're in our third week, and now they say it's
going to take months."

'A Man From the East'

Halbert Tyler, a 20-year-old maintenance worker, said he thought Armageddon had
begun. "It's in the Bible that a man from the East will bring the world to
destruction," he said.

Those with painful memories of Vietnam -- like Daniel Guilfuchi, 39, a building
superintendent from the South Bronx who lost two brothers in that war -- said
they were not enthusiastic about early reports from the Persian Gulf.

'Going to Be Like Vietnam'

"You don't give the enemy a chance to dig in and then try to dig them out," said
Mr. Guilfuchi, wearing a camouflage jacket and a diamond chip in one ear. "I
think this is going to be like Vietnam."

And there were war-borne anxieties in an area where pedestrians worry about
getting caught in the crossfire of drug dealers and in a city where crime has
become a way of life. "I take the train to work everyday, and now I have to fear
not only being mugged but some kind of terrorist retaliation," Mr. Martinez
said.

But others were unflinching in their support for President Bush and the American
involvement in the war, and said Captain Rivera's death did not make them waver.
"America has to do what they have to do," said Linda Torres, 25, an acquaintance
of Captain Rivera, before entering the church.

"I feel the war should go on until they finish Hussein," agreed Gonzalo Roig,
66, who estimated that slightly more than half of his neighborhood backed the
American role in the war. "We've got a good Army, and we're going to win."

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Hundreds of friends and neighbors gathered yesterday at St.
Anselm's Church in the South Bronx to mourn the death of Capt. Manuel Rivera
Jr., a Marine pilot from the parish who was the first New York City fatality of
the Persian Gulf war. (pg. B1); Bishop Francisco Garmendia handing the parents
of Capt. Manuel Rivera Jr. a letter from John Cardinal O'Connor, who sent his
sympathy and regrets that he could not attend their son's memorial Mass
yesterday. (pg. B3) (Ruby Washington/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Shops Are Backed

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 182 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 27


The President of Vietnam has signed a law sanctioning and protecting private
business in hopes of reviving one of the world's most backward economies.

The Communist Government has been relaxing central control of the economy and
encouraging private enterprise since doctrinaire Marxist leaders retired and
changes were adopted in late 1986.

The law, which the National Assembly adopted on Dec. 21, was signed last Monday
by President Vo Chi Cong, the official Communist Party newspaper Nhan Dan
reported. The law will take effect on April 15.

The law says Vietnamese citizens 18 and over have the right to open private
businesses.

The Prime Minister's approval is needed for involvement in production of
explosives, poisonous substances and toxic chemicals; excavation of precious
minerals, and large-scale production and supply of electricity and water.

Approval is also required for any business involved in international tourism,
the manufacture of radio transmitters or the providing of postal,
telecommunications, radio, television, publishing and special import-export
services.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Andover Journal;
At a Missile Maker, Pride and Relief

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 737 words

DATELINE: ANDOVER, Mass., Jan. 21


For many workers in this Boston suburb of 27,000 people, the success of the
Patriot missile in the Persian Gulf war is more than just a matter of pride.
It's a matter of job security.

The Raytheon Company plant here began making the radar and guidance systems for
the missiles in 1980. Since then, people from throughout the Merrimack Valley
have come to Andover, the well-heeled town where President Bush went to prep
school, looking for work. But defense cuts and threats by Congress to scrap the
Patriot, which tracks and intercepts attacking missiles, have made continued
employment uncertain.

In the last six months, the Andover plant laid off more than 300 of its 6,000
workers, sending them into a battered local economy whose unemployment rate has
doubled in just over two years, to 7.3 percent.

Until news came two weeks ago that the Patriots had begun knocking out Iraqi
Scud missiles, morale had been low, workers said.

"I was laid off from the plant before, so I had been worrying about my job,"
said an assembler, who spoke on condition that her name not be used. "But I feel
good about what I do, especially now that the war is on and the Patriot is
working. Maybe if it continues to do well, Raytheon will get more contracts and
there will be more secure jobs."

Workers at the plant had been expecting additional layoffs early this year, but
instead they are working around the clock to keep up with orders brought in by
the gulf crisis.

"I think we just all feel good about the fact that the Patriot is doing its
job," said Joseph O'Donnell, another assembler at the plant, as he soldered
parts on to a missile's circuit board. For three weeks last year, Mr. O'Donnell
was laid off from his $12.99 an hour job. Now, he said, his bosses are asking
him to work overtime.

Since 1980, Raytheon, the largest private employer in Massachusetts, has
delivered more than 108 high-tech Patriot missile systems, which includes the
missile, the launcher and other ground equipment, and more than 4,500 missiles.
The Pentagon pays $50 million to $55 million for a complete system and $600,000
for each missile.

Led by sales of the missile, Raytheon today announced record profits of $557.3
million on sales of $9.3 billion for 1990. Besides the United States, which has
asked Raytheon to step up production, buyers of the missile include Germany, the
Netherlands, Japan, Italy, and, since the gulf crisis began, Israel and Saudi
Arabia.

Andover officials hope the money that goes into the company will spill out to
the community. "Raytheon is a good neighbor to us, and we are pleased the
Patriot is doing well," said R. S. Stapczynski, the town manager. "Maybe
there'll be some jobs created by this success. This whole state could use a
boost."

Tightened security at the Andover plant, which is surrounded by a chain-link
fence topped with barbed wire, serves as a reminder that the United States is at
war against an enemy whose weapons could include terrorism. On the other side of
Boston in Quincy, workers at another Raytheon plant , have petitioned for
stricter security measures.

Raytheon officials would not comment on security measures, but employees said
entrances to work areas, once staffed by one security guard, now had four to six
guards. All handbags and knapsacks are now inspected as workers enter and leave
the plant.

"They are checking everything," said Cindy Cote, a 31-year-old assembler whose
husband works as a mechanic on the morning shift. "They just seem to be afraid
of people coming in here illegally."

Elation about the Patriots' successes has also been dampened by the increasing
numbers of friends and family called into military service. More than 100 people
from the Merrimack Valley are serving in the gulf, at least 13 of them from
Andover.

While no war protesters have made their way to Raytheon's gates, Andover
residents have gathered in homes and churches to pray for peace and the
soldiers' safety. "A lot of people have relatives over there and are worried,"
said Mr. O'Donnell, a 43-year-old veteran of the Vietnam War.

Mrs. Cote said her worries had been of a different nature.

"At first I had a hard time thinking about making weapons that are killing
people," she said. "But now I think about the fact that it's saving our own
people and it's for our country. I guess if it wasn't me making it, it would be
someone else. And it's a good job."

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Battle Report;
Iraq's Warplanes Continue To Seek Safe Haven in Iran

BYLINE: By CHRIS HEDGES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 876 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, Jan. 27


Some of Iraq's best combat planes have been flown to Iran to escape destruction,
the allied commander, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, said today.

"Our air campaign has started to force his air force into Iran," the general
said during a news briefing here.

General Schwarzkopf said that since Saturday, more than 39 Iraqi aircraft had
flown to Iran, 23 of them landing from 7 P.M. Saturday to 7 P.M. today. Most of
the planes that headed into sanctuary across the border were identified as being
among Iraq's most effective fighters.

Motive Unclear

The general said he did not know whether the decision to fly aircraft to Iran
had been made at the highest levels, but he speculated that the move might be an
effort by the Iraqis to conserve the planes for future action.

"They are now taking their very best fighters over there," the general said. "I
think that that is because they have lost an awful lot of their best fighters."

Iranian officials announced today that they were holding up to 12 Iraqi planes.
Iran said to protect its neutrality, it would confiscate any warplanes landing
within its borders and hold them until the end of the conflict.

But Iraqi Radio said Baghdad had contacted Iran about the return of the
aircraft, leaving the implication that the fliers had bolted on their own and
not followed a prearranged plan.

When asked whether the Iraqi planes in Iran could be counted on to stay there
for the duration of the hostilities, General Schwarzkopf replied, "At this time
we should take Iran at its word."

But the general added that his staff had not discounted the possibility that the
planes could leave Iran to rejoin the Iraqi war effort.

"We have contingencies that will take care of that situation if it occurs," he
said.

General Schwarzkopf dismissed reports from Iraq of widespread attacks on
civilian areas, though he acknowledged that some damage to civilian areas was
inevitable.

"It is going to happen," he said when asked about attacks on civilian areas,
"but we are doing everything we can to prevent it.

"I have been bombed by our own Air Force," he added, referring to his service in
Vietnam.

At Least 26 'Kills'

In reviewing the operations of the American-led coalition, General Schwarzkopf
said allied planes had flown more than 23,000 sorties and air operations. He
said allied planes had made at least 26 air-to-air "kills."

The latest engagement, he said, took place at 11:20 A.M. today, when two United
States F-15's shot down four Iraqi MIG-23's southeast of Baghdad.

"In the last 48 hours the allied forces have not lost any planes," he said.

"If they won't fly up to meet us, we fly down and destroy their hardened
shelters one by one by one," he added.

General Schwarzkopf said the only aspect of the war that had surprised him had
been President Saddam Hussein's scant use of Iraqi air power.

The general said that while allied planes were continuing their bombardment of
Iraq's elite Republican Guard units, the planes had recently turned their
attention to such strategic targets as bridges and roads that are important to
the Iraqi resupply efforts.

The Navy attacked mine-laying craft in the northern gulf, the general said. Navy
vessels sank or crippled a total of 18 Iraqi vessels.

The general said Iraqi ground operations were limited to "sporadic artillery and
rocket-launcher fire," and allied forces had responded with close air-support
strikes and artillery attacks.

Iraq has fired 51 Scud missiles, 26 at Saudi Arabia and 25 at Israel, as of
tonight, according to the general's figures. The allies say they have damaged 16
mobile Scud missile launchers and may have damaged three more on Saturday night
in eastern Iraq.

Scud Numbers Uncertain

"We knew that he had more than 20 mobile missiles," the general said of Mr.
Hussein. "We had a wide variety of estimates. I will tell you quite candidly,
nobody knows exactly how many mobile missiles he has."

A military statement by Baghdad Radio today said there had been 122 allied air
raids on civilian targets and residential areas the previous day. The Iraqis
said they had shot down three allied warplanes or missiles.

British military officials today said their forces had destroyed a Silkworm
surface-to-surface missile site, which would be the first of the Chinese-made
Silkworms to be destroyed in the war.

Need for Ground War Is Stressed

WASHINGTON, Jan. 27 (Special to The New York Times) -- Defense Secretary Dick
Cheney said today that the Pentagon's war plans assume that air strikes alone
will not drive Iraqi troops out of Kuwait and that attacks by American-led
allied ground forces would eventually be needed.

'We've always assumed that we would eventually have to send in ground forces,"
Mr. Cheney said on the NBC News television program "Meet the Press."

Mr. Cheney's remarks were the most explicit on-the-record statement by a high
Administration official about the probablility of an American ground attack.
Though the United States has assembled large ground forces in the Persian Gulf,
Bush Administration officials had previously held out more of a hope that air
strikes would be so effective that a ground campaign would be unnecessary.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1175 words



War in the Gulf A6-A12

The U.S. bombed oil installations along the Kuwaiti coastline in hopes of
stemming the huge spill deliberately unleashed by Iraq nearly a week ago. The
allied commander said the mission was a success. Page A1

The enormous oil slick in the gulf continued to expand southward, killing
elegant cormorants and other wildlife. The worry was that Saddam Hussein's
"scorched ocean policy" might cripple a vital desalting plant. A1

The war is changing vacation plans for many Americans frightened by the threat
of terrorism and preoccupied by the unfolding conflict. Airlines, tours and
cruises report cancellations and fewer bookings.  A1

The stress of the war felt by children and how they should react is the focus of
a barrage of advice coming from experts in information from schools and the news
media.  A12

Some of Iraq's best combat planes have been flown to Iran to escape destruction,
the allied commander, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf said. He speculated that Iraq
wants to conserve planes for future action.  A8

Man in the News: Gen. Schwarzkopf learned from Vietnam what a military leader
needs to win: more than enough force on the battlefield and more than enough
political backing at home. A10

Reporter's Notebook: On the road to Kuwait, 500,000 mines A10

Saudis abandoning old secretive ways A10

Americans at Aramco report facing job loss if they leave A10

Iraq ordered thousands of refugees stranded at Jordan's border to return to
Baghdad to collect exit visas. But the highway on which they must return has
been under allied bombing raids, travelers said.  A11

Egypt says it doesn't favor removing Iraqi chief A11

Kurds in Turkey fear war will reach them A11

Canadians enter Persian Gulf war, sparking debate A11

Soviets said to hedge on war with future in mind A7

Explaining war votes back in home districts A12

Andover Journal: At a missile maker, pride and relief A14

The first New York war casualty, Capt. Manuel Rivera Jr., a Marine pilot, was
mourned at St. Anselm's Roman Catholic Church in the South Bronx. For many, his
death brought the fighting closer to home.  B1

International A2-A6

Winnie Mandela will go to trial soon on charges of kidnapping and assault, and
if found guilty, could face 10 years in prison. The trial will be followed
across South Africa like no other case in recent years.  A1

Somali rebels say they won control of the capital, Mogadishu, and have forced
President Siad Barre to flee his palace. The claims were largely confirmed by
French doctors.A3 In Tienanmen trials, attitude counts A3

Ho Chi Minh City: Poking around Vietnam's history A4

The cocaine cartel in Colombia has smothered open debate on the drug issue by
kidnapping nine journalists in August in an effort to end hostile press
coverage. A2

National A14-A21

The dreadful toll of urban poverty has become more toxic to those caught in it
as its impact on most Americans has grown more distant. But the effects of
inner-city decay can be far-reaching. A1

The Federal Trade Commission is emerging from the laissez-faire attitude of the
Reagan Administration. It is starting to use its antitrust muscles and renew its
interest in cases affecting the public's pocketbook. A16

More than two million jobless people have used up all their unemployment
benefits in 1990, a 16 percent increase over the year before. In Troy, Ohio,
where many have bleak prospects of finding a job, life seems perilously close to
the edge. A14

Woman in the News: NadineStrossen, new A.C.L.U. head A14

Washington Talk: Pauper cases shape high court caseload A16

A feud on hazardous waste disposal in several Southeastern states is posing a
challenge to the principle that the Federal Government and not states should
control the transportation and disposal of industrial waste.  A18

TV among supremacists' targets, U.S. says A15

Seven shot to death in New Mexico A21

Sears may opt to sell its catalogue, or to eliminate it, as part of sweeping
changes that retail executives and others watching the company say will be
considered by the lagging company at a meeting next month.  D1

Regional B1-B5

Bribery of city building inspectors to obtain approval to occupy new or
completely renovated apartment buildings is widespread in New York, developers
and contractors say.B1

The policy of nondisclosure of AIDS among health-care workers raises questions
that haunt some workers and anger others at Bellevue Hospital in New York, where
80 percent of the patients in surgery have AIDS.  B1

Who is the voice of voice mail? Her name is Lorraine Routh Nelson, and she wants
the world to know she is not a drone at the other end of the line. When she
says, "To get your messages, press 2," she really cares. B1

New York State's fiscal slide has been worsened by the recession -- not only by
corroding state revenues butby increasing the mandated costs of caring for the
poor.  B3

The census added 289,000 people in New York City in the final four months of the
1990 count by using a series of last-minute methods. The methods' reliability is
now coming under increasing scrutiny. B3

A.T.& T. plans to lease out space at its headquarters B3

Women can now join all eating clubs at Princeton University. Until recently two
were open only to men. But with one club's membership tradition of drinking,
getting sick and nakedness, will women want to join?  B2

Neediest Cases B4

Business Digest D1

SportsMonday

Baseball: Winfield aims to reverse suit C14

Basketball: MacLeod tries to stay hopeful C14

Lakers roll over Celtics C14

Georgetown upsets Pitt C14

U.N.L.V. leaves varied impressions C14

Columns: Berkow on Super Bowl security C2

Anderson on Parcells C4

Features: Question Box C15

On Your Own C17

Hockey: Islanders lose to Capitals C10

Lemieux returns in style C10

Outdoors: Saltwater fly fishing C17

Super Bowl XXV was super, especially for the Giants. In an exciting game of big
plays, the Giants rallied in the fourth quarter to edge the Buffalo Bills,
20-19. C1

Security slows crowd entry C2

Scalpers finds a way to unload their wares C3

Tennis: Becker earns victory and No. 1 spot C10

Obituaries D8

Arts/Entertainment

Africa's influence on Brazilian music C19

Lease dispute is closing a musical C19

Mary McGarry Morris and her life C19

Theater: Sondheim's "Assassins" C19

Film: "Memories of a Marriage" C20

Music: Leontyne Price at Carnegie Hall C22

Dance: Debuts in "Jewels" C21

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A22

Killing fields aren't level

When doctors have AIDS

John P. MacKenzie: Sentences

Letters A22

William Safire: Remember the Kurds A23

Anthony Lewis: A sense of proportion A23

Michael Howard: Clausewitz -- man of the year A23

Edward Kane: Banks are looking a lot like S.& L.'s A23

Bernard L. Weinstein, Harold T. Gross: "We've been there" A23

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Ho Chi Minh City;
Poking Around in the Attic of Vietnam's History

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1039 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


In the archeology of discarded foreign influence here, Soviet artifacts now sit
atop the multilayered trash heap of history. But the fascination with America,
if it ever disappeared, is re-emerging.

Jean Nguyen Khac Doan is one of this still-sophisticated city's best gauges of
fashion, selling and recycling the detritus of foreigners. A northern-born Roman
Catholic who speaks excellent French, he moved to the south in 1951. He was a
teacher, then served in the South Vietnamese Army as a political officer,
learning a working English. Russian, he says, he never took the time to learn.

In some ways, it didn't matter. The Russians, military and civilian advisers
both, never had very much to sell or barter. But what they did have, especially
caviar and the suddenly modish wristwatches of Soviet officers, are among Mr.
Doan's best-selling items.

Mr. Doan's shop -- just off Dong Khoi, the old Tu Do in the American time, and
Rue Catinat for the French -- is a way to see the movement of history, or at
least its flotsam.

At a quick glance, it is a sort of junk shop: lots of clocks and watches, silver
and crystal, old pens and cameras and books in many languages, Buddhas and Khmer
heads (almost assuredly fake), a few of Vietnam's inescapable porcelain
elephants and an ever-ready pot of tea.

A Sort of Order

But there is a sort of order. What the Russians are now leaving behind has
pushed back on the shelves what the Americans left, as much of what the French
left before them is relegated to a back room.

Mr. Doan's wife, Madeleine Huynh Thi Thuan, works with him and their two
remaining children. A daughter died of an asthma attack, in part because of
inadequate medical care; their eldest son disappeared at sea in 1982, after
fleeing by boat to seek resettlement in the West.

"Every family in the south of Vietnam has been touched, has one or two who have
died at sea, who have disappeared or were in jail," Mr. Doan said. Now 53 years
old, he spent two years and two months in a re-education camp after 1975 and
tried numerous times himself to escape by boat. "But each time I was betrayed,"
he said. "Finally I had only enough money to send my son."

The hard hand of the Communist Government has loosened considerably here since
the first few years after South Vietnam fell, he says. Private enterprise is
encouraged. Crackdowns are intermittent, of course, particularly after the
collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe. But mostly, the police now leave people
like Mr. Doan alone.

He caters both to Vietnamese, with treasures to sell or money to buy, and to
foreigners looking for an unusual memory or souvenir. Sometimes, he says, they
are seeking to repurchase the past.

Some Popular Clocks

An American veteran comes in, looking for the night-vision binoculars he
remembers. He nearly buys a French officer's saber for $70. A German journalist
examines an old Rolleiflex camera. A French banker arrives to pick up a heavy,
round, 24-hour clock the Americans used on their patrol boats. Repaired by Mr.
Doan and his staff and often mounted in wooden boxes, they are very popular, as
are the smaller ones pulled out of American helicopters.

Most of these key-wound ship's clocks were made by the Chelsea Clock Company of
Boston. After oiling and adjustment, they keep on ticking. Mr. Doan sells them
for $100 to $200. The brass ones are the most expensive. "I discovered this
market a year ago," Mr. Doan said, and he has since sold more than 50 clocks.

"People like them, especially French tourists," Mr. Doan said. "They like things
from the American army. Many ask me to find them leather flight jackets."
Swedes, he says, like United States Navy binoculars. "The Swedes think they are
all sailors and navigators."

Old Swiss watches, especially Rolexes, are very popular, too, but more scarce.
Fakes are proliferating, Mr. Doan says, with some of the best now made in China
and Vietnam. Many of the Rolexes for sale -- about $400 for steel, $700 for
steel and gold and about $2,000 for solid gold -- never belonged to Americans at
all, he says, but to Vietnamese who had Americans buy them at the P.X. and who
now need the money.

Ah, but Soviet watches -- "these are one of the best things to sell," Mr. Doan
said. "They're not beautiful, and they're heavy, but they are good watches and
cheap, with many decorations. And they are the fashion now in Europe."

Caviar Sells Well

Soviet army officers' watches are particularly prized, bearing a star. Naval
officers' watches have a blue face and an anchor. Tank officers' watches display
a tank. "Americans like these a lot," said Mr. Doan, who has sold more than 300
of them at prices ranging from $5 to $30. "They make good Christmas presents."

Russian caviar, too, sells well, but with fewer Soviet advisers here the price
has doubled in a year. A 95-gram tin of pasteurized Beluga is now $15, while a
600-gram tin is $80, but hard to find. At the moment, there is a 1.5 kilo (3.3
pound) tin of fresh caviar for $120. Most of the stock now originates with
Aeroflot pilots.

"Just watches and caviar," Mr. Doan says. "There's nothing else Russian that
people want."

Outside, the archeological process continues. On the streets, the Soviet Volgas
and Ladas are being replaced by Toyotas and Nissans. A few Peugeot 404's and
ancient Citroen sedans, last seen in French gangster movies, still putter along,
as do the incongruous bulks of much-repaired Ford Fairlanes, Chevy trucks,
DeSoto buses and International Harvester jeeps.

Japanese autos are part of the inevitable transition from isolationism toward
hard currency, however much they choke on bad Soviet gasoline. But there is
something of a resurgence of American influence, too, which is more a matter of
stylishness, itself a quiet political gesture.

It is not just that so many young people are learning English. The Cuu Long
Hotel is now, once again, the Majestic. For a week, the Continental Hotel, its
famous open-air bar now glassed in, had a freshly painted American jeep out
front. Near the airport is a stunningly modern discotheque called Superstar. And
then, almost inevitably, there is the newly opened Ca-li-pho-nia Ham-bu-go
restaurant.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jean Nguyen Khac Doan, left, with his wife, Madeleine Huynh Thi
Thuan, in their shop in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. They sell such souvenirs of
the colonial past as French officers' sabers, Soviet watches and caviar, as well
as clocks from American patrol boats, background, which he and his staff repair
and sell for between $100 and $200. (Steven Erlanger/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Military Briefing;
Excerpts From Remarks by General Schwarzkopf in Riyadh

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2473 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 27


Following are excerpts from a news briefing by Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf,
commander of the American forces in the Persian Gulf, in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
as transcribed by the Federal News Service:

OPENING STATEMENT

After nine days we've flown over 22,000 sorties and air operations. In those air
operations, we have over 26 air-to-air kills by the coalition Air Forces. The
most recent engagement was 11:20 today, local time. Two U.S. F-15's engaged four
Iraqi MIG-23's just southeast of Baghdad. At the conclusion of that engagement,
four Iraqi MIG-23's were destroyed. There were no U.S. losses.

Spill Set on Fire

What we were really interested in is, No. 1, how much damage this was going to
do to Saudi Arabia and the military operations. We were also interested in
anything we could do to assist in somehow trying to help with what was going on.
At that time, they asked us to try and do two things. They said, first of all,
about the best thing we could do right away would be to somehow set the source
of this oil spill on fire. If we could set it on fire, it would burn off a great
deal of the pollutants that otherwise would go into the Gulf and continue to
flow down.

The other thing they did is asked me to somehow cut off, cut off the flow of oil
to this buoy. That became a major interest of ours because, of course, we are
not in the business of destroying Kuwait while we are liberating Kuwait. And we
certainly didn't want to go in and completely destroy the oil field or do undue
damage. I would tell you that I am no oil expert. I was not then and I certainly
am not now, and therefore, we needed the advice of many, many experts as to how
to go about doing this and we finally came up with a solution that I'll talk to
you about in just a minute.

Next slide, please. On the evening of the 25th, after we had gotten the
recommendations from these experts, we just happened to have a circumstantial
happening out here at the Sea Island terminal. The United States Navy
encountered a small boat. This was a small boat of the type that is suspected of
supporting mine lying craft, also a small boat that has antiaircraft on it, and
this is the type of small boat that they've been going -- out in the area
because those boats have been shooting at them.

They engaged that boat, that boat happened to be next to the Sea Island
terminal, and as a result of that engagement, the Sea Island terminal caught
fire. So, just by circumstance, we did accomplish the first thing we were asked
to do and that is set the source on fire even though that's not exactly the way
we expected to do it.

I would tell you the almost immediate results we saw though on the night of the
25th -- again looking at hard evidence -- is we found that the flow of oil out
to the oil buoy had been cut off and as a result of this fire, it seemed like
the flow of oil from the Sea Island terminal was considerably less than the flow
of oil that was coming out of the oiling buoy.

Next, please. This is a blowup of the crude oil storage terminal north and the
crude oil storage terminal south. Basically, what we have here is storage tanks,
and south of these storage tanks are two small manifold areas: the manifold area
here and a manifold area here. These two areas, by the way, are about three and
a half miles apart and are approximately five miles away from the shoreline. The
Sea Island terminal is about eight miles further out.

Bombing the Manifolds

What the petroleum engineers and the oil-fill experts advised us to do was to
take out these manifolds. They said if we could destroy the manifold here, No.
1, it was the type of damage that could be repaired very quickly once they went
back into the area -- in approximately two weeks time was their estimate -- but
they said that if you took out these manifolds, the manifolds essentially
control the flow of all the oil that comes out of the oil fields into the
storage area and further from the storage area out to the ocean, and the same
thing with regard to coming through here. So that's what we decided to do.

Unfortunately, at that time, the weather was very bad and this obviously had to
be a very precise military operation because, as I say, we don't want to
liberate Kuwait by destroying Kuwait, so we had to wait until a time when we
could go ahead and launch that against those two manifolds. Twenty-two thirty
last night was when we launched that exercise . . .

The type of munition that was used was a GBU-15 guided precision emission fired
from an F-111 aircraft. What you're going to be doing is looking directly
through the TV camera in the nose of that aircraft as it goes right in to the
manifold, so you'll see the manifold areas.

Now, this next is a tape that was taken late in the afternoon yesterday, prior
to the time we destroyed the manifold, and it gives you some idea of what we
had. You can see very, very heavy black smoke, a very large fire out in the
area. That is Sea Island Terminal, yes, that is where, where the fire was
occurring and the leakage was happening yesterday. . . .

Now, this is after the attack -- this is early today. You will see that you have
an entirely different color smoke coming out of here, which I am told is because
the oil is deeper in the water and it's burning much less. You can see the size
of the flame area is much, much smaller than the one you saw just a few minutes
ago . . .

Here is your pier area running out here, and you can see the very, very large
fireball that was out here. This was as of 0900 or 0913 on 26 January. You can
see how very, very large that fireball is. If you compare that to what you see
here, this is a much closer shot of the pier, and the fireball here I think you
will see by comparison that that fireball is considerably diminished.

The question may come to mind, well, why is it still burning? I have been told
that because, number one, as I told you, the manifolds were five miles away from
the shore, and then from the shore you have another eight miles of pipeline
going out to the Sea Island Terminal. You had 13 miles of oil in that manifold
-- in that pipeline that was probably flowing, and the best estimates that we
had originally were that it will take more than 24 hours before the fire goes
out.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

U.S. Expected Oil Dumping

Q. We have heard from the Saudi Minister of Environment today that this could be
10 to 15 times the size of the spill of the Exxon Valdez, and we have also heard
several times from several briefers in the past day that no one expected Saddam
would go this far and do something this heinous. Before the war began, there
were environmental groups in the United States who were saying let's not go to
war because this could be a disaster for the Persian Gulf if he goes ahead with
his threats. Did we miscalculate, did we not expect that he would go this far?

A. No, I think that you've answered your own question. Saddam Hussein did in
fact say he was going to do this sort of thing before, and we did expect him to
do exactly this sort of thing. He's announced all along that he would do things
to destroy the Kuwaiti oilfields. He has also announced that he would go ahead
and pour oil into the Gulf to try and defeat amphibious operations -- which,
incidentally, this will not do.

And as far as the extent of the disaster, I think that, you know, right now it's
far too early to tell what is going to happen. I have heard as many different
opinions on that as there are people who have given me opinions.


Success of Mission

Q. General, are you convinced now that this operation is a success? Is it over?
Is more action likely to be necessary and also did you encounter any kind of
opposition from Iraqi while this thing was going on?

A. You talking about when we went in and bombed the manifolds? Is that what
you're talking about?

Q. Yeah.

A. Well, you know, it is certainly a success because we accomplished exactly
what we wanted to accomplish when we went in there. No, we did not encounter any
kind of opposition from the Iraqis, but then again, we very seldom do. One of
the reasons why is because we don't let people know what we're going to do ahead
of time.

Attitude Toward Planes in Iran

Q. General, are you assured that the planes going into Iran will not come back
from Iran and be used against the coalition? And if you're not assured of that,
are you prepared to attack those planes?

A. I think the Iranian Government has stated that they're neutral and the
Iranian Government has stated that any planes from either country that are
coming to Iran will remain there until the termination of the conflict. I think
at this time we should take Iran at its word; they have consistently been
supporters of the United Nations resolution and I see no reason why we should
suspect at this time that they will change.

I would also say, however, that we would be absolutely not worth our salt as
military people if we ignored the fact that those planes could fly back out of
Iran after us, and, therefore, we obviously have contingencies that will take
care of that situation if it were to occur.

Intimidating Hussein

Q. General, you've referred today and on previous occasions to Saddam in
personal terms. And you've talked about his air force and his forces today. Do
you think Saddam is listening to your words now and are you trying to
psychologically intimidate him?

A. I've been trying to psychologically intimidate him from long before the
beginning of this conflict. I think we have pretty well predicted for Saddam
Hussein exactly what would happen if he went to war against us and he didn't
choose to believe it. And I think he is -- I don't know whether he knows what's
going on right now. I sincerely hope he knows exactly what's going on. But I
have no intention of psychologically intimidating him, as much as I have of
spelling out the simple facts of what's happening and what's going to go on
happening.

Attacks on Republican Guards

Q. Some assessment of your air campaign against the Republican Guards, and
secondly, an assessment of how you're doing on the bomb damage assessment in
light of the bad weather that we've been having?

A. Yeah. I think that we have -- so far I would declare that our campaign
against the Republican Guard is highly successful. Just based upon the delivery
methods that we've been able to put on them, I, being an infantryman, I
certainly wouldn't want to be under that type of attack right now.

As we've said all along, bomb damage assessment -- or battle damage assessment
-- on a tank division or a mechanized division is an extremely difficult thing
to come up with, so I don't think we can give it a better assessment at the
present time. As far as the rest of the B.D.A. is concerned, I would say that,
it varies, you know, we have an awful lot of camera shots coming in from the
aircraft that show that, you know, that the ordnance have been placed right on
the target. And -- but as you've also seen from the camera shots, what you see
is the explosion and then the aircraft pulls off so you don't really see the
after effect and we're trying to be deliberately conservative. . . . We don't
want to mislead anybody; we don't want to tell you we've done something we
haven't done and as a result, we're being deliberately conservative. When we
announce something to you that, you know, that's something's happened, you can
take it to the bank.

Defining Carpet Bombing

Q. We've heard some reports from some of our colleages that there's been carpet
bombing going on in Kuwait, across the Kuwait border by the B-52's and I know
you've been -- and your staff has been very deliberately vague about exactly
what the B-52's are doing. But it's, it's a fearsome weapon, as you well know.
Could you give us a little idea, is there, are you trying to get mainly to the
Republican Guard in southern Iraq or do you have Kuwaiti targets for B-52's
which -- are you carpet bombing or do you have plans for carpet bombing?

A. I don't know what the definition of carpet bombing is, and last night I
turned to my air component commander and asked him the same question. He said he
doesn't know what the definition of carpet bombing is. I don't think that what
we're doing would be described as carpet bombing.

Carpet bombing tends to portray something that's totally indiscriminate, you
know, en masse without regard to the target. I think we've stated all along that
we're being absolutely as careful as we can not only in the way we are going
about executing our air campaign, but in the type of armament we're using. We're
using the appropriate weapon against the appropriate targets. We're being very,
very careful in our direction of attacks to avoid damage of any kind to civilian
installations. It's going to happen. It is absolutely going to happen; there's
no question about it. But we're doing everything we can to prevent it and that's
not carpet bombing by any definition.

'Bombed by Our Own Air Force'

Q. Second question. Is -- there's been film from Iraqi television of a mass
being held in the ruins of a church that I think has been shown on C.N.N. It
seems to have been that the church was bombed. Do you know anything about that
or anything?

A. I know absolutely nothing about it. I'll just reiterate what I've said. You
know, that these things happen. I've been bombed by our own Air Force. I don't
think they did it intentionally. You know, I really don't mean to make a joke
out of this. I really don't, but you have to understand that bomb racks get hung
up and drop and I was bombed by B-52's one time in Vietnam and (indistinct)
pass. They were coming towards us. They did a marvelous job of dropping all
their bombs, and then one rack hung up and it released over my position. And I
certainly never went back and said, you know, why did you do that. I'm angry at
you. I know you did it deliberately.

The GBU-15 at a Glance

Use

The GBU-15, or guided bomb unit, is built by Rockwell International for the U.S.
Air Force. It is used to attack heavily defended fixed targets like arifields,
bridges and missile launchers by air.

The bomb carries a 2,000-pound conventional warhead, and can be fitted with a
television or infrared camera for day or night attacks. The cameras transmit
pictures of the target back to the bomb operator in the cockpit.

A transmitter and receiver in the tail of the bomb allow the operator to guide
the bomb until just before impact.

Range

One to 50 miles, depending on launch speed and altitude.

Deployment

F-4E, F-111F and certain F-15 airplanes.

Characteristics

Length: 13 feet
Diameter: 1.5 feet.
Wing span: 5 feet.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Smoke billowing from the Sea Island Terminal off Kuwait, which
was set afire on Friday during a skirmish between United States Navy ships and
an Iraqi vessel laying mines. (Department of Defense via Associated Press)

Diagram: "The GBU-15 at a Glance" illustrates how a GBU-15 works. (Sources:
Jane's Weapon Systems, U.S. Air Force)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

ABROAD AT HOME;
A Sense Of Proportion

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 732 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


U.S. and allied planes have flown 11,000 combat missions so far against Iraqi
targets. But air bombardment will not be enough, intelligence officials say. The
500,000 troops massed in Saudi Arabia, most of them American, will have to go
into action on the ground. The fighting may go on for months.

This enormous war effort is necessary, President Bush says, to achieve a "new
world order."

But as our attention is on the gulf war, something else is happening. In Moscow
and Vilnius and Riga, the hopes of democracy and freedom are slipping away. The
Soviet Union is moving rapidly back toward repression: a militarized form of the
totalitarian state.

The headlines have been dwarfed by the war with Kuwait, the television coverage
glancing. But think what has happened in the last two weeks.

* Soviet soldiers have shot and killed 19 civilians in Lithuania and Latvia.

* The Soviet Government has ordered armed soldiers to join the police in
patrolling all major cities in the country.

* President Gorbachev has granted sweeping powers to the K.G.B. and the police
to search private businesses -- foreign as well as domestic -- and to freeze
their assets.

Those ominous actions have been accompanied by ominous rhetoric. Soviet military
officers describe the elected government of Lithuania as "fascist." Secret
"Committees for National Salvation" ask for presidential rule of the Baltic
states -- as Czech Stalinists invited Warsaw Pact forces to crush the Dubcek
Government in 1968.

Mikhail Gorbachev's position is still something of a mystery. He has not so far
imposed presidential rule on the Baltics. He told the foreign press that events
there were "tragic."

But what is clear is that Mr. Gorbachev is more and more relying on the new
Soviet right, and deferring to it. Made up of military officers, K.G.B. leaders
and Communist bureaucrats, it is deeply conservative and xenophobic. It fears
economic reform, private enterprise and foreign investment. It denounces
"bourgeois" ideology and demands a return to "Socialist" central control.

The right is deeply suspicious of the United States. Some question Mr.
Gorbachev's joining American policy in the Persian Gulf, saying that it will
lead to American domination there and will menace the U.S.S.R. A key right-wing
figure, Col. Victor Alksnis, has denounced what he called Soviet "appeasement"
in the gulf.

The trend of events in the Soviet Union must be of the deepest concern to
President Bush, and to all of us. But the American Government's capacity to
address the problem has been compromised by Mr. Bush's decision to go to war
against Iraq.

Mr. Bush has criticized the shootings in Vilnius and Riga. He will probably
postpone the summit meeting scheduled for next month. What more could he do to
protest Soviet developments?

What he could do is to deal directly with the crucial immediate issue: the three
Baltic republics. The United States has never recognized the Soviet takeover of
Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia in 1940. Nor, lately, has it directly encouraged
their claims to renewed independence -- a cautious policy that seemed to me
wise.

But the cynicism and brutality of recent Soviet military actions in the Baltics
require a reappraisal of our policy. How can we just wring our hands when we see
what looks like the development of an internal Brezhnev Doctrine, the use of
armed force to suppress freedom in the republics? Today it is Lithuania;
tomorrow it would be Georgia or the Ukraine or Russia.

There are no easy answers for the United States in the chaos now overtaking the
Soviet Union. But President Bush should be forcefully protesting the repression
in Lithuania and Latvia. He should be talking with those who are struggling for
democracy in Vilnius and Riga and Moscow. But he cannot when he so urgently
needs Soviet support for his policy in the Persian Gulf.

Mr. Bush is obsessed by the gulf crisis. He told David Frost that there has been
"nothing like this since World War II. Nothing of this moral importance." As
Haynes Johnson wrote in The Washington Post, Mr. Bush was saying: Not the
Marshall Plan, not the cold war, not Korea, not Vietnam. Nothing to equal this
conflict.

Mr. Bush and his Administration have lost their sense of proportion in this war.
And if the Soviet Union goes down the road to darkness, they will have lost
their new world order, too.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Killing Fields Aren't Level

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 586 words


Close to 30 percent of the Army's troops in Operation Desert Storm are black,
though blacks are just 14 percent of the nation's population between the ages of
18 and 24. In a land war, black casualties will be similarly disproportionate.
Is it fair? Is it inevitable? For answers, one must search the soul of American
society.

Gen. Colin Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs and a black, has pointed out
that it is "simply a given" that any group suffers in proportion to its presence
in the fighting force. Rejecting charges that the proportion of blacks is
unfair, he says he's "proud that African-Americans have seen fit to volunteer to
join the armed forces."

From World War II through Vietnam, most U.S. servicemen were drafted, the armed
forces were larger, and minority representation was in closer proportion to the
population. Today's all-volunteer system replaced the draft in 1973.

A big pay hike and cash benefits for education have raised the caliber of
enlistments. More than 90 percent of recent recruits are high school graduates
-- far higher than the national percentage or the percentage for draftees in the
past. According to the Pentagon, the average G.I.'s socio-economic background is
slightly below average for his age group, but -- nonpartisan analysts agree --
he is not a dropout from society. Still, blacks are more likely to enlist than
whites. Almost 21 percent of U.S. forces worldwide are black; the figure is
higher in the gulf because of large Army and Marine contingents.

Clifford Alexander, a black who was Secretary of the Army in the 1970's,
explained the imbalance at the time in a few pointed words: "(Ask) why there is
almost 40 percent unemployment among black teen-agers before you ask why they
enlist or why they re-up." Their jobless rate is still above 30 percent, and the
point endures: the military offers blacks more opportunities than life on the
outside.

Once laggard, the military is now a leading force for integration. General
Powell has said that before the gulf crisis, some blacks complained that planned
cutbacks in the armed forces would hurt them, but "now I'm sort of getting the
reverse, that perhaps they're overrepresented."

While the attractions are real -- rewarding career, education, escape or proud
service -- they do not match the risk to life itself. Army recruiters don't
advertise it. Casualty lists will tell it loud and clear. But life at home holds
terror, too. Listen to a 19-year-old black who enlisted in Los Angeles last
month: "It's nothing out there in the streets for you but trouble. I don't want
to die at a young age getting caught up in the gang thing."

The Brookings Institution's Martin Binken, an authority on military service,
says equal representation under current conditions is next to impossible; unless
black enlistments were barred, the services would have to expand considerably,
enlisting or drafting enough whites to balance the blacks, taking men now
rejected. And blacks would still sustain more casualties than whites, because
men with less schooling get low-skill duty, which includes combat.

The disproportion is unfair on its face. Tragically, it may be almost inevitable
-- rooted in unequal opportunity. America owes its minorities a better chance,
as offered by the job rights bill that President Bush vetoed last year.
Meanwhile, despite the indignities they suffer in civilian life, or perhaps
because of them, blacks in the military serve their nation with honor --
disproportionately.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The General; Man in the News;
Tough but Politic Chief; H. Norman Schwarzkopf

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1011 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Jan. 27


In his two tours of duty in the Vietnam War, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf learned
that a military leader must have more than enough force on the battlefield and
more than enough political backing at home.

As commander of more than 500,000 American and allied forces in the Persian
Gulf, General Schwarzkopf has spent the last six months trying to insure he has
both.

So far, the burly, hard-charging four-star Army general known affectionately to
his troops as "Stormin' Norman," has seized the moment, directing an allied air
and sea attack against Iraq that in the first 11 days of hostilities has yielded
surprisingly few casualties and scored impressive military gains, like the
establishment of air superiority.

But the test of ground combat, with its certainty of higher death tolls, still
lies ahead. If General Schwarzkopf can help it, though, there will not be any
big surprises.

"I and my entire staff spend most of our time trying to think of what those
surprises could be so that we're ready for them," he said at a news conference
today.

A Fatherly Personality

If generals like George Patton cultivated images of harshness, General
Schwarzkopf has not tried to hide his fatherly personality and he has been known
to choke up with tears talking about his troops.

"I don't consider myself dovish and I certainly don't consider myself hawkish,"
General Schwarzkopf told an interviewer in November. "Maybe I would describe
myself as owlish -- that is wise enough to understand that you want to do
everything possible to avoid war; that once you're committed to war then be
ferocious enough to do whatever is necessary to get it over with as quickly as
possible in victory."

General Schwarzkopf, who is 56 years old, appears more comfortable in the field
with his soldiers than behind a desk. But, as someone who was wounded twice in
Vietnam, he shows respect for the consequences of soldiering.

"War's a profanity," he has said, "because let's face it, you've got two
opposing sides trying to settle their differences by killing as many of each
other as they can."

Familiar With Combat

General Schwarzkopf has seen war at close range. C.D.B. Bryan's 1976 book,
"Friendly Fire," described how Lieut. Col. Schwarzkopf, a battalion commander in
Vietnam, landed by helicopter in a minefield to rescue his men trapped there.

Inching his way to an infantryman who had stepped on a mine and badly wounded
his leg, the officer calmed the hysterical soldier: "Take it easy, son," he is
said to have told him. "It's only broken; I can tell that from here."

In the desert, just before Thanksgiving, field telephones the general had
ordered for soldiers who had been at remote camps for three months had not been
sent. One ballistic tirade from "the Bear," the nickname the general prefers,
and the phones were on their way in time for the troops to call home for the
holidays.

"He's a good mud soldier," said Lieut. Gen. William S. Carpenter Jr., the
commander of Army forces in Korea, who served with General Schwarzkopf in
Vietnam. "The most important thing is that he cares about ground troops and he's
not about to get them chewed up."

Doesn't Mind Waiting

That might explain General Schwarzkopf's comment to an interviewer that
momentarily put him out of step with the Pentagon's position to resolve the gulf
crisis sooner than later:

"If the alternative to dying is sitting out in the sun for another summer than
that's not a bad alternative," he said. "I'm not rushing into battle. I'm not a
General Custer."

Nor has it stopped him from criticizing decisions made by superiors. While still
a lower-ranking general, he was plucked from his command at Fort Stewart, Ga.,
to coordinate the ground attack -- from a Navy ship -- of the United States
invasion of Grenada in 1983.

He later told a television interviewer how he was "stunned" by the lack of
reliable information American forces possessed before beginning the invasion.

"He doesn't like surprises," said his wife, the former Brenda Holsinger, who met
her husband 24 years ago at a West Point football game. They have three
children.

Vietnam His Crucible

Vietnam, the crucible from which General Schwarzkopf's world vision emerged,
taught the value of understanding an enemy's strength and weaknesses, and how to
strike at his vulnerabilities.

The seeds of his Middle Eastern involvement, though, were planted when he was 12
years old and lived in Teheran with his father and namesake.

President Franklin D. Roosevelt tapped Norman Sr., the first superintendent of
the New Jersey State Police and chief investigator in the kidnapping case of
Charles A. Lindbergh's son, to set up and operate the Shah of Iran's new police
force.

Young Schwarzkopf's fascination with the region grew with his rise through the
Army ranks until 1983, when he was charged with helping to develop a military
contingency plan for a Persian Gulf crisis.

In 1988 he took charge of the Central Command, which spans United States
military activities in 19 countries in the Middle East, Africa and the Persian
Gulf, and ordered an overhaul of outdated plans aimed at stopping a Soviet
attack on the Iranian oil fields.

By last April, the Central Command staff began writing contingency plans for
sending 250,000 troops to the gulf to halt an Iraqi invasion of oilfields in the
region.

Born in Trenton

H. Norman Schwarzkopf was born Aug. 22, 1934, in Trenton, N.J. After graduating
42d in a class of 485 at the United States Military Academy in 1956, he joined
the Army as a second lieutenant of infantry. he later earned a master's degree
in guided missile engineering from the University of Southern California.

Highly sensitive to criticism from Congress, the public and the press, General
Schwarzkopf has refrained from making any predictions about the war's duration
that could return to haunt him.

"I don't think it would be fair to mislead the American public and give them any
certain date, short-term or long-term, at this point," he said.

NAME: H. Norman Schwarzkopf

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf with soldiers from the First Infantry
Division in the Saudi desert. The four-star Army general commands more than
500,000 American and allied forces in the Middle East. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 29, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Gail P. Kelly, 51, Dies; Professor of Education

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 215 words


Gail Paradise Kelly, a professor of comparative education at the State
University of New York at Buffalo, died on Friday at Buffalo General Hospital.
She was 51 years old and lived in Buffalo.

She died of cancer, university officials said.

Dr. Kelly, who received a Ph.D. from the University of Wisconsin at Madison, was
chairwoman of the Department of Educational Organization, Administration and
Policy at the university's Graduate School of Education.

A professor of education at SUNY for 16 years, she was the author or editor of
13 books, including such standard texts as "New Approaches to Comparative
Education," (University of Chicago Press, 1986) and "Comparative Education"
(Macmillan Press, 1982). Her book "Vietnam to America" (Westview Press, 1977),
was a serious look at the plight of Vietnamese refugees.

In the early 1960's, she was national secretary of the Student Peace Union, a
group protesting the blockade of Cuba during the 1962 missile crisis.

She is survived by her husband, David Kelly, chairman of the history department
at D'Youville College in Buffalo; two daughters, Jennifer, of Manhattan, and
Elizabeth, of Buffalo; her father, Joseph Paradise of Rye, N.Y.; a sister,
Judith Moskowitz of Manhattan, and a brother, Steven Paradise of Washington.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 29, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: JOURNALISTS;
SAUDIS CRITICIZED ON MISSING CBS MEN

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 368 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Jan. 28


CBS News asserted today that restrictions imposed by the Saudi authorities were
impeding an investigation of the disappearance of a news team near the
Saudi-Kuwait border a week ago.

Saudi officials in the border area have begun rounding up foreign correspondents
who had been trying to cover the front without official permission. About 10
reporters were arrested Sunday and released after their press credentials were
seized. They face possible expulsion from Saudi Arabia.

The missing CBS News crew, which disappeared seven days ago, included Bob Simon,
who covered wars in Vietnam, Central America and the Middle East. With him were
Peter Bluff, a London-based CBS News producer; Roberto Alvarez, an American
cameraman, and Juan Caldera, a Nicaraguan sound man.

Saudi officials told CBS News that tracks had been found leading from the crew's
abandoned car in the direction of Iraqi positions in occupied Kuwait.

"Initially, the Saudi officials were gracious and seemed to want to be helpful,"
said Donald DeCesare, vice president of operations for CBS News. "But in the
following days, we have run into a bureaucratic sandstorm. Each day of inaction
could lessen the chances of our people, who may be in great need of assistance."


Unsupervised Travel Barred

Since Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, Saudi Arabia has forbidden unsupervised travel
by correspondents anywhere in the country.

Late today, Mr. DeCesare said, the Saudi authorities informed him that an Iraqi
defector had seen four foreigners taken into custody by Iraqi troops.

The CBS executive said that he had asked to interview the defector or at least
examine the report of his interrogation, but had been turned down by the Saudis.

Saudi officials also told him that they had decided not to allow CBS
investigators to visit the "restricted" area where Mr. Simon and his colleagues
disappeared.

"The Americans are unwilling to intercede," Mr. DeCesare said, "because of
unwillingness to offend Saudi sensibilities."

"The Iraqi Foreign Ministry insists that it has no knowledge of our crew," he
said. "It may be, of course, that Baghdad's communications with its military
officials in Kuwait have been disrupted."

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 29, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF;
IN OTHER SECTIONS

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 157 words



A CRAZED TYRANT?  A psychological profile drawn by a former adviser to the
United States Government suggests Saddam Hussein is ruthless but not crazy.
Science Times, page C1.

CNN UNDER FIRE Is Peter Arnett, the only American correspondent left in the
Iraqi capital, sending out enemy propaganda, or is he doing the journalist's job
under difficult conditions, or both? Critic's Notebook, page C11.

DEAL ON RESERVES The 21-nation International Energy Agency willstick with its
emergency plan to tap two million barrels of oil a day from Government reserves,
even though supplies are plentiful. Business Day, page D6.

INVESTOR INTEREST Some investors are hoping to make money on the stocks of
companies that may play a role in cleaning up the huge Persian Gulf oil spill.
Page D7.

OUTLOOK ON JOBS The Persian Gulf war is not likely to match the Vietnam War in
breaking down job barriers. Business Scene, page D2.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 29, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 573 words



Companies

While public funds shored up the Bank of New England, the Treasury sharply cut
back similar deposits at Freedom National, thus hastening the collapse of the
minority-owned bank. [Page A1.]

ARCO, Phillips, Unocal, Amerada Hess and Pennzoil reported substantial profit
gains. [D1.]

Boeing reported a fourfold increase in earnings and a sharp rise in sales, but
the stock fell. [D1.]

Apple Computer asked the F.C.C. to set aside radio frequencies to allow PC's to
receive and transmit data without wires. [D2.]

Moody's is reviewing Chrysler's creditworthiness and could lower its rating to
"junk bond" status. [D2.]

Procter & Gamble's operating profit rose 13.2 percent in the second quarter,
helped by sales abroad. [D5.]

McDonald's reported that its net income rose 8.8 percent, to a record $186.2
million, and was up 10.4 percent for all of 1990. [D5.]

Merrill Lynch reported higher earnings, but in the 1989 quarter the firm took a
large restructuring charge. [D8.]

USA Today said it planned to start a new weekly tabloid on April 5 that will be
called USA Today Baseball Weekly. [D19.]

Tonka predicted substantial losses for the quarter and said it had been in talks
about a possible sale of the company. [D5.]

The Daily News met with union negotiators for the first time since it warned of
closing the paper. [B3.]

The Economy

With health-care costs rising, companies and employees are feeling the burden.
Last year, 26 percent of the average company's net earnings went for medical
costs, a survey shows. [D1.]

Personal income ended the year on a buoyant note, rising 0.7 percent in
December, the Commerce Department said. [D1.]

Sweeping proposals to revamp U.S. banking laws will reportedly be offered by
Bush in his State of the Union Message. [A16.]

In New Jersey, owners of subsidized housing are entitled to reduced property
taxes, the state's Supreme Court ruled. [B1.]

Cuomo will propose raising New York State's gasoline tax by 10 cents a gallon.
officials said. [B1.]

International

American companies specializing in oil-spill cleanups are preparing to help
Saudi Arabia. [A11.] Investors hope to make money on the stocks of cleanup
companies. [D7.]

A Japanese Treasury official warned that if the U.S. applied sanctions because
of slowness in opening financial markets, Tokyo would curb credit to the U.S.
[D18.]

Markets

Oil prices eased as traders shrugged off the latest Iraqi missile attacks. Crude
lost 39 cents, to $20.96. [D6.] The International Energy Agency voted to stick
with its plan of tapping two million barrels of oil a day from government
reserves. [D6.]

Smaller stocks continued to show gains, but the Dow fell back slightly in dull
trading, losing 4.95, to 2,654.46. [D10.] Prices of Treasury securities were
narrowly mixed. [D16.]

The dollar drifted lower in thin trading, undermined by a lack of compelling
news about the war. [D17.] Platinum futures prices approached five-year lows.
[D17.]

Today's Columns

Wall Street is again enthusiastic about Collagen, which is moving beyond
products with cosmetic uses. Market Place. [D1.]

This war is never likely to match the way the Vietnam War broke down job
barriers. Louis Uchitelle: Business Scene. [D2.]

As the advertising event of the year, the Super Bowl fell far short of the mark.
Kim Foltz: Advertising. [D19.]

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 29, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: BAGHDAD;
Hussein Hints Use of All His Weapons

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1090 words


President Saddam Hussein said in an interview reported from Baghdad yesterday
that Iraq had maintained its balance in the war thus far by using only
conventional weapons, but that his missiles could deliver chemical, biological
and nuclear weapons. He suggested they would be used if necessary to preserve
his nation.

In his first interview with a Western reporter since the war began on Jan. 17,
the Iraqi President told the CNN correspondent Peter Arnett that allied air
superiority had failed, and insisted that Iraq would win the war, although he
declined to predict its length.

In a wide-ranging, 90-minute talk that Mr. Hussein initiated and that took place
in a bungalow in a Baghdad suburb, he also blamed the United States for the huge
oil spill in the Persian Gulf, skirted questions on Iraqi warplanes flown to
Iran and said Iraq was justified in using allied prisoners of war as human
shields.

Mr. Hussein made no explicit threat to use chemical, biolgical or nuclear
weapons, but was quoted by Mr. Arnett as having said Iraq would use weapons
"equitable" to those used by allied forces. Asked if he meant Iraq would use
such weapons only if they were used by the allies, he said he did not mean that.


No Videotape or Recording

The implication, according to Mr. Arnett, appeared to be that Iraq would use
unconventional weapons if it found its back to the wall. "He said, 'Let's pray
that we don't go that far, that the losses aren't that great.' " Mr. Arnett said
in a late-afternoon broadcast over the Cable News Network.

Mr. Arnett's report on the interview included no videotape of the Iraqi
President and no audio recordings of his comments. Mr. Arnett was accompanied by
his own translator, who rendered into English all of the Iraqi leader's
comments.

The live report was relayed over a telephone-satellite hookup that bypassed
regular telephone circuits in Iraq, but was subject to censorship, as all of Mr.
Arnett's recent reports have been. Mr. Arnett, who is the only correspondent
from a major American news organization left in Baghdad, quoted the Iraqi
President as saying:

"We have maintained our balance using only conventional weapons. We pray that
not a lot of blood will be shed from any nation. We pray we shall not be forced
into taking a forced measure."

For the firs time, Mr. Hussein said the missiles Iraq has been firing at Israel
and Saudi Arabia have the ability to carry chemical, biological or nuclear
warheads. Mr. Arnett said Mr. Hussein "proudly" referred to the weapons as
"al-Hussein missiles."

Iraq is known to have developed chemical and biological weapons, but Western
analysts have questioned whether the Iraqi military could use its Scud-B
missiles to deliver such weapons. Much of the allied air war has been aimed at
knocking out the missiles.

It is unclear whether Iraq has nuclear weapons. Some analysts in the West say
Iraq before the war was a year or two from developing atomic warheads, and
American military officials have said the recent bombing has obliterated any
nuclear abilities Iraq might have had.

'Only God Knows' Duration

Asked how long he believed the war would last, he was quoted as saying: "Only
God knows. Iraq will win the admiration of the world with their fighting
prowess. Lots of blood will be shed, lots of blood. We are referring to blood on
every side, American, French, Saudi blood and Iraqi."

On the possibilty of negotiations to end the war, Mr. Hussein said it was up to
President Bush. But then he said such a dialogue "could only come between the
peoples of the lands of Iraq and in the West and elsewhere in the world."

When asked about American assertions that Iraq had released millions of gallons
of oil in the Persian Gulf, the Iraqi leader suggested that the United States
had released the oil by attacking Iraqi tankers and oil installations.

Thus, he said, if his field commanders used oil as a weapon of self-defense in
the war, "such as trenches filled with burning oil or other techniques," they
would be "justified in taking this action," he was quoted as saying.

To a question about scores of Iraqi aircraft flying to Iranian air fields, he
shed no light on whether the planes were being flown by deserters or perhaps
secretly sheltered by Iran, out of reach of allied warplanes.

Will Planes Be Used Again?

Iraq and Iran are neighboring Muslim countries and despite nearly a decade of
war, both now regard the present war as "a battle between faith and the
infidel," Mr. Hussein said.

Might the planes be used again in the war? "He said in all circumstances we
respect the decisions and regulations of the state of Iran," Mr. Arnett said.

Asked about allied prisoners of war and their use as human shields at targets of
allied planes, contrary to the Geneva Convention, Mr. Hussein said that Iraqi
students were being unfairly interned in the West and that other restrictions
had been placed on Arabs of Iraqi descent.  "Does the Geneva convention allow
Iraqi students to be imprisoned in the West?" he asked.

Mr. Arnett said the President expressed annoyance at what he called
"hypocritical Western politicians" who convinced him last year that he could
preserve peace by freeing Western hostages.

"He said, if we had kept these 5,000 hostages here, would Bush still have
attacked Baghdad?" Mr. Arnett said.

'An Unexpected Meeting'

The interview was apparently initiated by Mr. Hussein. Mr. Arnett called it "an
unexpected meeting," and said he was picked up yesterday by Iraqi security
forces and told he would be taken to see "a senior official."

He said he was driven to a suburban street lined with bungalows. They stopped in
front of one that looked like all the others and went in.

Iraqi television cameras were already there. Mr. Arnett said he waited with
several Iraqi officials for an hour before Mr. Hussein came in. He wore a blue
suit, dress shirt and necktie, and "was very relaxed," Mr. Arnett said.

The Government expelled all other Western reporters at the start of the war. It
has permitted Mr. Arnett to continue filing reports as long as a censor previews
his scripts and sits next to him as he broadcasts.

Mr. Arnett, a 56-year-old native of New Zealand who won a Pulitzer Prize in 1966
for his reports for The Associated Press from Vietnam, has been a correspondent
for more than three decades. He reported from Vietnam for 13 years, from Iran
during the hostage crisis a decade ago, and from Moscow, El Salvador and many
other areas.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Iraqi press agency yesterday released this photograph to
Jordanian newspapers, which it said shows damage in downtown Baghdad as a result
of allied bombing. Iraq did not say when the picture was taken. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 29, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Business Scene;
War Won't Open Too Many Jobs

BYLINE: By Louis Uchitelle

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 834 words


FOR all its divisiveness, the Vietnam War broke down job barriers in ways the
Persian Gulf war is never likely to match.

As the armed forces swelled in size in the late 1960's, men and women who had
not sought work before were drawn into the labor force. The first big civilian
job gains of the civil rights movement came then for blacks, and the rapid entry
of women into jobs also began in this period.

But the Vietnam military buildup coincided with an economic boom and the draft
drained away young men, starting in 1965, just as the civilian sector was
running short of workers. The unemployment rate, as a result, plunged to less
than 4 percent over the next four years, forcing companies to bid for people
they had not previously considered.

"Poverty and joblessness declined across the country," said Paul Osterman, a
labor economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

A quite different experience -- the unfolding of a recession -- has accompanied
the first six months of the gulf crisis, and most Americans expect the war to be
far shorter than the fighting in Vietnam. Unemployment, instead of declining, is
rising much faster than the military buildup. For each of the 180,000 reservists
activated by President Bush since Aug. 2, three other people have joined the
unemployment lines. With the unemployment rate above 6 percent, employers are
not hiring all those who seek jobs, much less those who remain outside the labor
market.

The situation probably would not change even if President Bush activated all of
the 1.15 million men and women in the Reserves and National Guard. A Defense
Department study showed the reservists to be mostly high school graduates, in
their late 20's and 30's, holding a great variety ofjobs: teachers, civil
servants, mechanics, police officers, office workers, self-employed. But if all
1.15 million were to be called to active duty tomorrow and replaced in their
civilian jobs by the unemployed, the jobless rolls would decline only to their
levels of last spring. The unemployment rate then was 5.3 percent.

"The armed forces and the Reserves are too small a number to have any impact,"
said Gregory Weyland, a Census Bureau economist.

Making an impact would require a renewal of the draft, an end to the recession
and months or years of gulf warfare, economists say. Only then might employers
find themselves so short of workers that they would turn to those on the margins
of the labor force, particularly black and Hispanic young people, who stay out
of the labor force in large numbers today, neither holding nor seeking jobs.

The armed forces are still well below the level that set off the influx of
workers into the labor force in the late 1960's. During the Vietnam War, the
military grew to more than 3.4 million people in 1967 and 1968, or 4.3 percent
of the total labor force. That was enough to produce a shortage of civilian
workers, and jobs opened up for millions of womenand minorities, in many cases
in the retail and service industries then beginning to expand.

By comparison, the 2.1 million men and women in the regular armed services today
represent only 1.7 percent of the labor force. If all 1.15 million reservists
were called up, the total in uniform would rise to only 2.8 percent of the labor
force, which is much larger today than in the Vietnam years.

Even the busy Raytheon Corporation, maker of the much-used Patriot missile, is
not hurting for workers. The Defense Department asked the company to speed up
Patriot production at its Andover, Mass., plant, where 6,000 employees produce
Patriots and other missiles. The speed-up has been achieved through overtime and
the hiring of only 250 additional workers, said Edward Powers, a company
spokesman.

Were these skilled missile makers hard to find? "We have had no difficulty,
because other companies in the area have been laying off good people,
particularly the computer companies," Mr. Powers said.

The General Dynamics Corporation and the Grumman Corporation, two other
manufacturers of weaponry widely used in the gulf, also report that skilled
workers are relatively easy to find, although neither has hired additional
workers in response to the gulf crisis.

The ample pools of skilled people would presumably disappear if the war lasted
long enough and the armed forces swelled in size. When this occurred during the
Vietnam War, many employers endorsed federally subsidized job training for
unskilled new workers drawn into the labor force. And the Government obliged
under the Manpower Development and Training Act of 1962.

Most of the subsidized training was later phased out, but a prolonged gulf war
might bring it back, Mr. Osterman said. "The reservists are older, skilled
people embedded in their jobs, so it is hard to think you could replace a
reservist with a 19-year-old dropout," he said. "But if the war were sustained,
there would be a trickle-down effect. People would be trained and would get
hired."

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 29, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK;
Washington Goes to War, Besieging the TV Set

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1281 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 27


In a city where Administration officials do not feel well dressed unless they
are clutching a folder marked "Secret," this has been a frustrating war.

White House officials still pretend to know a lot, of course, and go about
murmuring in hushed, important tones about the latest intelligence information
from the "Sit Room."

The Situation Room is a windowless cell in the White House basement where cables
and telexes and secure faxes come in from military commanders and world leaders
and spies and diplomats. In the era of an electronic war beamed instantaneously
on television to George Bush in the Oval Office, Saddam Hussein in his bunker
and the rest of the world in offices and living rooms, it seems somewhat
outmoded.

The first 11 days of the Persian Gulf war have had the feeling of a surreal
spectator sport here, with the President constantly flicking the television
channels in the study off the Oval Office and with other senior officials
gathered in semicircles with sandwiches around television sets.

"There is a quality of watching the war from an armchair," said Marlin
Fitzwater, the President's spokesman. Unlike other wars, this one has brought no
parade of limousines carrying military brass, diplomats and Cabinet officers to
the White House; most communications move at lightning speed by phone or by
computer.

Journalists who have visited the few lonely diplomats left in the Iraqi Embassy,
ringed with police officers and F.B.I. agents, report that they, too, are
sitting in a semicircle around the television set, watching stories of war and
terrorism.

Robert M. Gates, the deputy national security adviser, has found the obsessive
television watching at the White House so distracting -- and perhaps diminishing
to the myth of privileged information -- that he refuses to even turn on his
office television set now, loyally waiting for the reports from the Situation
Room.

But even that top-secret intelligence, widely presumed to be fuller and more
accurate, has been infected by the television coverage.

"The problem is that it's hard to sort out the information because the CNN stuff
has a way of trickling into the intelligence," another Bush adviser said,
referring to Cable News Network, the potent new entry in Washington's alphabet
soup. "We get the intelligence reports, and they include the stuff that's on
CNN. Then we get another report that seems to confirm what the first report
said, but it turns out that they're just using a later CNN broadcast. CNN
confirming CNN."

Bush and the Drumbeats

After the tocsin of war come the drums of war.

"Those damned drums are keeping me up all night," the President told a gathering
of Republicans on Friday.

The antiwar protesters camped in Lafayette Park across the street from the White
House have been beating a drum round the clock since the war began, like an
Edgar Allan Poe heartbeat intended to pierce the President's conscience as he
sleeps in a room above Pennsylvania Avenue.

But unlike Lyndon Johnson, who used to stare out the window of the White House
at the Vietnam War protesters and say, in anguished tones, "Why are they doing
this to me?" Mr. Bush, while he may not like the noise, is unfazed by the
sentiment.

White House officials like to say the President is the calmest man in
Washington, and there is some truth to that. Unlike politicians like Mario Cuomo
and Jimmy Carter, President Bush is not a very introspective man, and he is not
one who likes to explore moral gray areas. Once a decision is made, he never
looks back. Every time Saddam Hussein orders a military action to cause
psychological terror the President feels even more confident.

"Maybe this will help everyone realize why this guy needs to be stopped," he
told aides after the first Iraqi Scud missiles hit Israel.

The rest of the White House may be engaging in wild mood swings as officials try
to determine whether the deepening conflict will buoy the President or destroy
him.

But except for an angry outburst over the tapes of allied prisoners of war, Mr.
Bush's mood has stayed relatively stable, causing a daily problem for his press
secretary, Mr. Fitzwater, who spends a lot of time at his morning staff meeting
trying to decide on new "mood words" for reporters eager to know how the
President is holding up.

"I've used rested and resolute, " Mr. Fitzwater mused. "Calm and resigned.
Determined and vigilant. Steady and strong."

Mr. Fitzwater will sometimes pick up the beige phone with the Presidential seal
on his desk and the President will be on the other end, asking in a teasing
tone: "So, Marlin, I see you had me 'steeled' yesterday. What mood am I in
today?"

Old Acronyms Will Do

Washington's jump from provincial to boom town came a few wars ago. This time
there is no need of new agencies or new acronyms. As David Brinkley noted in his
memoir, "Washington Goes to War," World War II spawned "the O.P.C., W.P.B.,
O.P.A., W.M.C., B.E.W., N.W.L.B., O.D.T., W.S.A., O.C.D., O.E.M. and many
others."

"One office, issuing wartime regulations for plumbers, was the
P.W.P.G.S.J.S.I.S.I.A.C.W.P.B."

Mr. Brinkley talked about the sight of the antiaircraft guns atop Government
buildings. They looked impressive but were mostly for show; many were wooden
copies, and the ones that were real had stacks of ammunition the wrong size
behind them.

On the surface, everything seems fairly normal in the capital. Washington is not
yet the tense, divided city it became at the end of the Vietnam years. There is
still a sense of unreality, with occasional epiphanies of horror and confusion.

Politicians here are still working out how they feel and how much they can
criticize without seeming disloyal to the President in time of war.

Democrats in the Senate dining room privately grumble about published reports of
draft-age Kuwaitis lounging around Cairo discos and about Prince Bandar bin
Sultan, the Saudi Ambassador to the United States, spending his Christmas
holiday at his new 55,000-square-foot, 28-bedroom house in Aspen.

The immediacy of the television war and the threats of terrorism have left
people feeling tired and jittery.

Brent Scowcroft, the President's hard-working national security adviser, who is
famous for catnapping in the Oval Office and even standing against walls, has
taken to outright sleeping on his couch.

"During the Vietnam War," a top Bush adviser said about the menace of terrorism,
"people never thought there was the remotest chance that the North Vietnamese
could actually reach out and touch someone."

There are new concrete barriers outside the Senate office buildings, the wooden
shutters are drawn over the windows of Congressional leaders on the first floor
of the Capitol and the Capitol Hill police are now carrying shotguns. Some White
House officials with corner offices have taken to keeping their blinds down.

White House staff members have been told not to leave the schedules of the
President and Vice President lying around on desks and to consider taking
alternative routes to work. Members of Congress have been briefed on how to
protect themselves from the threat of letter bombs.

People who enter the Capitol must remove their overcoats now, to be checked, and
clean-up crews have been removing packages and furniture from halls there and in
other government buildings.

The President's State of the Union address to Congress on Tuesday night has set
off the tightest security preparations in years. The streets within a four-block
area of the Capitol will be closed off during the speech and devices that detect
explosive materials by "sniffing" enzymes in the air have been installed.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Antiwar protesters in Lafayette Park across the street from the
White House have been beating a drum around the clock since the war began.
"Those damned drums are keeping me up all night," President Bush told a
gathering of Republicans last Friday. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 29, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

American to Share 'Saigon' Lead

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 311 words


An Asian-American actress will play a leading role on Broadway in "Miss Saigon"
after all -- but only some of the time.

Cameron Mackintosh, the producer of the hit London musical, announced yesterday
that Kam Cheng, a 21-year-old student at Muhlenberg College in Allentown, Pa.,
would share the role of Kim, a Vietnamese bar girl, with Lea Salonga, the
19-year-old Filipino actress who created the part.

Early this month, a union-management arbitrator ruled that Miss Salonga could
re-create the character on Broadway because she had unique talent. Mr.
Mackintosh had asked Actors' Equity to approve Miss Salonga, but the union
refused, saying that an Asian-American actress should have the opportunity to
star on Broadway, and the producer took the matter to arbitration.

Mr. Mackintosh had said all along that he wanted Miss Salonga to share the part
with another actress, as she did in London. A statement released by Mr.
Mackintosh yesterday said only that Miss Cheng would play the role "at certain
performances." A spokesman for the producer said it was uncertain how the eight
weekly performances would be divided between the two actresses.

Miss Cheng, who grew up in Sewell, N.J., has appeared in several productions at
Muhlenberg; she has also performed in "The Mikado" and "The Emperor's
Nightingale" at the Muhlenberg Summer Music Festival.

The $10 million musical, which begins performances March 23 and is to open April
11 at the Broadway Theater, has a record advance ticket sale of more than $34
million.

Rehearsals began yesterday for the musical, which tells of the love between an
American marine and a Vietnamese bar girl during and after the fall of Saigon in
1975. In addition to the British actor Jonathan Pryce as the Engineer, a
Eurasian pimp, the cast includes Willy Falk, Hinton Battle, Liz Callaway and
Barry Bernal.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 29, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook: CNN in Baghdad: Danger of Propaganda Vs. Virtue of
Reporting

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1268 words


The Cable News Network, which began its coverage of the Persian Gulf war with
exciting accounts of the first air raids on Baghdad and has attracted a large
audience with carpet coverage, has run into flak from officials, competitors and
viewers. Some people are taking aim at the general quality of CNN reporting, but
the heaviest criticism has been directed at Peter Arnett's Iraqi-supervised
dispatches from Baghdad. His latest exclusive was an interview yesterday with
President Saddam Hussein in a bungalow in a suburb of Baghdad.

Is Mr. Arnett, the only American correspondent left in the Iraqi capital,
sending out enemy propaganda, or is he doing the journalist's job under
difficult conditions, or both? Should he stay at his post or leave Iraq?

At his every appearance, Mr. Arnett and CNN remind viewers of the restrictions
placed on him by his "very amiable" official watchers, but his reports still
suit Baghdad better than Washington. Marlin Fitzwater, the White House
spokesman; Gen. Colin L. Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and
Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the commander of the American forces, took
particular exception to last week's description of a two-hour guided visit
"through a powdered-milk factory that makes actually infant formula," which
Iraqi officials said had been destroyed by American bombing. General Powell
stated, "It is not an infant-formula factory." What was it? "It was a
biological-weapons facility, of that we are sure."

Perhaps in a wink to his audience, Mr. Arnett noted in his report that "The
intact signboard at the entrance to the factory read 'Baby Milk Plant' in
English and in Arabic." He did not follow up with a survey of how many other
Iraqi factory signs are written in English for the assistance of the invited
reporter. Iraqi information officials cannot be charged with sublety. Another
picture, either supplied or approved by them, showed a man wearing a jacket that
had a similar inscription stenciled across the back; one imagined that his own
name, say Hank, was printed on the front pocket and he was on his way to join
the other guys from the Iraqi-American Chamber of Commerce bowling team for a
night out.

The Hussein interview gave the Iraqi ruler an opportunity to restate his
certainty of victory, to suggest that he might use unconventional weapons if
forced and to express gratitude to "noble souls" in the West who have been
demonstrating against the war. Mr. Arnett's efforts to press for specifics were
unavailing.  Hearing directly from President Hussein was news, but the content
could have come just as easily from his usual spokesman.

For four days in a row, Mr. Arnett told of being taken on what he called "guided
tours" to "what Iraqi officials described as nonmilitary targets" that had been
hit by bombs. At one stop, he was told, and told viewers, that 24 civilians had
been killed; he said he had counted 23 destroyed buildings. An Iraqi videotape
showed debris, including a framed photograph of a child. (The camera's affection
for photographs of children amid rubble knows no nationality; they could be
found in scenes from Scud-struck Tel Aviv neighborhoods, too.) The Pentagon
responded that a munitions depot, a chemical-warfare facility and a military
communications site were in the area. While not disputing that, Mr. Arnett said
he saw only homes and a technical school.

On Saturday he told of hits near Iraqi holy places (at one point, apparently in
a slip, he said they had been targeted), and on Sunday he recounted interviews
with a surgeon and injured civilians. It may be taken as a given that Mr. Arnett
is being allowed to stay on in Baghdad to serve Iraqi interests. Perhaps as an
expression of appreciation, the Iraqi Government is allowing a CNN producer and
television crew into the country with a satellite transmitting device that will
send back live pictures. CBS, NBC and ABC have been denied visas; Iraq is
evidently satisfied with CNN. The question is whether the cable network is also
performing a service for viewers.

I think so. As long as CNN and Mr. Arnett continue to acknowledge the conditions
under which he has to work, there is some value in hearing and possibly seeing
what he is allowed to see. It is news that Mr. Arnett has seen damage to a
residential neighborhood; American viewers are not likely to learn that from
Washington. And even if that factory was making biological weapons, it is news
that Iraq says it was a milk plant.

Propaganda can be news. ABC's decision not to run pictures of captured American
pilots uttering what looked like coerced statements of opposition to the war
seems a touch over-delicate for journalism. The news department's job is not to
suppress disagreeable material but to put it in pespective. When it comes to
allegations about civilian targets, Pentagon officials have plenty of
opportunity to set the record straight, assuming it is crooked.

Although Mr. Arnett's reports concentrate heavily on damage to what he describes
as residential neighborhoods and any scoops provided by the Iraqis are best
received through gas masks, he has also been noting whether shops are open and
traffic is moving and has been passing along glimpses of the extent to which
life in Iraq is going on more or less as usual.  That is about all the
television audience can obtain from enemy ground for now, and it is better than
nothing. A further consideration: His reports, though inherently skewed, may
help counter the us-against-them assumptions in some reporting from Washington
and Saudi Arabia.

The argument for his staying on, though strong, has unfortunately assumed a
promotional aspect. Viewers have been reminded more than once by CNN that Mr.
Arnett reported from Hanoi during the Vietnam War. And Mr. Arnett himself has
said things like, "I've been in much more dangerous situations in my career" and
"I'm with CNN, a great international news organization, and they should have
someone here, and I'm here."

Despite the posturing, however, Mr. Arnett is on solid journalistic ground. As
he has noted, reports from Saudi Arabia and Israel are censored, too. Granted,
American and Israeli officials are constrained by their countries' traditions,
journalists' enterprise and some public sophistication from exerting as heavy a
hand as the Iraqis can; still, war means censorship. Manipulation of information
is a weapon available to all sides.

As for CNN's overall performance, it has not been as seasoned as that of the
major networks. Criticism from other networks that CNN reporting is not entirely
dependable has been dismissed by John Holliman, who was part of the original CNN
team in Baghdad, as mere envy. But CNN is in fact by no means consistently up to
the competition.

A few correspondents, like Wolf Blitzer at the Pentagon, are of the first rank,
but others seem shaky. Reaching for words to describe one of last week's air
raids in Israel, the CNN man could find nothing better than repeating "scary."
And there is an ingenuous air to many of the exchanges between anchors and
correspondents; Mr. Arnett has probably got used to being asked questions that
have little purpose other than to keep him talking until the telephone
connection fades.

Still, the cable channel continues to do its unique job of covering everything
it can all the time, and Mr. Arnett is properly part of that mission. So
appreciation is in order, but so is Samuel Johnson's crack about a dog's walking
on his hind legs: "It is not done well; but you are surprised to find it done at
all."

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Peter Arnett's Iraqi-supervised reports from Baghdad have drawn
not only large audiences to CNN's coverage of the war but criticism as well.
(CNN)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Investment in Vietnam

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section D; Page 7; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 58 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Jan. 29


British companies led the list of countries that invested a total of $1.47
billion in 217 joint ventures in Vietnam last year, an official newspaper said
on Monday. The daily newspaper Nhan Dan said British companies invested $145
million, followed by France with $93 million and Belgium, the Netherlands and
Luxembourg with $71 million each.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Military Gives Big Role To Civilian Technicians

BYLINE: By RICHARD W. STEVENSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 992 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Jan. 29


As they wage war on Iraq, the United States and its allies are relying heavily
on civilian employees sent to the Persian Gulf by military contractors to
provide technical expertise in maintaining the world's most advanced weapons,
industry executives and military officials said.

Industry executives estimate that there are about 1,000 contractor employees at
air bases, on aircraft carriers and at other military installations in the
region. Companies declined to specify how many employees they have in the gulf,
citing security concerns, but the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, the Raytheon
Company, the Lockheed Corporation and almost every other major contractor
confirmed having at least some workers on the scene.

The employees are the 1990's high-technology version of civilian personnel who
have long flocked to jobs in war zones. If the need in Vietnam was for engineers
and laborers to build airfields and ports, the need in Saudi Arabia is for
technicians to maintain sophisticated radar, navigation, guidance and
communications systems and the other hardware and software that make modern
planes, missiles, bombs and sensors work as advertised.

More Complex Systems

Arms makers have dispatched technical representatives to wars where their
weapons were deployed at least since the Vietnam War. But the complexity of the
new weapons of the gulf war, like the Patriot and Tomahawk missiles, and the
fact that many advanced weapons have never been used in combat, has increased
the need for industry support.

The primary role of the personnel is to assist military technicians in
diagnosing and solving problems with weapons systems and in assessing and
repairing battle damage. In some cases, companies are under contract to provide
support services directly to Saudi Arabia's military as well as to American
forces.

Several companies said their employees had had extremely heavy workloads as the
United States and allied forces continued their constant air attacks on Iraq.

"You can be sure they're pretty busy," said Michael Burch, a spokesman for
McDonnell Douglas. Mr. Burch said the company's personnel were generally present
wherever there were McDonnell Douglas weapons systems, like the Air Force's F-15
fighters and the Navy's ship-based Tomahawk missiles.

New and Untested

Industry executives said the military relies heavily on contractor personnel
when a weapons system is relatively new and untested in combat, as is the case
with many weapons systems in the gulf. In those cases, military technicians may
have limited experience in dealing with any problems that may arise with
increasingly complex electronics systems. Raytheon, for example, is known to
have sent technical representatives to aid military personnel in installing and
maintaining the Patriot anti-missile system both in Saudi Arabia and in Israel.

Lockheed said it had a number of employees stationed in Saudi Arabia with the
F-117A Stealth fighters made by the company. E-Systems Inc., a Dallas-based
military contractor, is believed to have employees in the gulf supporting
missions flown by the TR-1 and RC-135 reconnaissance planes, analysts say. The
Hughes Aircraft Company, a unit of the General Motors Corporation, has "a few
dozen people over there," said Richard Dore, a spokesman. Hughes makes missiles,
radar systems, night-vision and targeting equipment and other gear.

"In these types of situations, if something does develop, the Defense Department
and the people in the field understandably want immediate assistance," Mr. Dore
said. "The Government has a lot of good people of its own there, but it helps to
have someone from the team that built it."

Request From the Navy

Richard Vance, the director of field operations for the Grumman Corporation's
aircraft division, said the Navy had for some years been trying to reduce its
dependence on contractor employees on aircraft carriers by building technical
and trouble-shooting expertise among its own seamen. But he said the Navy
requested more help last year after Iraq invaded Kuwait and the American
military buildup in the gulf began.

"There's a desire to have as much expertise there as possible," Mr. Vance said.
Grumman makes the carrier-based F-14 fighter and A-6 bomber, among other
weapons.

While the employees are not armed and remain well behind the front lines,
industry executives said they were at risk like anyone else attached to a
military installation during a war.

"Are we concerned? You bet," Mr. Vance said.

Advance Agreements

Most contractors agree to provide support services as part of their contract to
build a weapon. The companies recruit technical representatives from among their
own employees and from among former military personnel, and most agree in
advance to go to a war zone if needed.

Industry executives declined to discuss the pay scale. Mr. Dore said that in a
war, Hughes employees on the scene received their regular pay, plus an amount
equivalent to whatever differential the military pays soldiers for combat duty.
The differential ranges from 10 percent to 40 percent of base salary, depending
on how close the employee is to the front lines.

Contractor representatives are in regular communication with engineers and
technicians at company plants in the United States. "If the F-15E is
experiencing problems that are not normal, the tech rep gets in touch with the
factory, anytime day or night," said Mr. Burch of McDonnell Douglas.

Industry executives said that the Pentagon had been pushing in recent years to
reduce the amount and complexity of the maintenance needed for its weapons. As a
result, contractors expect the role of their employees in future conflicts to
decline.

"In ordering new airplanes, the Pentagon has given manufacturers high goals to
meet in terms of reliability and maintainability," said James Ragsdale, a
spokesman for Lockheed's aircraft division.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Ethiopia Talks to Resume, Under U.S. Leadership

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 786 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 29


The United States will mediate the first formal peace talks between Ethiopia and
Eritrean separatist guerrillas in more than a year in London next month in an
effort to end 30 years of civil strife, Administration officials said today.

The American officials said the Soviet Union pressed Addis Ababa to enter into
the negotiations, an indication, they said, that Moscow was still ready to
coordinate its diplomacy with Washington to resolve civil wars in the developing
world.

A State Department official involved in making policy concerning Ethiopia said
the Administration was hopeful that the Soviet Union would join future rounds of
talks as co-chairman or observer.

The official said the Soviets might have taken part in the first round, had it
not been for the deep suspicions of the Eritrean rebels, who believe that they
would have won independence for their coastal province long ago, had it not been
for the Soviet military support of the national Government in Addis Ababa.

The announcement in Addis Ababa of the talks suggested that both the Government
of Lieut. Col. Mengistu Haile Mariam, the Ethiopian President, and the Eritrean
People's Liberation Front have concluded that neither can win the conflict by
military means.

War Plus Famine

Colonel Mengistu faces a daunting combination -- two insurgencies, famine, and
substantial reductions in aid from Eastern Europe, while the rebels can no
longer rely on either Iraq, their principal foreign supplier, or their main
supply route through the Sudan, which is left vulnerable by civil war there.

The precise dates of the talks have not yet been scheduled.

The war between the Government and the Eritreans has raged on and off since
1962, leaving hundreds of thousands dead and millions more as refugees. The
combat intensified last year as the Eritreans captured the port of Massawa and
encircled the province capital, Asmara. Peace talks mediated by former President
Jimmy Carter broke off in December 1989, when Colonel Mengistu rejected a rebel
proposal to include a United Nations observer in the negotiations.

Washington and Moscow then entered the diplomatic void, a joint effort to
prevent severe famine that accompanies stepped-up fighting. Under their joint
pressure, the Government agreed last month to allow United Nations relief
supplies to enter rebel-held Massawa. Administration officials speculated that
Colonel Mengistu signaled that he was ready to compromise in talks by
effectively pledging not to try to retake the port.

Girma Amare, the Ethiopian charge d'affaires in Washington, said his Government
was seeking a "lasting peace within the framework of Ethiopian unity." He said
some form of autonomy for Eritrea could be "the subject of discussion."

"We would like to hope we are closer to peace but it is too early to tell," said
Tesfai Ghermazien, an Eritrean rebel representative in Washington. But he added,
"We don't accept the participation of the Soviet Union as long as they keep on
advising and providing military supplies to the regime."

U.S. and Soviet Interests

While the Soviet Union has cut its support, it still provides Addis Ababa with
$750 million in annual military aid and hundreds of military advisers, United
States officials say.

Nevertheless, a State Department official said Moscow's blessing for the
Ethiopian talks reinforced the impression that despite the comeback of
hard-liners in the Soviet Union and the crackdown in the Baltic republics, the
Kremlin still seeks political settlements of civil wars in Ethiopia and Angola.

A second State Department official said the Soviets continue to press the
Angolan Government to negotiate a settlement with the United States-backed Unita
guerrillas, noting that Washington and Moscow agreed to a single mediation
position early in January that includes a international-monitored cease-fire
that would lead to free elections.

Other Administration officials, however, cautioned that the Soviets are proving
progressively less helpful in ending the civil wars in Afghanistan and Cambodia,
where they also support Governments that are opposed by rebels supported by
Washington.

An Administration official monitoring Afghanistan said the Soviets in recent
talks with United States officials had hardened their position of supporting
President Najibullah in an interim Government during a proposed election
campaign.

The United States has insisted that Mr. Najibullah give up his control over the
military and intelligence services.

Other United States officials said decreasing Soviet interest in Southeast Asia
had encouraged Vietnam in recent months to stiffen its support for the Hun Sen
Govenment in Cambodia.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

House Backs Aid for Agent Orange Victims

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 168 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 29


On a vote of 412 to 0, the House of Representatives sent to the Senate today a
bill to insure that Vietnam veterans suffering from certain illnesses because of
exposure to Agent Orange receive permanent disability benefits.

The Senate is expected to pass the bill handily, and the White House said today
that President Bush supported it.

Agent Orange is a herbicide that was sprayed by American forces in Vietnam to
deny jungle cover to North Vietnamese troops and their Viet Cong allies. Many
veterans contend that it is responsible for cancers, birth defects in their
offspring and other ailments.

The bill would establish as law what until now has been an administrative
program of providing benefits. Under it, Vietnam veterans who suffer from
non-Hodgkin's disease lymphoma and soft-tissue sarcoma would be assured of
permanent disability benefits, as would the veterans' survivors. Veterans who
developed chloracne within one year of their military service in Vietnam would
also be eligible.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

STATE OF THE UNION: The President;
President, in State of Union Talk, Dwells on War and the Economy

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1498 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 29


In a State of the Union Message to a nation burdened with war and recession,
President Bush promised tonight that the "indomitable" American character would
overcome Saddam Hussein abroad and economic troubles at home.

"If we can selflessly confront the evil for the sake of good in a land so far
away, then surely we can make this land all that it should be," the President
told a joint session of Congress. "If anyone tells you America's best days are
behind her, they're looking the wrong way." [Transcript of the address, page
A12.]

In a speech intended less to offer a new domestic agenda than to explain the war
with Iraq and give courage to Americans fearful of a long and bloody conflict,
the President harked back to images of the years leading up to World War II.

"Together, we have resisted the trap of appeasement, cynicism and isolation that
gives temptation to tyrants," he said.

Relations With Moscow

The President spoke in measured, sober tones, a contrast to his first State of
the Union Message, in which Mr. Bush spoke triumphantly of "Communism crumbling"
and of a new relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union.

Today he spoke of challenges in the new superpower understanding in light of the
Soviet crackdown in the Baltic republics and war in the gulf. The President's
speech followed three days of talks between the United States and the Soviet
Union, in which each side offered signs of flexibility on those issues. [Page
A3.]

Mr. Bush offered economic reassurance in his speech by referring to the
recession as a temporary interruption of economic growth. Among the few domestic
initiatives were a proposal to eliminate the political action committees that
provide a large measure of the money for election campaigns, a promise to offer
legislation that would reform the nation's banking system, and a renewal of
efforts to reduce the tax rate on profits from investments.

For Mr. Bush, who generally shuns the formality of prime-time televised
appearances, the nationally broadcast speech had political significance beyond
the annual ritual of giving a report on the condition of the nation. He became
the first President since the Vietnam War to deliver the State of the Union
Message while the country was at war.

Measuring the Worth of the War

The President's 50-minute talk was interrupted more than 40 times by applause.
He drew standing ovations when he praised the American forces in the Persian
Gulf and when he introduced the wives of General Colin L. Powell, Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, commander of gulf
forces.

"Each of us will measure, within ourselves, the value of this great struggle,"
Mr. Bush said of the gulf war. "Any cost in lives -- any cost -- is beyond our
power to measure. But the cost of closing our eyes to aggression is beyond
mankind's power to imagine."

For Americans who worry that the United States is shouldering too much of the
burden of expelling Iraq from Kuwait, Mr. Bush said that "as Americans, we know
there are times when we must step forward, and accept our responsibility to lead
the world away from the dark chaos of dictators."

"This we do know," he concluded, to applause from both the Republican and
Democratic sides of the aisle. "Our cause is just. Our cause is moral. Our cause
is right."

In the Democratic response that followed Mr. Bush's speech, Senator George J.
Mitchell, the Majority Leader, struck right at what the Democrats consider the
great vulnerability of the President, that he is too consumed by the Persian
Gulf to pay attention to "the crisis" on the domestic front.

Trying to Quell Recession Fears

In the face of criticism that the costly war is taking resources away from
domestic matters, President Bush tried to outline domestic programs that would
provide a "forward-looking plan of action" and sought to quell fears about a
prolonged recession.

Speaking of the recession, Mr. Bush said that "the largest peacetime economic
expansion in history has been temporarily interrupted." But he vowed that "we
will get this recession behind us and return to growth -- soon."

Mr. Bush, whose criticisms of the Federal Reserve have so far been mild compared
to those of previous Presidents, engaged in some arm twisting on interest rates.
"Sound banks should be making more sound loans, now, and interest rates should
be lower, now," he said. In the Administration's view the central bank has been
slow to lower rates.

Mr. Bush tried to mitigate the political impact of the capital gains tax-cut
issue, which sharply divided Democrats and Republicans last year. He called for
the formation of a commission headed by the chairman of the Federal Reserve
Board, Alan Greenspan, that would resolve differences over the economic impact
of such a tax cut. Mr. Greenspan, who as a private economist was chairman of the
Presidential commission in the early 1980's that established the current payroll
tax structure for Social Security, has said he would like to see a lower capital
gains tax rate.

Mr. Bush also revived other tax proposals that died in 1990, including tax-free
family savings accounts and penalty-free withdrawals from retirement accounts
for first-time home buyers. Echoing a favorite theme of the Reagan
Administration, Mr. Bush proposed the establishment of $15 billion in block
grants to states that the individual governments could then use as they think
best.

Deliberate Domestic Ambiguity

Administration officials said the speech was made deliberately ambiguous on
domestic policy in an effort to continue to put off debates between the White
House and the Democrats in Congress, and within the Republican Party, and to
straddle differences on the nation's direction.

The speech also reflected the victory of Richard G. Darman, the White House
budget director, in a power struggle with junior White House staff members who
wanted the President to reach out in a more dramatic way to offer the nation's
poor ways to help themselves.

The speech contained a few vague references to what the junior staff members
call "empowerment" programs, but Mr. Bush did not use that word, which is
currently fashionable among some young conservatives. He called for "a plan of
action right here at home to put more power and opportunity in the hands of the
individual," but the President offered only general descriptions of programs
that would offer incentives to create jobs and help tenants buy public housing.

Weapons Highlighted

In the sections of his speech referring to the war, Mr. Bush highlighted the
performance of the high-tech weapons tonight as a way of rallying Americans to
the cause. White House officials, obsessively watching the course of the war,
have tried to present all developments in the best possible light.

Noting the success of the Patriot missile in shooting down Iraqi Scud missiles,
President Bush proposed a major shift in emphasis of the Strategic Defense
Initiative program, the space-oriented missile defense known as Star Wars. He
said that it should be designed not only to protect against intercontinental
ballistic missiles but also to shoot down shorter-range missiles like the Iraqi
Scuds.

"Looking forward, I have directed that the S.D.I. program be refocused on
providing protection from limited ballistic missile strikes, whatever their
source," Mr. Bush said. "Let us pursue an S.D.I. program that can deal with any
future threat to the United States, to our forces overseas, and to our friends
and allies."

With the Kremlin's crackdown on the independence movements in the Baltic
republics shaded Mr. Bush offered a marked change from last year's upbeat
assessment of the United States relationship with the Soviet Union.

The President, who has been criticized for not speaking out more strongly on the
Baltic issue for fear of upsetting the Soviet arm of the international alliance
against Iraq, made it clear that he did not intend to forsake the personal
relationship with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, which Mr. Bush values so
highly and which is critical to his concept of the "new world order."

"The principle that has guided us is simple," Mr. Bush said. "Our objective is
to help the Baltic peoples achieve their aspirations, not to punish the Soviet
Union.

"In our recent discussions with the Soviet leadership," he added, "we have been
given representations, which, if fulfilled, would result in the withdrawal of
some Soviet forces, a re-opening of dialogue with the Republics, and a move away
from violence."

In the Democratic response, Senator Mitchell offered support for the President's
Persian Gulf policies but added: "As critical as the Gulf conflict is, the other
business of the nation won't wait. The President says he seeks a new world
order. We ask him to join us in putting our own house in order. We have a crisis
abroad but we also have a crisis here at home."

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush as he delivered his State of the Union Message
last night. Behind him was the Speaker of the House, Thomas S. Foley. (pg. A1);
Barbara Bush wavinga cane as she acknowledged applause last night in the House
Gallery before her husband's speech. She was flanked by Alma Powell, left, wife
of Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Brendas
Schwarzkopf, wife of Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, commander of the allied forces
in the Persian Gulf. (pg. A13) (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Bumbling Backward From the Summit

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 372 words


Diplomatic silence is no substitute for frank talk. Instead of going to Moscow
and telling Mikhail Gorbachev how Americans feel about repression in the Baltics
and regression on reform, President Bush has regrettably chosen to duck, and
delay a summit meeting until the spring.

The diplomatic niceties were observed. Secretary of State Baker never mentioned
the Baltics or Moscow's pledge to withdraw troops and resume dialogue. Foreign
Minister Bessmertnykh acknowledged the common U.S.-Soviet interests in the
Persian Gulf. And both sides stuck to official pretexts for the postponement. It
was awkward for the President to leave Washington with the war on, and the
strategic arms accord isn't quite ready for signing yet. These points have only
superficial plausibility.

After all, President Nixon found it possible to meet Leonid Brezhnev in Moscow
in May 1972 even with the Vietnam War raging. And after two years of dithering,
the final details of a strategic arms accord could easily have been worked out
had there been a will to do so.

There's no denying that Mr. Gorbachev's Soviet Union has slipped into reverse.
The tumultuous turnaround won't be over by spring, and who will ultimately hold
power is uncertain. Meanwhile, it would surely be preferable to bind any future
Soviet regime by wrapping up Start talks promptly.

Delay may suit hard-liners in Moscow's military who feel the diplomats gave away
too much. It also may satisfy unreconstructed cold warriors in Washington who
distrust any deals with Moscow. But even they recognize that neither side can
now afford many more nuclear weapons. And everyone else would be better off if
the two sides began dismantling their nuclear arsenals.

There is an appropriate response to Mr. Gorbachev's new repression: Hold up aid
to the Soviet Union. That would be an unmistakable sign of American disapproval.

After all the ups and downs, why can't the United States and Soviet Union
finally have a mature relationship? They have many common interests. At summit
talks these could be served, even as the two Governments speak frankly about
their very real differences. That meeting is best scheduled soon, and a Start
treaty completed even sooner.



LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Don't Bash the Messenger

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 272 words


War reporting is a perilous calling in which important or unwelcome information
can be ungratefully received. The peril was underscored by the disappearance
last week of the CBS correspondent Bob Simon and three members of his television
crew near the Kuwaiti border. And the ungrateful reception was reflected in
White House displeasure with reports from Baghdad by Peter Arnett of CNN, the
only correspondent for a U.S. news organization still in that city.

However limited and one-sided Mr. Arnett's accounts from Iraq must necessarily
be, the White House ignores the value in such independent reports of what its
adversary wants the world to believe. Mr. Arnett won a Pulitzer Prize in
Vietnam. He knows the chaos of war, and how to cope with propaganda. His
coverage is subject to censorship, as he repeatedly reminds CNN viewers. But his
accounts of what he is and isn't shown are valuable supplements to the allied
version of the war.

Despite heavy bombing, civilian casualties have not been extensive, or so it
would appear from the limited damage that Mr. Arnett has reported. A week ago he
was taken on a tour of a devastated "baby formula" factory that the White House
contends is a biological weapons plant. If so, then allied targeters should
welcome evidence of their accuracy; in any case, his viewers were amply warned
not to take Baghdad's version at face value.

It takes more than average courage to remain in a hostile capital, risking death
from friendly fire or arrest by an obsessively suspicious host. Mr. Arnett, and
the CNN camera crew that is soon to join him, deserve praise, not opprobrium.


LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
The Key to Unity

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 746 words


A nation divided only a few weeks ago has become a nation largely united in
support of the war in the Persian Gulf. Can that unity be maintained? History
suggests that it won't be easy.

The opening of hostilities naturally silenced much of the opposition, as
patriotic Americans -- whatever their prewar sentiment -- closed ranks behind
the war effort and those endangered by it. Saddam Hussein then brought further
American hostility against himself with his missile attacks on Israeli
civilians, his displays of coerced contrition from captured American fliers and
his environmentally disastrous oil discharge into the gulf.

The success of the air assault on Iraq, though overstated in the first days of
the war, also encouraged Americans -- some to reassurance in the accomplishments
of U.S. technology and military forces, others to euphoric fantasies about a
quick and relatively bloodless war.

If, however, as the Pentagon now suggests, a ground war is inevitable, and if
that war proves lengthy, bloody and destructive -- as some but not all analysts
believe it will -- early American support for the war could fade, as it did in
Korea and Vietnam. Anti-war demonstrations in Washington and elsewhere show that
substantial domestic opposition remains; and as anti-war opinion continues to be
displayed worldwide, American dissidence could be encouraged and enlarged.

The gravest threat to unity, however, may be neither hard-core dissent nor a
long and costly war. Americans showed in the central event of their history, the
Civil War, and later in World War II, that they can support the most horrendous
combat, through the most discouraging disasters, if they believe in the value of
what they're asked to do.

That's the problem. Judged by Korea and Vietnam, the lack of a clear-cut, widely
accepted and easily understood war aim may be the factor that could undermine
American unity in the gulf war. In Korea, once the Chinese intervened, the war
became to many Americans a "no-win" struggle with no obvious victory envisioned;
in Indochina, three Presidents failed to convince the public that the U.S. was
fighting for justifiable goals obtainable at an acceptable price in lives and
money.

The abstract aim of resisting aggression, and even the specific one of driving
Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait, may not be enough to maintain American resolve
through a lengthy ground war and extensive casualty lists. Suppose, moreover,
the U.S.-led alliance succeeds at length and at high cost in clearing Kuwait of
Iraqis; does President Bush, having satisfied his U.N. mandate, then call off
the war?

A more satisfying war aim and -- in view of Saddam Hussein's demonstrated
ferocity -- a more popular purpose would be to defeat him totally, end his
regime, bring him to trial as a war criminal and destroy Iraq's aggressive
potential. If proclaimed by President Bush, that goal might sustain war at any
cost; it surely would be more in keeping with Americans' traditional desire, in
wartime, for total victory over an opponent who can be perceived as savagely
evil.

But if that were to become the asserted U.S. war aim, it would surely have a
divisive effect among the Arab-state allies -- even perhaps in Saudi Arabia, the
defense of which was President Bush's original purpose in deploying American
troops to the Middle East. Reaction against the Western, largely American
assault on Iraq, as it supplants the defense of Saudi Arabia, already is rising
in Egypt; Syria has never been an enthusiastic ally; and even if their
Governments continue to acquiesce in Washington's leadership, that's no
guarantee that their Arab populations will. The mysterious flight of Iraq's
fighter planes to Iran also raises disturbing questions about the latter
nation's ultimate position in the war.

The question is not so much whether the U.S., with stout British help, could win
the war without Arab allies.  But at what cost? What kind of peace ultimately
could be had if the Arab world resisted and resented -- as it surely would -- a
Western war with the proclaimed purpose of destroying modern Iraq? Even Arabs
willing to see Saddam Hussein's aggression rebuffed might see in this a plot to
remove an Arab champion and maintain Western dominance over the Arab nations.

Still, if ground war begins and body bags start coming home, Mr. Bush may need a
clarion call to arms, both believable and unifying. Ambiguities, like
half-measures, are not much use in war.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Military's New Myths

BYLINE: By Gary Hart; Gary Hart, a Democrat, was a member of the Senate Armed
Services Committee from 1975 to 1987.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 710 words

DATELINE: DENVER


In the first euphoric hours of the Persian Gulf war, statements were made that
the military reformers of the 1980's -- who argued for using technology to
produce larger numbers of simpler weapons that could operate dependably and
successfully in combat -- had clearly been proved wrong. In war, the first
casualty may be the truth, but the first creation is myth.

Two myths have already emerged from this war: One is that technology in itself
is a battlefield determinant. The other is that "high quality" weapons have
proved their superiority over "low quality" weapons. But only one new
technological fact has been established: Expensive anti-missile missiles, the
Patriots, can knock down most cheap, militarily ineffective missiles, the Scuds.

Overwhelming this fact, however, is a more important fact. The most
sophisticated technological weapon system of the 1980's, the B-1 bomber, is not
in the gulf. It grounded itself without an Iraqi shot being fired. It has proved
to be either too ineffective at high levels, too vulnerable at low levels or too
prone to self-destruction. At $25 billion for 100 planes, that is an expensive
lesson to learn about the limitations of technology.

To date in the war, we have lost as many of our superior planes as we have shot
down inferior Iraqi planes. "Smart" precision-guided bombs apparently have been
more effective against infrastructure targets (at what "collateral damage" to
civilians our military is not heard to say) than they have been against
well-protected military targets.

A disproportionate number of air sorties are dedicated to destroying Scud
mobile-missile launchers in order to achieve a political objective -- keeping
Israel out of the war -- not any serious military objectives.

Virtually without exception, all electronic weapons technologies can be confused
or defeated by a substantially cheaper countermeasure. Superiority is enjoyed
only in the period between the deployment of the weapon and the discovery of an
appropriate countermeasure. Steven Canby, a military reformer, has pointed out
that sophisticated heat-seeking missiles can be confused by ordinary smoke pots.

Other than this, no other apparent conclusions can be drawn (let alone myths
created) from the preliminary phase of an air war by a superpower against a
quantatively and qualitatively inferior regional power.

Indeed, the real combat -- on land -- has yet to begin. There we face a
numerically equal, reasonably well-armed opponent defensively deployed. The
Iraqi Army has 28,000 Milan antitank weapons, 2,000 Hot airborne antitank
weapons, 700 Exocet air-to-surface missiles and 60 Roland mobile antiaircraft
missiles. All make the Scuds primitive by comparison.

They will do great damage to allied armored columns and cause considerable
inconvenience to supporting air and sea assets. For the sake of our nation's
sons, we should pray that the relatively crude, old-technology B-52 carpet
bombers now flying sorties over Kuwait do a more effective strategic job than
they did in Vietnam. And we should also pray that the even cruder garden of
cheap land mines that the Iraqis have laid do not destroy our best tank
battalions.

When the land war begins, we will have a much better measure of the role of
technology in the battlefield. Even though our forces are qualitatively superior
overall, there is greater parity in land weaponry than air weaponry. Much has
been made of the role of battlefield computers, but military reformers have
warned for more than a decade against substituting technology for thinking.

If our strategy, tactics or doctrine are wrong, no amount of computers or
sophisticated technology will fix them. In the friction of combat, a dramatic
increase in the quantity of information does not guarantee that it is "good" or
useful information. Compared to the vast capacity of the human mind for
flexibility, creativity and imagination, the inflexibility of a computer makes
it supremely vulnerable to the disaster that surprise can bring.

As it is much too early to evaluate the relative performances of vast categories
of weapons, so it is much too early in a war that promises to last a
considerable time to permit a new military mythology to be created.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 31, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Bill Passed to Aid Veterans Affected by Agent Orange

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 30


With a clear eye on the troops in the Persian Gulf, Congress moved today to put
to rest one of the most emotional lingering issues of the last war, the effect
of Agent Orange on Vietnam veterans.

Without a dissenting vote in either chamber, Congress adopted a bill ratifying
recent Administration decisions to provide permanent disability benefits to
veterans suffering from two rare forms of cancer -- non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and
soft-tissue sarcoma -- and a skin disease, chloracne.

The bill also provides for independent scientific reviews, by the National
Academy of Sciences, to determine whether other medical conditions were caused
by Agent Orange and other herbicides used in Vietnam to destroy foliage that hid
Communist forces. If such causes are found, the Department of Veterans Affairs
would be expected to give great weight to those findings and to make veterans
suffering from those conditions eligible for service-connected disability
benefits.

President to Sign Measure

Today's 99-to-0 vote in the Senate after a 412-to-0 tally in the House on
Tuesday sent the measure to President Bush. Anthony A. Principi, Deputy
Secrtetary of the Department of Veterans Affairs, said Mr. Bush was enthusiastic
about the bill and would soon sign it into law.

Senator Tom Daschle, a South Dakota Democrat who has been a leading advocate of
the legislation, said: "Veterans of the Vietnam War have waited over 20 years
for a meaningful response to the complex issues surrounding their hidden wounds.
I can only hope that if veterans of the war with Iraq suffer their own hidden
wounds, they will not have to endure that same fate."

Senator Daniel K. Akaka, a Democrat of Hawaii, said the Agent Orange issue "has
embittered thousands of Vietnam veterans and their families." He said that as
the Congress acted to "clear our debt" to them, "at the same time we will be
sending a strong message to our troops in the gulf that we intend to keep our
promises to them as well."

The outbreak of war has spurred quick Congressional action on many bills
relating to current and former members of the armed forces, from pensions to tax
relief, and this bill was an example. Until this month, leading lawmakers had
resisted it, rejecting the arguments of veterans that the dioxin in Agent Orange
had caused cancers and other health problems.

Representative G. V. (Sonny) Montgomery, the Mississippi Democrat who heads the
House Veterans Affairs Committee, said he had given in because the controversy
was thwarting all other legislation dealing with veterans. Last fall the issue
stood in the way of passage of a cost-of-living allowance for veterans'
pensions.

He insisted again in the House debate on Tuesday that research invariably showed
that exposure to herbicides in Vietnam was not responsible for the health
effects now suffered by some Vietnam veterans. But he said he hoped this bill,
and the reviews by the National Academy of Sciences, a congressionally chartered
organization of prominent scientists that does research for the Government,
would "help curtail the rancor and heal the wounds of mistrust" around the
issue.

Veterans' Agency 'Ecstatic'

Mr. Principi said his department was "ecstatic that we finally reached a
consensus on how to deal with this most contentious issue." He said the
department was happy with the legislation, which it had worked with Congress in
drafting.

The cost of the measure adopted today was estimated by the Congressional Budget
Office at $13 million, including $1 million for the studies by the National
Academy of Sciences. It includes the costs of covering the 2,350 veterans and
1,450 survivors made eligible for benefits last year when Edward J. Derwinski,
the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, decided to pay benefits for victims of
soft-tissue sarcoma and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

In addition, it covers a handful of veterans with chloracne, a severe form of
acne that was discovered in veterans within one year after they returned from a
tour of duty in Vietnam. The Veterans Administration said chloracne had been
proved to be caused by exposure to Agent Orange. Numerous studies have linked
several cancers to exposure to Agent Orange but some of these findings have been
contradicted by other research.

Mr. Derwinski's decisions, taken by the department on its own, would be made
permanent and irreversible by the bill passed today.

Bill Could Be Expanded

If the studies of existing research or new research suggested by the National
Academy determine that Agent Orange caused other health problems, the bill for
benefits would increase. But while some veterans groups have asserted that the
health of as many as 60,000 Vietnam veterans was damaged by the herbicide, no
one on Capitol Hill would venture a guess as to how many more veterans would
benefit from the legislation.

Among the conditions for which Agent Orange has been blamed are various forms of
cancer, birth defects and reproductive disorders, liver dysfunction, nervous
system disorders and suppression of the immune system.

The academy worked closely with the Congressional committees in drafting the
legislation providing for its reviews. Mr. Principi said he hoped to work out
the details of the agreement with the academy within 60 days and to have the
first findings and recommendations within a year.

While members from all sides went out of their way to congratulate themselves on
reaching agreement, there were still reminders of the bitter arguments past in
the brief debates.

In the House on Tuesday, Representative Lane Evans, Democrat of Illinois, said
Congress should "face the fact that our Government's efforts to deal with the
issue have been a woeful tale of foot-dragging and unmet obligations."

Today, Senator Alan Simpson, Republican of Wyoming, said that while he was
satisfied with the bill, as a compromise, he still felt that "we should not pass
bills based on frustration and pressure from veterans groups."

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Representative G. V. (Sonny) Montgomery, Mississippi Democrat,
said herbicides were not responsible for health problems suffered by some
Vietnam veterans. (Michael Geissinger for The New York Times); Senator Tom
Daschle, a South Dakota Democrat, has been an advocate of the bill to provide
disability benefits to Vietnam veterans affected by Agent Orange. (Associated
Press, 1986)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 31, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Leaders Reported Deeply Divided

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 928 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


The aging Vietnamese leadership is deeply divided over the direction of future
policies, Communist Party officials say, raising doubts that the 75-year-old
General Secretary of the party will step down in May.

The party is scheduled to hold its first congress since 1986 in May, when the
General Secretary, Nguyen Van Linh, has said he will resign. But persistent
disagreements over crucial issues, such as how far to open to the West while
preserving Communist Party power, have become inevitably linked to party
personalities, complicating the choice of Mr. Linh's successor, the officials
and other mid-ranking party members say.

Many Vietnamese and some Western and Asian diplomats in Hanoi say they now
believe that Mr. Linh may not step down at the next congress, which may itself
be postponed past May.

"This is the biggest crisis in the socialist camp since 1917," a party member
said. "Right now the leadership just doesn't know what to do."

'How Angry People Are'

Another party member said the leaders "know how angry people are." He added:
"But they don't have the answers. There is a contradiction between reality and
their principles, which they cannot abandon."

So there is confusion and stalemate, with a continuing search for the right form
of words, especially for the political report, the key document assessing the
last four years and pointing toward the future, that will be adopted at the next
congress.

A party meeting of the Politburo and the Central Committee ended here in
mid-January with a terse statement saying that "many important ideas" were
raised to improve the political report, and that a subcommittee had been
appointed to revise it.

The prospect of so much debate at this late date, after months of meetings at
all levels of the party, is a sign of the divisions, these party members say.
The collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe and its chaotic efforts for reform
in the Soviet Union have shaken the Vietnamese, who had started down the path of
perestroika and glasnost themselves at the last party congress, in December
1986.

Efforts for Change Slowed

Since 1989, however, party leaders have slowed efforts for openness and
political change, while stating bluntly that Vietnam will not tolerate a
multiparty system. There have also been efforts to improve relations with China,
the other stolid Asian Communist society. Those relations had been severely
strained since the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia in late 1978.

Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach has become a sort of focus for the debate,
party officials say. Some party members said Mr. Thach nearly lost his job at
the end of the meeting this month, but this assertion, though widely repeated,
could not be confirmed.

A skilled negotiator well known to the West and a member of the Politburo, Mr.
Thach is nonetheless thought to lack a solid political base, and he has been
associated with controversial policies of only middling success.

He has pushed the leadership to withdraw Vietnamese forces from Cambodia so as
to regain acceptance in the West and end an American-led embargo on aid and
investment to Vietnam, which badly needs hard currency. But he has resisted
moving closer to China and is widely disliked by the Chinese leadership. It is
significant, diplomats say, that at a secret Vietnamese-Chinese meeting of top
party leaders in Chengdu in September, to discuss Cambodia and future relations,
Mr. Thach was not present.

Thach Favors Economic Reform

Mr. Thach has also pushed for economic reforms and a modified market system,
going so far as to have Paul Samuelson's basic textbook on economics translated
into Vietnamese.

At the recent meeting, Mr. Thach was criticized for being "pro-Soviet," some
Vietnamese say, which still translates here as meaning too eager for political
changes. The name of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is not raised easily any
longer in the company of ranking Vietnamese leaders, who think more and more as
the Chinese do that Mr. Gorbachev has been a disaster for Communism.

Mr. Thach has also been criticized for the number of his family members who have
high positions in the bureaucracy, party members say, at a time when the party
has excoriated itself for abuses such as nepotism and corruption.

While the party has done little to correct its own complaints -- "washing only
from the shoulders down," as the Vietnamese say -- such personal criticism of
Mr. Thach may be a pretext for deeper political struggles.

Most Soviet Aid Stops

Mr. Gorbachev's economic changes have also given Vietnam severe difficulties.
Most Soviet aid has stopped, and there is a new requirement this year that all
trade be denominated at world prices in hard currency. That immediately makes
most Soviet imports, in particular needed oil products and fertilizer, seven
times more expensive than last year.

For oil alone, a Western banker says, that means an extra cost of $250 million,
and that is at prices prevailing before Aug. 2, when Iraq invaded Kuwait.

How to cope with such economic strains, and how much they may require further
economic changes or relations with the West, are fundamentally political and
ideological questions, a party member said.

The leadership knows it must deal with the West, he said. "But if you go too
far, you lose the respect of your people, whom you pushed to fight Western
imperialism and the rule of the dollar," he said.

"So you can't accept all the premises of either socialism or capitalism," he
added. "And the situation just gets worse."

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Nguyen Van Linh, the Vietnamese Communist leader, who has said
he will resign in May. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 31, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK;
Poison Gas Attack: A Longstanding Fear That Continues to Nag the Troops

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 893 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Jan. 30


The renewed threat on Monday by Iraq's President Saddam Hussein to use chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons against allied forces has sent a new chill
through the front-line troops here.

"The soldiers have a real anticipation of getting gassed," Staff Sgt. Robert
Langston, a 28-year-old medic from Ruidoso, N.M., told a pool reporter visiting
the 82d Airborne Division at a northern encampment here.

Since the Persian Gulf war began, allied troops have faced the constant threat
of poison gas attacks from Iraq. Alerts for incoming missiles have become a
daily routine.

The initial fear that Iraq might load chemical warheads on its long-range
ballistic missiles has faded, however, with each launch that carried only
conventional explosives.

"There was an alert this morning," said Specialist 4 Christopher Bolner, 21, an
M-60 machine gunner from Lexington, Ky. "I put on my mask and fell back to
sleep." Members of the 82d Airborne, one of the first American units sent to
Saudi Arabia after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August, have trained in the
desert wearing protective clothing.

Before they left their headquarters in Fort Bragg, N.C., members of the 82d
walked through gas chambers in protective suits, in part to overcome any
deep-seated fears of a gas attack.

But on the battlefield, in sight of enemy artillery batteries that might soon
launch poison gas, it is difficult to wipe the fear away.

"This is not fun and games," said Specialist 4 Alan Mayo, 20, of San Diego.
"You've got to keep your wits about you and your gas mask at your side."

Lives on the Edge

It was late Monday night when the radar of the frigate Curts picked up and
identified a fighter plane racing toward the American warship from the Kuwaiti
coast.

Capt. Glenn Montgomery ordered his 250-member crew to their stations and waited
tensely for a signal from the plane: friend or foe?

Just seconds before Captain Montgomery was about to order the plane shot down, a
message crackled over the ship's radio: the plane was an American A-6E Intruder,
a carrier-based attack aircraft.

The difference between disaster and routine in the Persian Gulf can sometimes be
measured in seconds.

In this case, an electronic signal identifier built into the A-6 had failed, and
only the pilot's greeting staved off tragedy.

Memories of a somewhat similar incident haunt all American Navy captains in the
gulf. Four years ago the frigate Stark waited too long -- and an Iraqi Exocet
missile struck the ship, killing 37 crew members.

American military commanders have declared that the allies have gained air
supremacy, but the fear that a lone Iraqi suicide bomber could slip through
keeps sailors vigilant.

"The Stark probably nags in the back of the mind of every commanding officer of
any ship," Captain Montgomery told a visiting group of pool reporters.

The Ghost of Vietnam

In conversations with American troops in the field, invariably one of the first
questions soldiers ask is, "What do the people back home think of the war?"

Vietnam weighs heavily on the minds of soldiers of this generation, most of whom
are old enough to remember the bitterness that greeted veterans returning from
Southeast Asia.

So it was comforting to many troops who gathered around a television set at 5
this morning to see and hear, via satellite half a world away, members of
Congress stand and cheer President Bush when he saluted to service members in
the Gulf in his State of the Union Message.

"This is about as good as I've felt since I entered the military," Staff Sgt.
Keith Morgan, a 33-year-old medic, told a group of reporters visiting the First
Tactical Fighter Wing hospital.

"It gave you a great feeling of worth," said Sergeant Morgan, an Air Force
veteran of nearly 10 years.

Six months in the Saudi desert away from home has given many soldiers time to
reflect.

Sgt. William Resides, 24, of Hampton, Va., beamed a huge smile through most of
the speech but he admitted feeling troubled by Mr. Bush's insistence that
America would always be the world's protector of freedom -- and what that might
mean for future conflicts.

"I don't know about that," said Sergeant Resides. "His speech did sound a little
big-headed, like maybe America's head is getting a little big."

'Calling In Death'

The needle-nosed, stubby-winged, swoop-tailed OV-10 Bronco is not a pretty
airplane. But in the first two weeks of the gulf war, the Marine Corps plane has
proved invaluable.

The Bronco, built originally for combat in Vietnam, has largely flown
reconnaissance missions in the Gulf, helping to guide American artillery and
fighter bomber attacks against Iraqi targets.

"We're calling in death on top of the enemy," said Captain D.J. Holzrichter, an
aerial observer in VMO-1, a squadron of OV-10's from North Carolina.

Broncos, flying both night and day missions, have directed Marine artillery fire
against Iraqi positions in southern Kuwait in the past few days.

Armed with rockets, bombs and machine guns, the Bronco also escorts transport
helicopters and can swoop down to kill enemy helicopters.

A highly maneuverable two-seater, it can also skim over the desert, snapping
reconnaissance pictures.

Weaving in and out of combat carries its risks.

So far one Bronco has been shot down by enemy ground fire.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 31, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

BRIEFS

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 265 words


* Advanced Micro Devices Inc., Sunnyvale, Calif., which makes computer circuits
and equipment, will phase out operations at a wafer fabrication plant by the end
of the year.

* British Aerospace P.L.C., London, said the planned merger of its guided
weapons systems business with that of Thomson CSF S.A., the French military
contractor, had been cleared by the British authorities.

* BP Exploration, a unit of British Petroleum Co., and Statoil A.S., the
Norwegian state-owned oil concern, have agreed to explore for oil and gas
offshore in China, Vietnam, West Africa and the Soviet Union.

* Furr's Inc., Lubbock, Tex., a grocery-store chain, said its managers would buy
70 of the company's 126 stores. Seven others would be sold, and 14 would be
closed.

* Hanson P.L.C., London, the British conglomerate, had protesters at its annual
meeting. The protesters, Navajo Indians from Arizona, objected to mining by
Hanson's Peabody Coal Co. unit in the Black Mesa region there.

* SHL Systemhouse Inc., Ottawa, a computer systems company, has purchased the
Computerland trademarks in Canada from Computerland Corp., Oakland, Calif. The
price was $40.5 million (Canadian).

* Tandem Computers Inc., Cupertino, Calif., which makes computer systems, said
its board had authorized the repurchase of up to 1.5 million common shares on
the open market.

* Varity Corp., Toronto, a maker of farming and industrial machinery, has
extended until April 30 its program for shareholders with fewer than 100 common
shares as of Nov. 16 to sell them back to the company.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 31, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: MILITARY ANALYSIS;
Air War Described as Slow but Effective

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1048 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 30


Although the commander of American forces in the Persian Gulf today presented a
picture of a devastatingly effective allied air war against Iraq, the kind of
destruction he described is a slow process and the extent of its success in
incapacitating Iraqi ground forces may not be known for weeks.

By pounding Iraqi aircraft shelters, knocking out radar, striking command and
communications links, blowing up ammunition dumps and destroying bridges, the
United States and its allies have taken important first steps toward weakening
and ultimately defeating the more than 540,000 Iraqi troops, 4,000 tanks and
2,300 artillery pieces that form the core of Saddam Hussein's military force in
Kuwait and southern Iraq.

Likely to Take Time

But military experts say it is likely to take some time for the crippled
logistics and command system to translate into an army that is largely unwilling
to fight or incapable of inflicting heavy damage on allied ground forces.

The commander, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, said it himself, after providing a
glowing picture of the American air campaign.

"Now, there's no way that I'm suggesting that the Iraqi Army is close to
capitulation and going to give up," he said. "I think their actions last night
have proven that to all of us." He was referring to Iraqi ground incursions into
northern Saudi Arabia.

From virtually the beginning, it has been clear to military officials that the
air campaign would take time to exact its toll on Iraqi ground forces, despite
the initial boasts by the Pentagon that its early raids were carried out with
great effectiveness.

A senior Pentagon official said President Bush was informed before the war that
the Air Force hoped to destroy 50 percent of the Iraqi Army's weapons and war
supplies over three to four weeks, softening up the Iraqis for a possible
American ground attack.

"Now that is enough to seriously disorganize Iraqi ground forces," the Pentagon
official said. "It will not make a walk in the woods for our guys who have to go
across and clean that mess up. But a 50 percent destruction level will mean
essentially the end of organized resistance that you can expect to be
effective."

How much damage direct air attacks on the ground forces have inflicted was a
question that General Schwarzkopf said he could not yet definitively answer,
despite anecdotal evidence that some of the Iraqi troops were cut off from food
and supplies.

In addition to efforts to sever supply lines, the impact of dozens of B-52
bombing runs, which have rained thousands of tons of explosives directly on the
Republican Guards in southern Iraq and Kuwait, is the most important factor in
determining how quickly the Iraqi Army deteriorates, and, by extension, how long
and costly a ground war might be.

Small-Scale Warfare

While some air-power advocates continue to hope that a ground war can be
avoided, Army and Marine Corps officials and senior American intelligence
officials said they believe that a ground war is virtually inevitable, despite
the statistics about tons of bombs struck and targets destroyed.

As the recent ground attacks showed, even relatively small-scale land warfare
has the potential to cause far more casualties than the air campaign, which has
so far had the support of most of the American public.

Twelve marines were reported killed in the first few hours of ground fighting
near the Saudi Arabian border town of Khafji. In contrast, seven American pilots
were taken prisoner and eight were listed as missing as a result of two weeks of
air warfare in which the United States dominated the airspace over Iraq and
struck vital command centers.

Only 12 American planes have been lost as a result of combat, far fewer loses
than the Pentagon had warned President Bush to expect. The President was
informed before the war that the United States might lose as many as three to
four aircraft a day during the air campaign, a senior Pentagon official said.

Political and Military Ends

By mounting its recent offensive ground actions, Iraq may have been trying to
change the political dynamics of the war, in which the allied forces have
punished Iraq with relative impunity.

But despite the ferocity of the localized ground fighting near the front,
Pentagon officials do not see Iraq's ground assault as a major attack that has
shifted the military initiative to Baghdad.

Rather, Pentagon officials said they believe that the Iraqis are trying to
accomplish several different ends, some political and some military.

Politically, the attack was seen as an effort by President Saddam Hussein to
boost the morale of his troops by showing that he has the ability to bloody the
Americans.

Testing the Allied Fighters

Militarily, Pentagon officials see the action as an effort by Iraq to test the
fighting skills of its adversary. Without spy satellites or sophisticated
intelligence skills, the best way for Iraqi troops to take the measure of the
Americans is to engage them in small-scale attacks.

Further, Iraq may also be trying to drag the Americans into an early ground war,
a course of action that Washington seems determined to resist.

Rather than launch an early ground attack, as President Hussein may want, the
United States and its allies intend to proceed with the air campaign
methodically.

Having struck command and communications centers, nuclear and
chemical-weapons-development plants and air defense systems, the United States
is focusing more on bombing the Republican Guards, ammunition dumps and roads,
and bridges and rail lines that have enabled supplies to travel to Iraqi forces
in Kuwait and southern Iraq.

Much of General Schwarzkopf's presentation was intended to document the systemic
strangulation of Iraqi forces.

While critics have noted that bombing by B-52's had limited effectiveness during
the Vietnam War, General Schwarzkopf, a Vietnam veteran, said that the movement
of supplies in the desert region presented far more vulnerable targets,
asserting that Iraqi efforts to repair their supply lines would not be
effective.

"What they got is what they got," the general said, suggesting that many of the
Iraqi troops were now virtually cut off from receiving supplies from the north.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Saudi Arabia highlighting Khafji (pg. A1)

Photo: Aircraft of the United States-led coalition in the Persian Gulf continue
to strike targets in a campaign intended to weaken the Iraqi armed forces.
Crewmen aboard the U.S. aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt in the gulf prepared
an F-18 Hornet for a mission against Iraq. (Associated Press) (pg. A13)

TYPE: Military Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 31, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: THE RESERVES;
Ripples of Pain as U.S. Dips Deeper Into Military

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1089 words


Danette Gandy, a 24-year-old mother in Los Angeles, has not taken part in any
military training since 1988 when she left active status in the Air Force
Reserves.

Last week, much to her dismay, she received a Mailgram telling her that she had
been ordered to report Friday to Lackland Air Force Base in Texas as part of a
widening military deployment that is bringing a new pool of inactive reservists
into the mobilization for the war in the Persian Gulf.

Mrs. Gandy, trained as a medical technician, is one of more than 20,000
reservists ordered to report this week as part of the deployment of the
Individual Ready Reserves, which consists of supplemental reservists who are not
assigned to specific units but are kept on reserve status in an unpaid backup
capacity.

Another 24-year-old mother in the supplemental reserves, Sara Davis Waters of
Clarksville, Tenn., went to Federal court in Nashville trying to block her
call-up to active duty. Mrs. Waters, an aviation mechanic, has a 2-year-old
daughter; her husband is already serving in the gulf.

Deep Into Society

Some supplemental reservists will report enthusiastically and others
reluctantly. But the experience of Mrs. Gandy, Mrs. Waters and others is a
reminder of how deep the military mobilization is reaching into American
society, touching both regular reservists and those who assumed they were far
removed from any likelihood of active military service.

"I signed up for an eight-year agreement that said four years active and four
years inactive," Mrs. Waters said. "Inactive means inactive to me. I thought
when I did my four years I was finished."

The Army, Air Force, Navy, Marines and Coast Guard have 466,138 members in the
Individual Ready Reserves, who, unlike members of the regular reserve, do not
hold routine training exercises or unit meetings and receive no pay or benefits.
After completion of active duty, they are required to undergo an annual physical
and remain eligible to be called up in times of national emergency.

In the first deployment of the I.R.R. since the Vietnam War, the Army announced
Jan. 20 that it was calling up 20,000 reservists for up to a year, with a
smaller number deployed by other branches. Officials say that most will be
assigned to units in the United States or Europe but that some will be assigned
to the gulf. They will supplement the 180,000 regular reservists throughout the
military who have already been called up.

Officials said that 70 percent of the supplemental reservists called up finished
active duty in the past year and that the rest had been out for longer.

Some reservists who put in their active duty have expressed surprise that they
were summoned, but Army officials say that when soldiers go to inactive status
they are reminded of their continuing obligations.

Call-Up 'Isn't Totally Understood'

But some officials said that, although the nine-page contract new enlistees sign
contains a reference to a possible call-up after the end of active duty, the
information that recruits receive could vary. Gladys Maeser, a public affairs
specialist with the Army Reserve Personnel Center in St. Louis, said it was up
to the recruiter to fully explain to potential recruits that they may be
activated in case of emergency.

Members of the Individual Ready Reserve "are a mobilization asset," Ms. Maeser
said. "That isn't totally understood by the entire reservist population."

Maj. Peter Keating, an Army spokesman, said most of those who have been called
up had special skills as medical personnel, truck drivers, mechanics, supply
specialists and artillery personnel.

Preparing Family for a Call

Many of the supplemental reservists are ready and willing to serve, even if it
means going to war.

Roger Reese, who teaches Soviet history at Texas A&M University, said he had
prepared his family for a possible call-up and was prepared to go.

"As for war and my potential participation, I support what they're doing," said
Mr. Reese, 31, who has a 9-year-old son and another child due Feb. 17. "Deep
down it wouldn't matter whether I supported them or not, because I took an oath
which I take very seriously."

But others are finding it extremely difficult to cope with the disruptions to
their life.

Resenting the Disruption

Mrs. Gandy, who has a 21-month-old child and a 5-month-old whom she is still
nursing, said she was assured by the Air Force that if she was ever called up
she would be deployed at nearby Norton Air Force Base.

Now, she is planning to leave her children with her mother, an hour from her
home, so her husband can keep working while she is away.

Mrs. Gandy said that she was not surprised she was called up but that she
believed she was misled by the Air Force.

"I tried to get them to at least let me have an extension so I could get my
children prepared to be with someone else or at least have time to wean my
baby," she said, "but they said no.

'It's a Terrible Hardship'

"It's a nightmare. It's a terrible hardship for me and my family. We all feel
really bad that our family is being stripped apart."

In Tennessee, Mrs. Waters, who was discharged from the Army in December 1989 and
served with a National Guard unit from Smyrna, Tenn., until four months ago, has
been granted a two-week extension after going to Federal court. She told the
court that her husband was already in Saudi Arabia and that she had nowhere to
leave their 2-year-old daughter.

"I'm willing to take a stateside assignment or anyplace I can bring my child,"
Mrs. Waters said. "My child deserves more than to have both parents leave."

Organizations that counsel service personnel, like the National Lawyers Guild,
the American Friends Service Committee or the War Resisters League, say they
have been swamped by calls from supplemental reservists looking for alternatives
to service.

Counselors said callers included single parents, those with medical problems,
those claiming to be conscientous objectors and many who did not realize they
were eligible to be called for active duty.

Jon Carnero, a 20-year-old artillery fire direction specialist from Fresno,
Calif., who leaves Thursday for Fort Sill, Okla., said he thought that his two
years of active duty would end his service.

"When a good-looking guy comes to a high school in a uniform and offers you
$6,000 for your education in college, it sounds like the whole world is being
laid at your feet," he said. "I could kick myself now for how naive I was."

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: More than 20,000 reservists usually kept in a backup capacity
have been ordered to report for duty this week. Sara Davis Waters, who has been
called to active duty in Saudi Arabia, where her husband is serving, hugged her
daughter, Cristina, at home in Clarksvile, Tenn. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 31, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE THIRD YEAR;
State of the War

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 705 words


The State of the Union is to Washington what the lighted ball is to Times
Square: the beginning of the new year. The political year that began on Capitol
Hill Tuesday night is already stunningly different than 1990.

When he opened his second year in office, President Bush was still riding a
golden chariot pulled by the twin steeds of peace and prosperity. Unprecedented
peace, in fact, with democracy marching through Eastern Europe, generals driven
from power throughout South America and apartheid crumbling in South Africa. And
unprecedented prosperity, with the economy continuing to grow for an eighth
straight year.

Not anymore. Economic contractions are now so sharp that even the President
publicly pronounces the word recession. And peace, meanwhile, has yielded to the
war that so painfully divides Americans. But this time around, unlike Vietnam,
the divisions are not only between people but within them.

Citizens who revile war also revile the barbarity of Saddam Hussein. Put off by
the oversimplified postures of hawks and doves, they grope for a principled,
limited position that resists aggression and also violence. Yet as recently as
last week, the President was loosely enlarging his war aims.

To judge by the State of the Union Message and other recent policy statements,
President Bush has now come to recognize the need to articulate and, presumably,
stick to limited objectives in a limited war.

On other subjects, the State of the Union speech clanked with banalities. ("We
are a nation of rock-solid realism and clear-eyed idealism.") But the President
devoted nearly half the address to the war, and that was notable for simple
eloquence ("the hard work of freedom") and a statement of limited war aims.

The speech and the U.S.-Soviet joint communique, issued almost simultaneously,
offer some reassurance to Americans who were afraid their President was starting
to sound like a war lover.

As late as last week, Mr. Bush seemed intent on raising the stakes. Speaking to
the Reserve Officers Association, he described four new goals beyond those
enunciated in United Nations resolutions -- to derail Iraq's nuclear weapons
ambitions, to demolish the Iraqi war machine, to topple Saddam Hussein and,
resisting any pause in the fighting, to go "all the way."

Even if desirable, those goals raise the alarming prospect of unlimited war to
Americans who are just coming to terms with the reality of limited war. But
before Congress Tuesday night, Mr. Bush seemed more restrained.

He welcomed sensible dissent. He noted how widely the war burden is shared,
whether measured in pilots or billions. With feeling he said, "If we fight in
anger, it is only because we have to fight at all." And it took only a few hours
for the news of the first American combat deaths to give somber depth to his
words "Any cost in lives -- any cost -- is beyond our power to measure."

Explicitly, Mr. Bush restated limited goals: "Our purpose in the Persian Gulf
remains constant -- to drive Iraq out of Kuwait, to restore Kuwait's legitimate
Government and to insure the stability and security of this critical region."
Explicitly, he renounced any aim to destroy Iraq or leave it so helpless that it
could become a target for aggression.

Meanwhile, even as the President prepared to speak, his intimate colleague,
Secretary of State Baker, joined with the new Soviet Foreign Minister in issuing
a statement that can be interpreted as opening, if only by a crack, a new door
to peace.

Since the war began, the U.S. has been insisting the war would be prosecuted
without pause. The joint statement, by offering a cease-fire if Iraq takes
"immediate, concrete steps" to get out of Kuwait, could save lives on all sides.

The joint statement also commits Washington and Moscow to "promote Arab-Israeli
peace and regional stability, in consultation with other parties in the region"
after the war. By restating these goals now, the Administration usefully
pre-empts any effort by Saddam Hussein to take credit for a Middle East
settlement.

The State of the Union, 1991, is troubled, full of doubts at the beginning of a
war. Tuesday's words offer a glimmer of hope about how to end it.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 31, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Protesters Are Fighting the Last War

BYLINE: By Paul Berman; Paul Berman is a member of the board of editors of
Dissent magazine.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 724 words


Peace movements, like generals, sometimes fight the last war. In honor of
America's socialist leader of the 1930's, let us call this phenomenon the Norman
Thomas syndrome.

Norman Thomas had learned the lessons of World War I. Civilization was wrecked,
millions died, the movements of the poor were derailed and not a single decent
cause was served. The whole exercise was an imperialist monstrosity.

But what about the war against the Fascist Axis? As the new conflict approached,
Thomas peered through the lens of his well-learned lessons and saw . . . another
imperialist war. Instantly he mobilized against it. Yet World War II was not, on
balance, an imperialist war. It was an anti-Fascist war to preserve civilization
from governments that were not only evil but vigorously on the march. Even
Thomas came to recognize that his own left-wing principles required a pro-war
about-face. But how hard it was to reconsider!

A Norman Thomas syndrome is upon us today. Vietnam taught many lessons, some of
them moral, not just military. Yet what happens when some of us who suppose we
have mastered those several lessons peer into the present?

The gist of the anti-Vietnam War argument looms up. There is the idea that the
far away enemy, creepy though he is this time, would pose no threat to us if
only we gave him time to ponder or left him alone. And there is the idea that
America is itself a trouble-making country and can wreak nothing but harm.

If these two notions proved even half as true today as they did in Vietnam, the
only decent alternative would be, as last Saturday's Washington peace march
advised, to "bring the troops home now." But what if the Baathists of Baghdad
are not just evil, like many another government, but are vigorously on the march
in ways that Vietnamese Communism never was?

The gassing of Kurds, the million-death war against Iran, the eerily familiar
tactic of wriggling out of a tight spot by inciting the oppressed masses against
a scapegoat population, the Israelis -- these features of Iraqi policy are less
than reassuring.

Many governments display an unseemly interest in unconventional arms, but not
every government causes its neighbors to move into sealed rooms. And when you
factor in the totalitarian controls, the preference for glorious self-immolation
to negotiated retreat and, as a dot on the i, the stampede across the desert by
hundreds of thousands of refugees bearing tales of horror about the invasion of
Kuwait, the whole regime does take on -- doesn't it? -- the glinty look of a
dynamic, expanding Fascism, 1930's-style.

Is war this time an imperialist exercise? Maybe this war is, on balance,
anti-fascist. The prospect of American blunders (sending the infantry too soon,
for starters) should frighten us. But maybe the blunder of letting the enemy
pick his own time to fight should frighten us as well. Maybe standing up for
little countries is not as shameful as some think -- even in the case of Israel,
that flawed democracy. Maybe standing up for a flawed democracy should be a
point of pride, the way standing up for those other non-Utopias, the France and
Britain of 50 years ago, was.

How hard it is, how weird, for some of us with solid backgrounds in the
anti-military to contemplate a friendly nod at a B-52. Yet our reluctance
contributes to an unfortunate difference between the present war and an earlier
exercise in anti-Fascism.

President Franklin D. Roosevelt lifted ideas from the likes of Norman Thomas and
proclaimed liberal democratic goals for everyone around the world -- which may
sound like silly war propaganda but proved real enough in post-Nazi Germany and
had its echo on the home front, too.

The field for similar reforms in the Persian Gulf may not be vast. Still, "the
liberation of Kuwait" ought to include some wealth-sharing and a bit of liberal
enlightenment -- just to show democracy's flag. We need radical wealth sharing
at home.

The President's "new world order," as articulated in his State of the Union
address, is not exactly that. Pressure for democratic goals can come only from
regions to his left. Yet what happens if the Norman Thomas syndrome persists?
Will we have a progressive war under conservative auspices -- while the nation's
best progressives go on mobilizing against the war in Vietnam.?

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 1, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The Bombers
SAUDIS RECAPTURE GHOST TOWN; ALLIES BOMB NEW IRAQI COLUMN;
NEW BASES FOR U.S.

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1084 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 31


To increase the number of B-52 bombing raids against Iraqi ground forces, the
United States has been secretly basing some of the bombers in Spain and has
obtained permission to use a British airfield as well, Western officials said
today.

The use of the base in Spain, which was disclosed by Administration officials,
has been considered politically delicate because the Spanish Government, under
public pressure, has been trying in recent years to reduce the presence of
American forces. In addition, Spain pays close attention to Arab sentiment,
particularly in the Muslim countries of North Africa, American analysts said.

The British Defense Secretary, Tom King, announced the agreement to base B-52's
in Britain. In an operation that recalled long-distance bombing missions against
North Vietnamese targets from Guam two decades ago, over about the same
distance, the United States will reactivate a B-52 base at Fairford in
Gloucestershire, Mr. King told the House of Commons today.

Expanded Use of B-52's

In another unpublicized example of cooperation by Western European nations with
the American war effort against Iraq, Germany has provided German-made shells
for American M1-A1 tanks in Saudi Arabia as well as artillery shells for British
forces there, Pentagon officials said. Germany's public contribution to the war
effort, which has drawn large protest marches in Germany, has consisted
primarily of economic assistance, some military equipment and the deployment of
18 Alpha jet fighters to Turkey as part of a NATO force to defend that nation.

Access to the European airfields allows the United States to expand the use of
the giant bombers by providing additional bases for fueling, arming and
maintaining the planes, which before the start of the war were permanently based
only in North America and Guam.

In the days before the war started, some B-52's were flown to Diego Garcia, an
Indian Ocean island about 3,000 miles south of the Persian Gulf. Since combat
began on Jan. 17, B-52 attacks have been launched from Diego Garcia and Spain,
and an airfield in the western part of Saudi Arabia.

The Pentagon has refused to disclose the precise number of B-52's being used in
the war, but an American official who declined to be identified estimated that
more than 50 of the planes would be part of the American arsenal. Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf, the commander of American forces in the Persian Gulf, said that on
Wednesday, 28 B-52's dropped 470 tons of explosives on Iraqi ground forces in
southern Iraq and Kuwait.

Mr. King explained the American request by saying "it was necessary to increase
the capacity," but did not say how many of the conventionally armed planes would
be based at Fairford, which is not now being used by the Royal Air Force.

Officials in London said that other countries had agreed to provide support for
B-52's, but declined to identify them, saying they would leave it to them to
make their own announcements. Spain has sought to keep the basing of the B-52
bombers secret. But it has given limited support for the American military
operation, such as allowing Washington bases for refueling stops and dispatching
several ships to the Persian Gulf region.

The B-52 has been one of the most formidable weapons in the Air Force and has
been used to launch punishing raids against Iraqi forces. Pentagon officials
said the B-52s carrying conventional bombs were at first based only in Diego
Garcia, where they were dispatched after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.

But because the United States wanted to increased the number of bombers that
could be used to attack Iraqi forces and because there is limited room at Diego
Garcia for basing the planes, the United States has sought to expand the network
of B-52 bases.

Egypt Declined to Base Bombers

One reason the American military may have been forced to seek bases in Europe is
that Egypt has opposed the stationing of the bombers on its territory. Saudi
Arabia also showed an early reluctance to base the bombers, a senior military
official said.

The hesitation of both countries might stem from the image of the B-52 as a
weapon of indiscriminate bombing associated with its use in carpet-bombing North
Vietnam during the Vietnam War, a reputation that the Air Force considers
inaccurate and unfair. The B-52 is also associated by some with nuclear weapons.
Although the planes being used against Iraq carry only conventional explosives,
the bulk of the B-52 force based in the United States is armed with nuclear
weapons to deter a once-feared Soviet nuclear attack.

In announcing Britain's decision to allow the stationing of B-52's on its soil,
Mr. King emphasized that London had received "an absolute assurance that they
will only use conventional munitions operating from that base."

Germany, which has been criticized by some lawmakers for not providing enough
assistance, announced recently that it would provide an additional $5.5 billion.
But some of Germany's contributions to the American and allied war effort have
not been publicly discussed by German officials, who have been worried about
criticism at home.

German Shells for U.S. Tanks

A Pentagon official said the United States Army had quietly obtained
120-millimeter artillery shells from Germany for use in American M1-A1 tanks in
Saudi Arabia. Germany made the shells for use in its Leopard tank.

The United States wants to have 60 days' worth of ammunition and other supplies
on hand for its war with Iraq, and 25,000 of the German shells have been
provided, according to a military expert, who suggested the the shells were
being donated to the United States.

Germany is also said to have provided 155-millimeter artillery shells and
Tornado spare parts to British forces there.

A Pentagon official also said Germany had been able to provide useful
intelligence to the United States about the Soviet-made equipment in Iraq's
arsenal. That is because the Government of the newly reunified Germany has
obtained Soviet equipment made for the former East Germany military.

Prime Minister John Major's decision to let the B-52's operate from British soil
is reminiscent of the agreement of his predecessor, Margaret Thatcher, to permit
American FB-111 planes based in Britain to attack targets in Libya in 1986, to
retaliate for a terrorist bombing in Berlin in 1986.

Map: Map of the Earth highlighting the Middle East showing locations of the B-52
bases. (pg. A8)

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 1, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The Medics;
Trek Across the Desert May Hinder Lifesaving

BYLINE: By PHILIP J. HILTS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 936 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 31


The front-line American medical system in the Persian Gulf is set up to handle
15,000 wounded soldiers a day, even if 3,000 of them need emergency surgery,
officials say.

The officials would not disclose estimates of possible casualties in an
extensive ground war. But analysts who have studied casualty rates in other
wars, including Israeli ground combat in 1967, 1973 and 1982, say that this
capacity should be adequate for even the high-casualty scenarios for the war.

With American ground forces suffering casualties on Wednesday in the first
sustained ground combat of the war, the military is likely to focus new
attention on the strength and preparedness of the medical system.

Brig. Gen. Ronald R. Blanck, director of professional services in the Army
Surgeon General's office, said that "well over 20,000" doctors, nurses,
technicians and other medical personnel were now in the Persian Gulf.

3 Times More Medical Workers

He said he could not give a more precise estimate, but recently he remarked that
there were three times as many medical personnel in the gulf as there were in
Vietnam at the peak of the fighting there, when the medical staff numbered about
9,000.

Beyond first aid on the battlefield, there are more than 30 mobile hospital
units near the front lines in the gulf. Backing them up are several larger
hospitals ranging in size from 500 beds to the two medical ships with 1,000 beds
each at anchor in the gulf.

But in this war, getting the wounded to hospitals could be a major problem.

In Vietnam, the wounded could often be flown straight from the battlefield to
the surgical units by helicopter for lifesaving care. But planners who designed
the medical installations for the gulf war assume that if hundreds of thousands
of soldiers fight in the great expanses of the desert, where enemy infantry may
carry weapons to knock down helicopters, they will have rely on stretchers and
field ambulances to move the wounded.

Delays in Evacuation

Military officials said the first American to receive a Purple Heart for
suffering wounds in the gulf war took two and a half hours to reach the hospital
from the battlefield, even without the pressure of combat, because of
transportation problems.

Possible delays in evacuation are particularly worrisome because military
experts attribute some of the increase in the survival rate among wounded
soldiers in recent wars to speedier treatment.

In World War I, an average of 18 to 24 hours passed between the time a man was
wounded and his surgical treatment in a hospital. In World War II, it was 6 to
16 hours.

In the Vietnam War, with its close quarters and heavy use of helicopters, the
time between hurt and help averaged two hours but could be as little as 30
minutes. With the improved speed came a reduction in deaths among the wounded,
from 8.5 percent in World War I to 1.7 percent in Vietnam.

In the Persian Gulf, "many of the wounded may have to be carried first by litter
from the field, then by truck back to a station where helicopters may evacuate
them to a surgical hospital," General Blanck said. "It could take hours in some
situations."

The Platoon Lifesaver

Because of potential delays, the military now gives all soldiers training in a
few emergency medical techniques like clearing respiratory blockage. "A wounded
soldier's survival may depend on his buddy's ability to initiate lifesaving care
on the battlefield," wrote Lieut. Col. James A. Martin, commander of the Army
Medical Research Unit. "Each soldier should possess the skill to clear an
airway, control bleeding and start an intravenous fluid line to control shock."

Foot soldiers do not have that full training, but in many platoons, General
Blanck said, one soldier has been trained and designated the lifesaver.

"We did not have this in Vietnam," he said, "and it may really be needed in the
kind of warfare we may have in the gulf."

Other changes since the Vietnam War include new vaccines and treatments,
including one for Hepatitis A and one to prevent septic shock from a sudden
invasion of certain types of bacteria in people who are most seriously wounded.
There are vaccines against local diseases, and one against anthrax to protect
troops who may be targets of biological warfare.

Once they reach a hospital, soldiers will benefit from improved techniques to
repair torn blood vessels and treat burns. CAT scanners will be available in the
larger hospitals of each corps, General Blanck said.

Heat Is a Serious Factor

The wounds suffered in troop engagements are expected to be similar to those of
other wars of the last two decades, though wounds in this war may be cleaner
because there is less bacteria-loaded muck to clog them. Heat may be a serious
factor, however, since it can cause heat exhaustion and encourage the growth of
bacteria in wounds.

The most serious wounds are those sustained in the abdomen, chest, neck and
head. Wounds in the head and neck account for about 15 percent of casualties; in
the chest, 7 percent; abdomen, 5 percent, and limbs, 60 percent. In Vietnam,
multiple wounds accounted for 20 percent of the casualties.

Most wounds in this war are expected to be caused by bullets and shrapnel. Burns
are expected to account for about 10 percent.

Of the wounds that cause death, head and neck injuries cause the largest
proportion, 40 percent of all deaths. Chest and abdominal wounds each cause 20
percent, while 15 percent come from multiple wounds. About 8 percent bleed to
death from limb wounds. A small fraction of the deaths have multiple causes.

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 1, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Apocalypse -- Stay Tuned

BYLINE: By Steve Erickson; Steve Erickson, author of "Tours of the Black Clock,"
is the arts editor of L.A. Weekly.

SECTION: Section A; Page 29; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 721 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


The role of television in this war has already launched a thousand cliches,
their glibness and truth not necessarily contradictions of each other. I'm
dubious that television has really made the war a video game or mini-series for
people, but it seems indisputable that TV instantly translated it into familiar
terms the public could be comfortable with.

For a war that isn't really anything at all like Vietnam or World War II, for a
war that may be more like World War I -- a vortex of events for which the
various rationales are either too banal (oil) or abstract (new world order) to
explain the enormity of what's happening -- that familiarity is important.

I know for myself, and for others, this war has never been more terrifying than
when I heard about it on the street or the radio, away from television. The
spare word-of-mouth bulletins, "We've attacked" and "They just bombed Tel Aviv,"
inspired the apocalypse of my imagination in a way TV commentary could not.
Indeed, I immediately turned to the TV, not simply to find out what was going on
but to reassure myself that this particular apocalypse wasn't so overwhelming it
couldn't be squeezed into a 24-inch screen.

What's happening in the Persian Gulf may yet test both television and our
imaginations. Forty-five years ago, technology one-upped the Western imagination
for good: gazing into the blossom of fission's sunflower over Japan, imagination
acquiesced, incapable of conceiving anything that could match what it had just
seen. Ever since, the Western imagination seems to have accepted not only its
own inadequacy, but obsolescence. The Bomb became the convenient out for a
culture that had lost its vision; information rather than ideas became the
increments of creativity. The nuclear age produced a nuclear consciousness and
nuclear psyche, but not a nuclear imagination.

Those few who have nuclear imagination not only confront the abyss but are
liberated by it. Everything they do is infused with the blood of an Armageddon
with no god, a Judgment Day in which the guilty and the innocent are damned with
equal cosmic merriment. They dance along the edge of the abyss to banish their
dread of falling over, relishing the view that their daring affords. Billie
Holiday was one example of someone with nuclear imagination; Walt Disney,
another.

The new war in the Persian Gulf, and the frantic attempts of the informational
culture to find parallels for it that don't exist, and convey it in a vocabulary
that doesn't apply, confronts the limits of our imagination in ways we don't
understand. Sixteen months ago, the nuclear psyche was suddenly unburdened of
the prospect of apocalypse. If the nuclear age itself didn't disappear (the
abyss is, in fact, not the Bomb, but the impulse that invented it), the age's
metaphors did, crumbling in Berlin to rubble.

The effect was something like a terminal patient suddenly being told that not
only is he going to recover, but he is in fact going to live forever: It's
exhilarating news, but it rather trivializes the contemplations of eternity to
which the patient had been giving some profound attention before receiving his
full pardon.

Now, just as suddenly, the pardon is revoked. Where at least four countries have
nuclear bombs, and oilfields are wired to erupt in a year-long inferno, where
the only thing that will quite match the oily black of the seas will be the
smoky black of the sky, doomsday is back -- a sucker punch to our psyches that
so recently entertained delusions of immortality.

The paradox of technology is that even as it has made apocalypse not only
possible but easy, it's also so literalized the imagining of apocalypse as to
reduce it to the icon of a gas mask. It is the business of culture to turn the
events of our lives into metaphors, and if they're large and resonant enough, to
turn the metaphors eventually into myth.

Nobody knows what metaphors will distill the crisis in the Persian Gulf for us
or if they will be up to the job of expressing our profound and growing
uneasiness about a conflict whose projected duration almost immediately leaped
from hours to months. But if this war finally forces our imagination to dance
along the abyss where it belongs, the images that fill prime time will not just
show us what we know, but what we are.

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Khafji Clash: Whose Loss?;
U.S., Saudis and Iraq Can Claim Benefits

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1169 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Feb. 1


It all depends on which lens you look through. The battle of Khafji, which
produced the first protracted ground fighting of the Persian Gulf war, was an
insignificant Iraqi incursion easily thrown back, or a demonstration of Arab
prowess in battle, or evidence that the initiative now lies with Baghdad, or a
warning that grim combat and heavy casualties lie ahead for American ground
troops here.

In purely military terms, Khafji was a rout; it may well have been an error for
the Iraqis to emerge from their bunkers. But that is by no means the only way to
view matters.

At the American headquarters in Riyadh, the generals competed on Thursday to see
who could be most dismissive of the battle. Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the
American commander in the gulf, made the widely quoted comment that the fighting
in Khafji was "about as significant as a mosquito on an elephant." Lieut. Gen.
Charles Horner, the air force chief here, belittled Saddam Hussein's probe as
"the stupidest thing he could do."

'A Major Iraqi Defeat'

The American briefer, Brig. Gen. Pat Stevens 4th, vigorously denied that the
fighting in and around Khafji was a major engagement.

But by this afternoon, the focus in Riyadh had shifted with the news that the
fighting had lasted for 36 hours and had resulted in the capture of more than
400 Iraqi prisoners. At today's briefing, General Stevens used the very word he
had objected to earlier, calling Khafji "a major Iraqi defeat."

That reversal was not isolated. A week ago, American spokesmen, including Lieut.
Gen. Thomas Kelly, the Pentagon's operations chief, cited Iraq's failure to
cross the Saudi border as evidence of Mr. Hussein's weakness. Now some cite the
half-dozen border crossings in the last 72 hours as evidence of Mr. Hussein's
weakness, or even of his desperation, as a few officers in Riyadh have argued.

Significance for the Saudis

For the Saudis, who were stung by widespread suggestions in Europe and the
United States in recent months that they lacked the will to fight for their
homeland, Khafji was a vindication. American marines at Khafji said the Saudi
forces who retook the town needed "to have their backs stiffened a bit," as one
put it. But even so, they out-fought the Iraqi invaders.

"They acquitted themselves terribly well," said Col. Jack Petri, the United
States Army liaison with the Saudi troops in Khafji.

Saudi officials, in Washington and Riyadh, were quick to trumpet their troops'
accomplishments. None of them minimized Khafji's significance.

If allied figures are anywhere near correct, the Iraqi leader was given a bloody
nose in the fighting there. A battalion, and possibly two, were more or less
demolished by the allies.

But while General Schwarzkopf and his coalition partners look at the war largely
in terms of the elimination of Mr. Hussein's capacity to remain in Kuwait, from
which they are charged with expelling him, the Iraqi President has other goals,
mostly political and politico-military, and they were very well served by his
troops' success in pushing into Khafji and hanging onto it for a day.

Views of Political Goals

American generals, now as in other eras, have a tendency to dismiss political
goals in war, viewing them as distractions from the serious business of combat.
But they sometimes matter a great deal, as they surely do to Saddam Hussein in
this case.

Among those goals might be included showing his civil population that their
leader has not abandoned them to the tender mercies of Stealth bombers and
Tomahawk cruise missiles, but is carrying the fight to the enemy on his home
ground; shoring up military morale by demonstrating what the Baghdad radio
called the ability of Iraqi soldiers to counter "the so-called superior
technology" of the allies; continuing to drive home to Americans, through
increasing casualties, the message that the war will cost them, even if they are
sure to win in the end; and demonstrating to all Arabs that Mr. Hussein and Iraq
can resist the West and reclaim the honor and glory of the Arab nation.

Those political points are made at a heavy cost, of course -- equipment like
tanks cannot easily be replaced, to say nothing of hundreds of troops lost.

But the Iraqi Army is a vast one, the fourth largest in the world, by one count,
and Mr. Hussein would seem to retain the capacity to make many more attacks like
the ones at Khafji and farther to the west, or on a much larger scale. The
history of the Iran-Iraq war shows that he is not averse to sacrificing men in
terrifying numbers.

Eventually, his string will run out; as President Bush said today in North
Carolina, Iraq's ability to wage war "is being systematically destroyed" by the
allies. That point may come in weeks, or in months. In the meantime, many Arabs
and some Western students of Arab affairs say, Mr. Hussein makes more points for
himself in at least some parts of the Middle East.

A Lot of Fight Left

For the commanders of American, British and French ground troops stretched out
along the Kuwaiti border, or at least a number of them, the message of Khafji
was straightforward: if Saddam Hussein is determined enough to try spoiling
attacks like those, and if he still has the resources to do so, it means he has
a lot of fight left in him; so the allies are going to have to take on either
his fixed defenses or the Republican Guards, or both, and that may turn out to
be a rather bloody proposition.

The choice, most analysts say they believe, will be an envelopment from the west
directed against the Republican Guards, because a direct assault to the north,
into the fixed defenses that the Iraqis have spent six months preparing, would
exact too high a cost.

Having served in Vietnam, many American Marine and Army officers at the
regimental and battalion level think that General Schwarzkopf, like the senior
American officers in Saigon, has overstated the extent of bomb damage inflicted
on the enemy, even though he has been careful, for example, not to make any
specific claims with regard to the Republican Guards. A large number are deeply
skeptical of all after-action reports by pilots, whom they suspect of habitual
exaggeration.

Intensive bombing raids before D-Day, a front-line colonel remarked the other
day, did not make it easy to storm Omaha Beach or to break through the hedgerows
in Normandy, "and we face something that bad or worse, in my view, before we
make our breakout."

President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt said this week that the war would be over in a
month. Even if the Egyptian leader is right, that will mean Mr. Hussein has
succeeded in standing up to an immense Western juggernaut for six weeks, which
is better than Egypt did against Israel in two tries. If the Iraqi leader
survives, he clearly believes that his defiant resistance to those whom he calls
the infidels will give him a strong claim to regional authority in this vital
but chronically unstable part of the world.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The President;
Bush Tours 3 Bases, Thanking Troops and Families

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 702 words

DATELINE: FORT STEWART, Ga., Feb. 1


With American flags and olive-drab war machines as his backdrops, President Bush
sped through a made-for- television tour of three military bases today and
thanked American troops and their families for "doing the hard work of freedom."

Mr. Bush seemed enlivened by the cheering crowds and the chance to do what he
likes best -- traveling and pressing the flesh -- as he broke out of six weeks'
confinement in Washington and swooped down in his Boeing 747 for brief visits to
Cherry Point Marine Air Station and the Seymour Johnson Air Force Base in North
Carolina and this Army post near Savannah, Ga.

Posing before batteries of television cameras, the President peered from a
ladder into the cockpit of a Marine F/ A-18 fighter-bomber, cleaned an enormous
plate of barbecued pork and hush puppies at a picnic with airmen's families at
the Air Force base and inspected a rank of armored vehicles at Fort Stewart. He
declared his resolve to defeat Iraq's Army to each of his audiences, mostly
women and children.

At the picnic in a pine copse on Seymour Johnson Air Force Base, the second stop
of the day, Mr. Bush paid tribute to Americans who had been captured in the war.
"No foreign dictator can imprison the love of liberty that beats in the hearts
of every American," he said.

Meets Families of Missing



Mr. Bush met privately with four families of airmen held prisoner in Iraq or
listed as missing. The names of the families were withheld by the White House.
There are two pilots listed as prisoners of war from Seymour Johnson Air Force
Base, Col. David W. Eberly and Maj. Thomas E. Griffith, and two listed as
missing in action, Maj. Donnie R. Holland and Maj. Thomas F. Koritz.

At Fort Stewart, where the arrival of the President and the deployment of much
of the base's fighting force to the gulf have left the streets virtually
deserted, Mr. Bush told his audience that a ground war would not begin until the
American military was ready.

"We will conduct this conflict on our terms, on our timetable, not on Saddam
Hussein's timetable," he said, raising his voice and pounding his fist on the
lectern.

There were echoes today of President Johnson's visits to American military bases
in the Vietnam War, as well as important differences.

Both Presidents used the visits to get away from the White House to a warmer,
more personal setting and to boost their own morale as well as that of American
servicemen and women and their families at places where they were assured of
enthusiastic crowds.

Mr. Bush said here that his morale had been "darn good," but after visiting
three military bases, he said, "I'm going on home to see Barbara with my morale
sky high."

As Mr. Johnson did before him, Mr. Bush offered patriotic calls to duty.
"Achieving our goals will require time and sacrifice, but we will prevail, make
no mistake about that," Mr. Bush said at the Marine air station, where he spoke
in front of an F/A-18 fighter, a Harrier jump-jet, and two menacing Cobra
helicopter gunships.

But Mr. Bush was in a vastly different political and military position today thn
the beleaguered Mr. Johnson, who visited military bases in 1967 and 1968 in part
to avoid the swelling masses of antiwar protesters. Where Mr. Johnson pleaded
with Americans in November 1967 to "show no crack in our courage, no split in
our resolve," Mr. Bush drew cheers from his audiences today by citing the strong
public support for the war recorded in opinion polls.

He also claimed a decisive American victory in the battle for the skies over
Kuwait. "Air superiority is an established fact now," he said. "The Iraqi Air
Force is no longer a factor."

At Seymour Johnson Air Force Base, more than two dozen women, many of them
pushing baby carriages and wearing yellow ribbons on their lapels, shouted at
Secret Service agents, White House aides and Air Force police who would not let
them into the tight space between the camera platform and Mr. Bush's podium.

"We're all wives of deployed airmen," said Heather Madison, whose husband,
Jeffrey James Madison, is in the Persian Gulf. "We've been here since 7 A.M.
today and they won't let us in. This is supposed to be for us."


LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush at Johnson Air Force Base, N.C., where he met
with families of airmen in the Persian Gulf. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1144 words



War in the Gulf: 4-6

Signs of Iraqi troop concentrations were reported north of the Saudi border, but
fears that Iraq planned another incursion faded, as allied bombers continued to
pound Iraqi positions near the border. Page 1

News analysis: The battle of Khafji was a rout in purely military terms:
Invading Iraqi troops suffered heavy casualties as they were easily repulsed.
But there are other ways to look at it. 1

Fighting continues in Khafji as Arab soldiers mop up 5

U.S. investigates whether marines were killed by U.S. jets 5

Soldiers and air crewmen missing in action are indentified 5

Bush tours three bases to thank troops and families 5

Iraqi troops played into U.S. hands by coming out of their entrenched positions,
officials said. The incursions into Saudi Arabia made them more vulnerable to
air strikes, as well as artillery and ground fire. 4 The bombing has ravaged
Baghdad, severing electricity and telephone service. As cruise missiles hit two
residential areas, wounding 11 civilians, Iraq said downed airmen would be
treated as war criminals. 6

France will allow B-52's to fly over its territory on raids 6

Prime Minister backs down in fight over Japan's contribution 6

The annual report on human rights issued by the State Department said that
Iraq's record of abuse worsened last year, but it also criticizes America's war
allies -- Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Syria, Turkey and Israel. 6

The troubled B-1 bomber spends the war at home 9

Is the end of the world upon us? The war has stirred interest in books like
"Armageddon, Oil and the Middle East Crisis" by John F. Walvoord, which try to
explain biblical prophecy of the destruction of humanity. 1

International: 2-3, 7

President F. W. de Klerk proposed scrapping the legal foundation of apartheid.
He suggested repealing laws that reserve most of the country's land for the
white minority and mandate residential segregation. 1

Naivasha Journal: Kenya makes a name for its flowers 2

Th Kremlin has softened its stance toward the Baltic republics. In a significant
reversal, President Gorbachev appointed delegations to begin a "discussion of
issues" with the republics' independence leaders. 1 Soviet troops are patrolling
Moscow and other cities with the local police. The joint patrols, mandated by
the Gorbachev Government, met no resistance in the capital but were denounced in
several republics. 3

Earthquake jolts Pakistan, killing at least 109 3

U.S. and British dispute over air routes heats up 29

Stock scandal in Japan runs deeper than many thought 29

National 8-10

The Federal Reserve's interest rates were sharply reduced amid reports of rising
unemployment and other economic weaknesses. Large banks across the country
responded by reducing their prime rate. 1

Government reports heavy new wave of job losses for January29

The nation's unemployment system is straining to keep up with the crush of new
applicants. Because of a decline in Federal aid, state unemployment offices have
had to reduce staffs over the last few years. 1

Bush proposes Pentagon budget of $295 billion for 1992 8

A USAir jetliner burst into flames on a runway at Los Angeles International
Airport after colliding with asmaller commuter plane preparing to take off. At
least three people were killed, and about 30 were injured. 1

American Airlines faces a walkout by its pilots, possibly as early as March.
Their union rejected a third contract offer this week, this time after a Federal
mediator supervised bargaining in Washington. 8

The E.P.A.'s plan to reduce haze in the Grand Canyon was criticized by the owner
of a giant coal-burning plant in northern Arizona. He accused the agency of
basing its decision on flawed scientific research. 10

E.P.A to scale back estimate of damage caused by radon gas 10

U.S. ban on some European wines may be lifted 10

Regional 25-27

Governor Cuomo's budget proposal, by relying heavily on spending cuts, will
force tax increases and service cuts at the local level -- a shift that mimicks
a Federal strategy he has denounced, local officials said. 25

Attorney General Robert Abrams said he would run for the United States Senate in
1992. Mr. Abrams, a leading Democrat in the state, will challenge the Republican
incumbent, Senator Alfonse D'Amato. 27

Mayor Dinkins's visit to Israel has created a controversy over black-Jewish
relations in the city. Blacks say he is trying to bolster his popularity among
Jewish voters while neglecting black constituents. 25

An inquiry on water-meter contracts is now focusing on whether a Staten Island
union helped a Kentucky company gain a edge in the New York City program by
allowing the company to underpay workers. 25 Daily News and unions enter crucial
negotiating phase 27

Landmarks panel rejects plans for Fifth Avenue newsstand 26

Has Gramercy Park lost its peace? The elegant square, a vestige of a gentler
era, has been shaken by charges of election fraud, slander, threats and -- worst
of all -- a breach of good manners and fair play. 25

An Episcopal bishop from Newark, John Spong, has shocked the establishment
inside and outside his church by arguing in a new book that the apostle St. Paul
was a "self-loathing and repressed gay male." 27

Serial killer in Rochester sentenced to at least 250 years 26

Neediest Cases 27

Business Digest: 29

Arts/Entertainment

Opera shows changes in composer 13

Disney cost memorandum has Hollywood abuzz 13

Furor over Cuomo arts cuts 13

Music: "Fidelio" at the Metropolitan 12

"Figaro" by City Opera National Company 16 Two books on rights and privacy 17

Critic's Notebook 46

Consumer's World 48

Making sure a health club is strong financially

Point man for the Center for Auto Safety

Coping with frail fabrics

Postage due: 29 cents

Guidepost

Obituaries 11

Phil Watson, player and coach of the New York Rangers

Robert J. Havighurst, educator

Peter Camiel, headed Philadelphia's Democrats in the '70's

Charles Salesky, president of the Hat Corporation of America

Sports

Basketball: Fans turn up heat on Bianchi 45

Barkley returns and sparks Sixers 45

Column: Rhoden on flags on uniforms 43

Football: Craig and Bavaro free agents 43

Marinovich enters draft 45

Golf: Azinger 10 under 45

Hockey: Ranger goalie overshadowed 45

Track and Field: Foster wins hurdles 43

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials22

The gulf war is not Vietnam

Mr. Florio cuts back

Mr. Weicker gets ready

Femme fatale

Letters 22

Russell Baker: A pretty flabby defense 23

Tom Wicker: An opposition leader?  23

Spurgeon M. Keeny Jr.: Is the Start treaty slipping away?  23

Martin Walker: The wrong cause at the worst time 23

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
Not Letting TV Do Its Best Job in the War

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 971 words


"Television is inherently a medium of simplicity," observed David Gergen, the
White House aide turned journalist, at a forum put on this week by the Columbia
University Graduate School of Journalism. Much of the day was given to criticism
of television coverage of the war in the Persian Gulf from such other
journalists and sometime journalists as the Rev. Jesse Jackson and Hodding
Carter 3d. There was a lot of politics in the air, but Mr. Gergen's simple
observation about simplicity seemed to strike most directly at the network news
departments' current problems.

Television is at its most effective when presenting pictures that tell a story
without many or any words. One does not look to the nightly news for complexity.
It did not prepare viewers for the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and is not likely to
prepare them for the political and economic consequences of the American
response.

What it can do, if permitted, is show, virtually while it happens, what war
brings, especially on the receiving end. That is not the whole story; it may in
fact be misleading; it is not likely to raise morale. But without that, no
comprehension of any war can be complete. The pictures of damage that Iraqi
censors have so far approved for export are too vague, and too plainly intended
to make a point, to have much punch.

Only this week, for the first time, was the nation given glimpses of
recognizable battle as land war broke out in the Saudi Arabian town of Khafji.
There were tanks and helicopters on the move, marines under fire, a tall
building being battered in the distance, and later, the remains of the
recaptured town and the corpse of an Iraqi soldier, the first corpse of the
television war. These pictures, although still somewhat remote, had the effect
of focusing attention on how little actual warfare has been shown so far. (There
were No pictures of the marines who were killed in the area.)

Without strong images, television reporting is either a return to radio as it
was that first gripping but unrepeatable night or a display of stock photographs
and talking heads, which have largely filled the hours since. One watches,
absorbed by the details yet aware that television is not doing what only
television can do. You want more yet fear to see too much.

There have been memorable pictures, such as the captured American pilots
delivering their set pieces for Iraqi television and the perspective through the
target sights of planes and missiles, but mostly the tube has provided official
briefings, mild, sometimes boosterish interviews with troops in the field and
experts galore. The latest Pentagon-supplied photographs of bridges being hit
have a video-game fascination, but as the fellow says, if you've seen one . . .

It's all so far away, and expectations have been aroused by war movies: if a
bomb is dropped, you get to see the bridge collapse.

Journalists are being kept from the action by a combination of the nature of the
war and the nature of censors on both sides. As James Webb, a former Secretary
of the Navy and Assistant Secretary of Defense noted at the Columbia Journalism
School forum, the difficulty of covering the Gulf War is "absolutely ideal from
the military's point of view."

To judge by a recent poll under the direction of Princeton Survey Associates,
most people are satisfied with the news they are getting and think that military
censorship is a "good idea." Complaints come, unsurprisingly, from those being
censored. About 10 days before Bob Simon, the CBS correspondent, disappeared
with his crew near the Saudi-Kuwaiti border, he said, "I suspect that the
Pentagon, the Administration, would like war coverage to come back with F-15's
taking off and landing, with aircraft carriers plowing the seas, with the kinds
of footage that promote the kind of war which the Pentagon, which the
Administration, would want to see on American television screens." The networks
have complained about restrictions on coverage, but to no effect.

Opponents of the war, too, want up-close reporting, in the belief that only
scenes of death and destruction can stir misgivings among the majority that
supports the war. Today's military commanders, old enough to have endured
Vietnam, when correspondents in the field became Washington's adversaries,
evidently share that belief and are determined to keep reporters at a distance.
The Pentagon won ground superiority over the press before it achieved air
superiority over the Iraqis. The invasions of Panama and Grenada, from which
journalists were effectively barred, were training grounds for the information
officers of this war.

All those easily satirized retired generals and admirals and all those think
tankists who have turned up (Mr. Carter called them "a dung heap of experts")
have their uses. They have helped instruct the nation in the tools and tactics
of modern war. But in relying so heavily on a technical approach and a trade
jargon ("assets" for weapons is neat; "collateral damage" for civilian
casualties is brilliant), the networks have found themselves playing the game by
the Pentagon's specifications. War as a slide presentation.

Those who attacked television coverage in Vietnam sometimes also lamented that
the United States was forced to fight with at least one hand behind its back. In
the Persian Gulf, it is the journalists who have their hands tied. Despite the
best efforts of experienced reporters, network news has so far been giving the
nation a controlled war, from afar and through the sights of the military. If
the land encounters glimpsed this week are a signal of things to come, the
pictures will grow grittier and bloodier, and many people around the world may
find themselves thinking back wistfully to the days when watching the war on
television was easier to take.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Center for Auto Safety's Point Man

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 48; Column 1; Style Desk; Consumer's World Page

LENGTH: 1122 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 1


For Clarence M. Ditlow, the seeds of activism were sown on field trips to
Pennsylvania factories when he was studying chemical engineering at Lehigh
University.

He was horrified, he now remembers, as he watched workers at a steel plant
scatter when molten wire cable spiraled out of control, and he shuddered as
employees at a sulfuric acid plant raced to the parking lot to move cars
threatened by a shift in the wind. "I was struck by the working conditions," he
said, "and I was struck by the environmental conditions."

For the last 15 years, Mr. Ditlow, son of a Chevrolet service manager in
Harrisburg, Pa., has been director of the Center for Auto Safety, the consumer
advocacy group founded by Ralph Nader and Consumers Union.  Now 47 years old,
soft-spoken and buttoned-down, he would hardly seem out of place in the General
Motors executive suite. But he has become one of the automobile industry's most
formidable and visible antagonists.

Victory for Air Bags

These days he is savoring victories in several long campaigns, particularly the
one that will put air bags in at least 35 percent of the new cars sold this
year. By 1995, he estimates, air bags for both driver and front-seat passenger
will be as common as automatic transmissions.

"There's no way but for our hard-core advocacy of air bags, including all the
litigation, that we would have gotten them," he said.

Mr. Ditlow's center seeks to promote not just car safety but all aspects of
automotive transportation, including highway design and fuel economy. "We're
pragmatists," he said in an interview in his small, plant-filled office just off
Connecticut Avenue. "The car is here, so why not not make it more efficient,
safer, less polluting and more reliable? Our goal really is to make the car more
socially acceptable."

With an annual budget of $800,000 and a staff of about 20, including part-timers
and interns, Mr. Ditlow is gearing up for new battles. The agenda for the 1990's
includes these goals:

*Extending Federal safety regulations for cars to pickup trucks, minivans and
utility vehicles.

*Requiring car makers to notify all customers when they extend warranties
because of defects, rather than extending them privately, on a case-by-case
basis.

*Preventing the trucking industry from adding a third trailer to tractor-trailer
rigs, increasing the longest truck to 120 feet. The center maintains that the
third trailer is hard to control, posing a safety hazard.

'I Like Being the Underdog'

Fighting these battles will mean fighting some well-financed lobbies in
Washington. That does not seem to bother Mr. Ditlow. "I like being the
underdog," he said. "I like challenges. You don't last long in the
public-interest community unless you really like what you're doing. I can't wait
to get in here every morning."

The motivation is not money, it would seem. Mr. Ditlow, who has never married,
earns $41,000 a year. But as classmates headed off to climb various corporate
ladders, he recalls asking himself whether there wasn't "a better way to get
involved in the decision-making process."

So he went to law school at Georgetown University, while holding a full-time job
evaluating inventions at the United States Patent Office (a job, he readily
acknowledges, that kept him out of the draft in the Vietnam era).  After that,
he went on to Harvard, where he received a master's degree in environmental law.

Under Mr. Ditlow, the Center for Auto Safety was active in the battle to impose
the first fuel-economy standards on new cars in the 1970's. That battle goes on
in the 1990's: the center is now seeking to raise the standards substantially.
"I frankly don't think there's any place in America for a car that gets 15 miles
per gallon," Mr. Ditlow said, adding that with new technology even big cars can
get double that mileage.

But auto makers say such increases cannot be achieved without reducing both size
and weight, jeopardizing safety. If the center "really cared about safety,"
asked William H. Noack, director of communications in General Motors '
Washington office, "why would they even want to take the chance that there might
be more fatalities" with smaller and lighter cars?

Mr. Ditlow acknowledges that big cars are safer than small ones, other things
being equal, but says there is still much to be done to improve the safety of
small cars. And he notes that in recent years big cars have shed an average of
about 1,000 pounds -- a reduced disparity that helps small cars survive crashes
with big ones. The center also receives complaints from consumers: about 40,000
last year, either about "lemons" or about problems that may be widely shared,
like faulty brakes or gas tanks prone to catch fire in crashes. About three
years ago this process was computerized, enabling the center to search for
patterns. Its usual response is to send out information packets, mostly tailored
to specific problems, along with solicitations to become a member of the center
at $15 a year.

About 40 percent of the center's revenue comes from members or other private
citizens; Mr. Ditlow said there were no big individual donors. Twenty percent
comes from the insurance industry, which shares the center's interest in auto
safety, and from foundation grants. Thirty percent comes from the sale of
written materials, notably "The Lemon Book" and "The Car Book."

"The Lemon Book," published about every 10 years (most recently in 1990), offers
advice to owners of problem-plagued cars. "The Car Book," which assesses the new
models each year, was formerly published by the Federal Department of
Transportation but was discontinued by the Reagan Administration.

'We're Not Really Enemies'

The rest of the center's budget comes from investments and fees generated by
research for product liability lawyers, who are billed at $60 an hour. Critics
complain that the center is overly chummy with such lawyers, compiling manuals
like "Ford Park-to-Reverse" and "Jeep Roll Over," which have been promoted in
legal publications. Mr. Ditlow defends the practice by pointing out that in
return, these lawyers often supply the center with information available nowhere
else.

Mr. Ditlow, who drives a 1987 Chevrolet Nova (without an air bag), says Detroit
is shortsighted in its resistance to the center's efforts. "We're not really
enemies," he said. "We'd like nothing more than to see Detroit make good cars.
Consumer protection is good for car companies and for consumers both."

He noted that Lee A. Iacocca, Chrysler's chairman, was a fellow Lehigh alumnus.
"He makes 'em; we recall 'em," Mr. Ditlow said. "We have a standing offer to
stop our opposition when they stop making bad cars."


LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Clarence M. Ditlow, Center for Auto Safety (Paul Hosefros/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
An Opposition Leader?

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 762 words


The Persian Gulf war obviously has wide public support, enough to intimidate
dissident politicians from standing up to oppose it. Someone, probably but not
necessarily a Democrat, nevertheless may be missing an opportunity by holding
his or her tongue.

A number of factors suggest that support for the war will fade, perhaps even
rapidly. For one thing, not every patriotic American who backs the troops and
hopes for his country's victory agrees that war was necessary or wise. Before
the shooting started, the nation was deeply divided; and today's enthusiasm may
fade as prewar doubts and questions re-emerge.

For another thing, the inevitable ground war is beginning, once again
confounding the rosy claims of air-power buffs; in Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf's
words, that means "the best is still to come." He might better have said "the
worst," since he referred to the major allied effort to drive the Iraqis out of
Kuwait, a push expected to bring hard fighting and high casualties. Soviet
generals long familiar with the Iraqi military, as well as U.S. analysts,
believe the U.S. has underestimated Saddam Hus sein's and Iraq's fighting
potential.

Unsettled war aims also may portend declining unity. The recent
Baker-Bessmertnykh statement seemed to suggest, for instance, that Iraq might
end the war with a "commitment" and "concrete steps" to withdraw from Kuwait,
rather than the previously specified withdrawal itself. But Israel's Foreign
Minister, David Levy, says the war will not end until the Iraqi regime is
destroyed, an aim neither the Arab allies nor Moscow embraces and one that the
U.S. has not yet formally avowed.

What happens if, after hard fighting, the Iraqis are driven from Kuwait but do
not give up? The U.N. mandate will have been satisfied but not Israeli demands
or the desire of many Americans -- probably including George Bush -- that Saddam
Hussein be removed and Iraq's military potential destroyed. Will the war go on
in that event? Would it then enjoy such wide support?

Sooner or later, moreover, many Americans will question the priorities that
place the gulf war ahead of crying domestic needs barely acknowledged by the
Bush Administration.  How long can it be contended that war against Iraq is more
important than the nation's failing education system, its inadequate health
services, its massive crime problem?  How long can or should superpower
pretensions be maintained, in spite of the nation's weakened economic and social
bases?

For all these reasons, and perhaps others, the potential for a strong opposition
to the gulf war exists. On the home front, too, the recession may well be longer
and harder than President Bush says he expects; and Alan Greenspan, the chairman
of the Federal Reserve, suggests that a long war might well cause a deeper
recession. Thus, war and the economy might cause public opinion to move sharply
against Mr. Bush.

Who, in that case, would be the political beneficiary? At the moment, it's not
surprising that none of those most often mentioned as possible Democratic
nominees in 1992 are speaking out. Most no doubt remember that even an active
and powerful domestic reaction against the Vietnam war failed to produce an
outright opposition candidate in 1968; and that George McGovern, as such a
candidate in 1972, lost a landslide.

An opposition leader would have to weigh his words carefully in order not to be
seen as undercutting brave American troops in the field. But the ambiguity of
the Administration's intentions, the dark uncertainties surrounding a postwar
settlement and numerous neglected domestic problems would provide such a leader
with legitimate causes for his stand.  He might genuinely argue, for example,
that the most useful support for American troops is to spare them needless
casualties in unwise battles.

Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, whom some consider a potential Democratic
candidate, voted against authorizing the President to start the war. His current
support for American forces and American victory can't change that vote, or the
impression that he believed the war unnecessary up to the moment it was started.

A Democratic dark horse, Senator Robert Kerrey of Nebraska, also voted against
war. He has a Medal of Honor, and Senator Nunn has a history of military support
and expertise, as a defense against charges of being "soft." But it's probably
too much to expect that either would take the undeniable political risk of
leading the opposition -- even to a war that's likely to lose acceptability as
the months go along.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Why the Gulf War Is Not Vietnam

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 500 words


"It won't be another Vietnam," President Bush keeps saying about the Persian
Gulf war. That's a sure applause line. Americans now agree that the long U.S.
military involvement in Southeast Asia was a disaster for America. But the
President's oratory, and the applause, are confusing, because Americans still
differ sharply about the nature of the disaster.

For liberals, Vietnam was an immoral war, in support of insupportable Saigon
regimes. Worse, America lost its innocence through napalm attacks, carpet
bombing and the My Lai massacre. The lesson: America should be wary of
Presidential and Pentagon scenarios and go to war only as a last resort.

For centrists, Vietnam represents good intentions gone awry, proof that John F.
Kennedy's summons to fight any Communist foe and bear any military burden was
simply beyond America's means. Obsession with an unwinnable struggle distorted
priorities and politics, ignited inflation and undermined patriotism. They, too,
wish urgently to avoid another costly crusade in the name of American
determination that ends up dissipating American resolve. To them, the lesson is:
Pick wars carefully, fight with a sense of proportion.

For conservatives like Mr. Bush, Vietnam represents mainly a failure of
political will. First, Washington forfeited public support by fighting a limited
war, resisting, for example, military demands for all-out bombing of the North.
Then, by withdrawing U.S. troops amid domestic political protest, America showed
the world that it lacked staying power.

Conservatives believe that this showing invited subsequent policy disasters like
Nicaragua, Afghanistan and Iran. To them, the lesson is: The United States must
prove it has the will to fight for freedom.

Thus in the Persian Gulf President Bush moved rapidly to build up American
forces. He quickly gave up on the economic embargo, which needs months to work.
And he has lately been pressing for all-out military victory.


Are any of these lessons of Vietnam relevant to the gulf war? Probably not, if
only because circumstances have changed so greatly. The United States is no
longer in a global confrontation with Communism. And Washington can no longer
afford the global commitments that a Pax Americana, J.F.K. style, would require.

The need to deter aggression remains -- with collective security, not new and
improved versions of power projection in the cold-war style. That means not just
financial burden-sharing and formal U.N. votes but serious commitments to joint
diplomatic, economic and, if necessary, military actions in defense of
international law.

In the days and weeks after Saddam Hussein seized Kuwait, Mr. Bush masterfully
organized a collective response. Then after the November elections he changed
tack, stressing the military, and the American, side of the equation.

The best way to avoid another Vietnam is to move forward into collective
security rather than slip back into fantasies about a Pax Americana.


LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Winning Their Hearts and Minds

BYLINE: By Terrence Maitland; Terrence Maitland is a co-author of "A Contagion
of War," "South Vietnam on Trial," "The Aftermath" and two other volumes in the
Time-Life series "The Vietnam Experience."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1064 words



FACING THE PHOENIX
By Zalin Grant.
Illustrated. 395 pp. New York:
W.W. Norton & Company. $22.50.

The library of significant works about the war in Vietnam grows more slowly now
-- evidence that publishers, and the reading public, may have wearied of that
divisive conflict. Yet an event that brought about the foreshortening of the
American century, as did the Vietnam War, deserves no end of study -- for its
inherent interest as well as for what it reveals about United States policy.

One policy in Vietnam shoved into the background by the American military
buildup was pacification -- the inelegant French cognate for attracting the
allegiance of the populace (winning hearts and minds) to the South Vietnamese
Government and away from the Communist Vietcong. Pacification didn't play to the
cameras, but it may have carried more potential for winning the war than a
military confrontation did.

Neil Sheehan's landmark 1988 biography of John Paul Vann, "A Bright Shining
Lie," showed that Vann, the American military adviser to the South Vietnamese,
recognized the political nature of the war and believed strongly in
pacification. As to the Vietcong guerrillas, he advocated pursuing them with
knives and carbines instead of with gunships and air strikes. Vann, with his
traditional military background, did not originate these concepts. They derived
from another maverick bureaucrat, Tran Ngoc Chau, the central figure in Zalin
Grant's "Facing the Phoenix."

The phoenix of the title refers to Mr. Chau and his remarkable survival as
soldier, official, betrayed prisoner of the South Vietnamese Government,
re-education camp inmate after the victory of the North Vietnamese, boat person
and immigrant to the United States, as well as to his role as unfortunate
godfather of the C.I.A.'s dreaded, but highly successful, Phoenix program.

A non-Communist soldier of the anti-colonial Vietminh, Mr. Chau defected to the
French side in 1949 when the Communists consolidated their control of the
supposedly nationalist rebellion. By 1962, the same year John Paul Vann arrived
in the Mekong Delta, Mr. Chau had risen to the post of chief of South Vietnam's
Kien Hoa province, a Vietcong stronghold in the northern delta.

A former comrade-in-arms of the Communists, Mr. Chau understood that the enemy's
strength consisted of regular troops, guerrillas and a politically organized
base. "To Chau," Mr. Grant writes, "the key to winning the war lay in defeating
the communists' political organization. . . . Chau did not want to kill the Viet
Cong guerrillas. He wanted to win them over to the government side."

To achieve this, Mr. Chau used three approaches. He created so-called
census-grievance teams to interview villagers, who made up the Vietcong's
political base, and learn their complaints; using his authority, he heeded the
complaints and instituted change. Second, he would offer an unconditional
amnesty to all Vietcong guerrillas. If these first two approaches failed to win
over the enemy, Mr. Chau had ready a third: three-man counter-terror teams to
track down and capture or kill recalcitrant Vietcong officials.

Operating on the peculiarly American assumption that no idea is so good that it
cannot be expanded beyond usefulness, the Central Intelligence Agency gradually
adapted Mr. Chau's counter-terror teams into the controversial campaign known as
Operation Phoenix. The counter-terrorism that had been a last resort for Mr.
Chau, however, metamorphosed into the program itself. Phoenix officials
identified suspected Vietcong operatives, and then dispatched patrols after
them. The process of identification, of course, carried great potential for
abuse, since any informer with a grudge might settle an outstanding debt by
reporting his enemy to the C.I.A. Phoenix defenders minimize the number of
actual abuses, however.

More than the heroic tale of Tran Ngoc Chau, "Facing the Phoenix" presents a
history of pacification far less dry or academic than that may sound. Zalin
Grant, who is a former Time magazine and New Republic correspondent fluent in
Vietnamese, and the editor of "Survivors," a 1975 oral history of prisoners of
war in South Vietnam, mines extensive postwar interviews he conducted with a
host of soldiers and C.I.A. men, rogues and role players, victims and
visionaries.

Dominating a large part of the book is Edward G. Lansdale, perhaps the most
public undercover operative the intelligence service has ever sent into the
field. Portrayed in Graham Greene's novel "The Quiet American" as a wrongheaded
meddler and in "The Ugly American" by William J. Lederer and Eugene Burdick as a
cultural imperialist, Lansdale, who died in 1987, is vindicated here as a man
whose ideas on the political nature of the war ought to have held sway.

The strange saga of Lucien (Three Fingers) Conein in the book might have been
dreamed up by a dime novelist. A hard-drinking adventurer and World War II
commando, Conein had a Vietnam career that spanned nearly 30 years, beginning
when he parachuted into Hanoi with the American O.S.S. in 1945. As a C.I.A.
officer, he was at the side of the generals who overthrew Ngo Dinh Diem in 1963.
He was also frequently at the side of Lansdale, and one night lobbed a grenade
at the home of an American ambassador too lackdaisical about security. "The
order of Ed Lansdale," he explained.

William Colby, the C.I.A.'s Saigon station chief and later its director, whom
Mr. Grant calls "the most effective American political action operative" in
Vietnam, defends the Phoenix program that he ultimately headed. Daniel Ellsberg
is shown shedding the covering of gung-ho true believer and revealing an
anguished opponent of the war.

Sometimes Mr. Grant allows his interviewees to lapse into war stories which,
while they are great material, add little to his analysis. The interweaving of
stories leads to some bumpiness in narrative. His history of political action in
Laos may be overlong, but it makes the critical point that much was accomplished
in Laos without the introduction of combat troops. The occasional error intrudes
in his account (Gen. Matthew Ridgway appears as James Ridgway).

These are minor quibbles, however. "Facing the Phoenix" is a prodigious work of
interviewing and research that earns a place on the shelf of important books
about America's misadventure in Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tran Ngoc Chau, left, before a military court in Saigon on
charges of pro-communist activities, 1970. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 928 words


A PEACE TO END ALL PEACE: Creating the Modern Middle East 1914-1922, by David
Fromkin. (Avon, $14.95.) A historian tells how today's Middle East jigsaw was
carved from the Ottoman Empire with the help of the British, who wanted to
insure that they had a land bridge to India. " 'A Peace to End All Peace' is one
of the first books to take an effective panoramic view of what was happening,"
Wm. Roger Louis said here in 1989. "Among the reasons for Mr. Fromkin's success
is the breadth of his vision, which takes the reader deep into areas normally
not associated with the Middle East."

VINELAND, by Thomas Pynchon. (Penguin, $9.95.) In this novel by the elusive and
seldom-photographed author of conspiratorial fantasies, the heroes of chaos and
entropy are led by an ex-hippie named Zoyd, sworn enemy of the evil renegade
Federal prosecutor and champion of order, Brock Vond. Last year our reviewer,
Salman Rushdie, called the novel "free-flowing and light and funny and maybe the
most readily accessible piece of writing the old Invisible Man ever came up
with. . . . What is interesting is to have before us, at the end of the Greed
Decade, that rarest of birds: a major political novel about what America has
been doing to itself, to its children, all these many years." Also available
from Penguin is a matching edition of Mr. Pynchon's 1973 novel GRAVITY'S RAINBOW
($12.95).

DEVICES AND DESIRES, by P. D. James. (Warner, $5.95.) When Commander Adam
Dalgliesh inherits a cottage from an eccentric aunt, he finds the coastal
community haunted by a serial murderer and a controversy over a nuclear power
plant. "While it has the richness of a classical novel, this topical tale is
told in a taut time framework and unfolds in the near cinematic scenes that are
Miss James's style," Judith Crist said here last year.

BARBARIANS AT THE GATE: The Fall of RJR Nabisco, by Bryan Burrough and John
Helyar. (Harper Perennial, $10.95.) Two reporters who covered the $25 billion
takeover of a seemingly lackluster behemoth named RJR Nabisco show why we no
longer hear Wall Street financiers crowing about how leveraged buyouts and junk
bonds are really good for the economy and the American way. This account has
"all the suspense of a first-rate thriller," Patricia O'Toole said here last
year. It is "one of the finest, most compelling accounts of what happened to
corporate America and Wall Street in the 1980's." Plume has republished another
chronicle of what has been called the biggest deal of the decade: TRUE GREED:
What Really Happened in the Battle for RJR Nabisco, by Hope Lampert ($9.95).

LORD BYRON'S DOCTOR, by Paul West. (University of Chicago, $12.95.) In real
life, Dr. John Polidori, who briefly signed on as the private physician to Lord
Byron in the hopes of promoting his own literary career, seemed a rather dull,
self-important buffoon. In turning him into the protagonist of this novel, Paul
West "imagines a complex character roiling with envy, spite, fury and, most of
all, the desire to be Lord Byron." The result is "a powerful book, a disturbing
and memorable evocation of the pernicious consequences that Byronism could
have."

WHAT KIND OF LIFE: The Limits of Medical Progress, by Daniel Callahan.
(Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $9.95.) America's worship of technology and the
good of the individual over the commonweal has left us with a health system that
is ineffective and unaffordable, an expert on medical ethics argues. Daniel
Callahan writes "with elegance and lucidity," Charles E. Rosenberg said here in
1989. "He excels at describing present irrationalities and in underscoring the
benefits anticipated in his new model health care system."

ORDINARY LOVE AND GOOD WILL: Two Novellas, by Jane Smiley. (Ivy, $4.95.) In the
first of these stories about the breakdown of families, a middle-aged divorced
woman confesses to her estranged children that it was she who destroyed their
happiness by having an affair with a neighbor; in the second, a Vietnam veteran
exiles himself and his wife and son on an isolated farm. In 1989 our reviewer,
Josephine Humphreys, said the two tales are "mutually resonant, thematically
linked in satisfying and subtle ways."

THE DELUGE AND THE ARK: A Journey Into Primate Worlds, by Dale Peterson. (Avon,
$11.95.) After the author learned that a species of South American monkey had
been reduced to about the size of the student body of his old high school, he
embarked on a journey to visit endangered primates and the people trying to save
them. "His book is a fine expression of [his hopes] and a passionate plea for
more, better and larger arks, in fact for treating the whole world more like the
ark it once was and still could be," Paul Schullery said here in 1989.

FELLOW PASSENGERS: A Novel in Portraits, by Louis Auchincloss. (St. Martin's,
$3.95.) Dan Ruggles, a lawyer who dabbles in writing detective fiction, provides
a behind-the-scenes look at the rich people who like to confide in him. In 1989
our reviewer, Isabel Colegate, said the best of these stories are "reminiscent
of Somerset Maugham at his most urbane."

A SAFE PLACE, by Leston Havens. (Ballantine, $8.95.) In a series of case studies
-- of a troubled student, a suicidal depressive, a schizophrenic, a physician
preoccupied by fears of death -- a psychiatrist shows that it takes more than
theories to help people. The book provides "an unforgettable sense of a
professional healer who is so empathetic that one can almost see his mind reach
out to embrace another," Richard Flaste said here last year.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas Pynchon.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Campus Life: South Carolina;
2 Win Fight To Display American Flags

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 45; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 517 words

DATELINE: COLUMBIA, S.C.


After two undergraduates displayed the American flag in support of the nation's
war effort in the Persian Gulf, the University of South Carolina has backed away
from its policy against hanging objects outside residence halls.

Last month, Frank Graffagnino, a freshman from Hardeeville, S.C., and William
Redman, a sophomore from Rapid City, S.D., began displaying flags from windows
of their residence hall.

Mr. Graffagnino, who served as a private first class in the Army in the 413th
Armored Division in Fort Knox, Ky., before coming to the university, said he
decided to display the flag to show support for his former unit, which is now in
the Middle East.

"My friends and I wanted to show the guys in the gulf that we care about what
they're doing and that this won't be another Vietnam," he said.

 President Steps In

On Jan. 24, their residence hall director told them to take down their flags
because it was against university policy to hang anything on the walls of
residence halls and other buildings on campus.

The students did not take down their flags, although they faced a $25 fine and
possible eviction from university housing.

"It goes against my constitutional rights not to be able to fly the flag and
show my support," Mr. Graffagnino said in an interview.

Instead, the students telephoned several local television stations and
newspapers in the hope that they could draw attention to the issue.

Arthur Smith, the university's interim president, learned of the controversy
from published and broadcast reports, and ordered housing officials not to
enforce the policy.

'An Extraordinary Period'

"We are in an extraordinary period of national conflict," Mr. Smith said in an
interview with the student newspaper, The Gamecock. "So, naturally, emotions and
feelings are running high. I don't feel this is a time to squash those
feelings."

Dennis Pruitt, vice president of student affairs and dean of students, said the
university's policy was one that had evolved over 20 years in response to
specific incidents involving safety. These included banners that were set on
fire while hanging on the student union building and students dangling from
their windows to hang signs outside their dormitories, Mr. Pruitt said.

Mr. Pruitt said the university was not trying to stop students from expressing
their patriotism. He said that university officials encouraged the students to
put up a flagpole outside their dormitory or to display their flags or signs on
"the banner wall" across from the student union. So far, no student has followed
up on these suggestions, he added.

Mr. Graffagnino, who represents his residence hall in dormitory government, said
he would bring up the issue of putting up a flagpole at its next meeting this
week. "It would really show our patriotism," he said.

Mr. Pruitt has called on a group of student leaders to review the policy, which
he hopes will be revised soon. Until the policy revision is complete, Mr.
Graffagnino and other students will be allowed to fly their flags outside their
residence halls.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Home Front;
War's Ribbons Are Yellow With Meaning of Many Hues

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1140 words


Sybil Roberts, whose nephew is in the Persian Gulf, was so angered by antiwar
protesters at her door carrying petitions that she wrapped the columns on the
porch of her Houston rowhouse with yellow satin, buried the facade under 14
giant yellow bows, and planted a sign in her lawn that read, "We support our
troops" on side and "Down with protesting" on the other.

Trish Shuh wears a yellow ribbon pinned to her blouse whenever she attends an
antiwar rally. A volunteer at the Manhattan branch of the Military Families
Support Network, Ms. Shuh has an uncle and a brother in the Persian Gulf, is
vehemently opposed to the war, and said she shares Mrs. Roberts emotional
attachment to yellow satin.

"You can oppose the policy," Ms. Shuh said, "and still support the troops."

Yellow ribbons, wrapped around trees, telephone polls, satellite dishes, pinned
to lapels, or fluttering from car radio antennas, mail boxes and shopping carts,
have blossomed into a national reminder of combat in the gulf. All around the
country, neighborhoods and entire towns have smothered themselves in yellow
ribbon, looking a little like captives of the wrap artist Christo.

But the symbol is ambiguous, flaunted with equal fervor by supporters and
opponents of the war.

The yellow ribbon, inspired by a 1973 song and popularized during the Iran
hostage crisis that ended in January 1981, has become a patriotic hommage to the
soldiers themselves, a way of sheltering the warriors from controversy about the
war.

"We were looking for a way to support the kids and let them know we're thinking
of them," said Barbara Kone, who with a friend has so far wrapped almost every
tree and 150 houses in Caroline, N.Y., a community of 3,500 people. After the
stores ran out of ribbon, she resorted to fluorescent yellow surveyors' tape. "I
didn't want us to get into the blame-the-soldiers problem that happened during
Vietnam," she said.

If there is a unifying thread to the country's conflicting sentiments about the
war in the gulf, it is a conviction that this generation of soldiers should not
be treated as shabbily as were the combatants in Vietnam; the yellow ribbon is
their promissory note. "My brother was concerned that coming home would be bad,
like Vietnam again." Ms. Shuh noted. "I said, 'Under no circumstances.' "

A New Use for Police Tape

The Vietnam veterans who frequent Boedekker Park, a seedy half block of park
benches in San Francisco's Tenderloin district, have adorned trees and a fence
with dozens of giant yellow bows made from the only available fabric, yellow
police tape with "Do Not Cross" printed on it.

"Seventy to 80 percent of us are black down here and we can't help but support
the troops because 32 percent of the Army is black," said a park denizen, who
said he was a Vietnam veteran but declined to give his name. "I know what it
means to lose a war," he said. "I don't want it, but once it's started I'm going
to do everything I can to make sure it ain't lost."

The yellow ribbon is viewed by most people as patriotic, not political. Las
Vegas casinos have draped yellow ribbons over their neon signs. Lorillard Inc.
is adding yellow ribbon stripes to the upper corners of magazine ads for Kent,
Newport and True cigarettes. And Everson Walls, a defensive back for the New
York Giants, defied National Football League regulations and wore a yellow wrist
band in the Super Bowl.

The yellow ribbon has become so apolitical and ubiquitous a symbol that some
feel they need to attach it to a more pointed message. In Concord, Calif., a
tatoo artist is busy applying peace symbols topped by yellow bows.

Members of the Vietnam Veterans of America have taken to wearing orange ribbons
as a reminder of the damaging effects of agent orange, a defoliant sprayed in
Vietnam, as well as a warning about the prospect of chemical warfare in the
gulf.

To David Cline, a New Jersey organizer of Vietnam Veterans Against the War, the
orange ribbon symbolizes "that the war is senseless and unneccessary." It
carried the opposite meaning to another Vietnam veteran, Mrs. Kone's husband,
Wilson, who wears an orange ribbon next to his yellow one. He said his only
regret about the Persian Gulf war was that it did not begin sooner.

Sales of American flags and American eagle emblems have also soared, and
shortages of yellow and orange ribbon have driven people to improvise with
home-dyed twine, engineers' tape and in at least one case in New Waverly, Tex.,
of folded yellow plastic tablecloths.

C. M. Offray and Son, a giant ribbon manufacturing company with headquarters in
Chester, N.J., has shipped 30 million yards of yellow ribbon, a tenfold increase
over last year. The company is on six-day work weeks and 24-hour operations to
keep up with demand.

Yellow ribbons were used widely during the Iranian hostage crisis, but the
practice was first adopted to welcome the returning prisoners from Vietnam,
inspired by the 1973 love song by Tony Orlando and Dawn, "Tie a Yellow Ribbon
Round the Old Oak Tree," about a returning convict.

The song, according to one of its writers, L. Russell Brown of Cedar Grove,
N.J., was based on a story he had heard about a woman who tied a yellow
handkerchief to welcome her lover back from the Civil War. There are historians
who cavil about the exact origins of the legend. Some point to the fact that
yellow was the color of the United States Cavalry; others cite a World War I
folk song entitled, "For Her Love Who Was Far Away," which was used in a John
Wayne cavalry movie, "She Wore a Yellow Ribbon."

In any case, it was the sentimental pop tune that brought the yellow ribbon to
its current pitch of patriotism. Mr. Orlando, who keeps a yellow ribbon tied to
the antenna of his Mercedes in Los Angeles, and wears a yellow silk slash on the
lapel of his tuxedo when he performs, said: "I feel very proud. All I did was
record the song; the American people turned it into an anthem of freedom."

There are those who find the yellow ribbon inappropriate. "To me it stands for
hostages," said Undis Foltz, of Puyallup, Wash., who said she created the yellow
ribbon symbol for the Iranian hostages after hearing Mr. Orlando's song on the
radio in 1980. Mrs. Foltz is currently leading a Flags Across America movement
to support the troops. "A flag is more patriotic to servicemen," she said.

But Penne Laingen, whose husband, Bruce, was a hostage in Iran, and is more
widely credited with popularizing the yellow ribbon, disagreed. She has kept a
ribbon on her front lawn in Bethesda, Md., for six years to honor the Beirut
hostages. It is now weathered gray.

She recently added a fresh yellow ribbon for her two sons who are serving in the
gulf. "To me, its just a symbol of caring," she said. "Of standing by our
people, and waiting patiently."


LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Yellow ribbon decorated Tony Carbone's home in Hoboken (Kim
Garnick/The New York Times) (pg. 1); The yellow ribbon, popularized by a 1973
song and during the Iranian hostage crisis, has become a hommage to the soliders
by both supports and opponents of the war. Agnes Colanconico tied a yellow
ribbon outside her apartment in the Carroll Gardens section of Brooklyn. (Dith
Pran/The New York Times) (pg. 16)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The Casualties;
Pentagon Seems Vague on the Iraqis' Death Toll

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1136 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 2


After more than two weeks of war in the Persian Gulf involving the heaviest
sustained bombing in history, the Pentagon is avoiding any estimate of Iraqi
deaths so far.

No American official has yet ventured an estimate on how many Iraqis, soldiers
and civilians, may have died under the coalition's bombardment.

"We just have no concrete way of knowing," said Pete Williams, the Pentagon
spokesman, when pressed repeatedly by reporters for estimates of the casualties
inflicted on the Republican Guards, which are the part of the field army in
Kuwait and southern Iraq that are being bombed most heavily. "There simply isn't
any way of knowing."

Other analysts, using traditional intelligence tools for estimating such things,
said the dead in those units alone probably numbered close to 1,000. The overall
death toll could be as low as a few thousand or more than 10,000, they said.

U.S. Casualties Precisely Known

The Pentagon has reported these American casualties: 12 killed in action, 9
wounded, 23 missing and 8 listed as prisoners of war.

From the Pentagon's point of view, casualty estimates are not only hard to make
but are not considered a significant measure of the war's success.

Military officials and outside analysts mention four main reasons not to make
estimates of the enemy dead. First, it is impossible to do so accurately.
Second, in military terms, the number of dead is not considered as important as
the number of hits against command centers, communications links, airfields and
major weapons. Third, officers who fought in Vietnam remember that they were
criticized for how they reported enemy dead in that war. And last, it could be
politically imprudent to overemphasize the bloodshed, undermining support for
the coalition effort both at home and abroad.

Members of Congress who have asked for an estimate of Iraqi casualties during
classified briefings have been told repeatedly that it is not available,
congressional aides say.

Reasons Not Clear

It is not clear whether the military's reluctance to make a public estimate of
Iraqi casualties could be fed by concern that the total is high, or because the
attrition of the Iraqi field army is low, or because the civilian casualties are
out of acceptable proportion to the military ones.

Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the field commander in the gulf, made plain at the
outset of the war that he was opposed to releasing estimates of enemy
casualties.

"I have absolutely no idea what the Iraqi casualties are," he said at his first
press conference shortly after the war began, "and I tell you, if I have
anything to say about it, we're never going to get into the body-count business.
That's, at best, nothing more than rough, wild estimates, and it's ridiculous to
do that."

As the war continued and the Pentagon released extensive details about the
bombings, replete with videotapes and crammed with statistics about sorties
flown and targets damaged, General Schwarzkopf and his aides have repeatedly
sworn off counting the dead, saying that this was a mistake the military made in
Vietnam and would not make again.

Deeply Seated Impulse

The impulse, deeply seated in the military psyche, is not to repeat the patterns
of Vietnam, where the published images of combat were often bloody and the
counts of enemy dead were often exaggerated.

On Friday, British officers at a briefing in Saudi Arabia told reporters that
300 Iraqis had been killed in fighting along the Kuwaiti border. Later they
reported that they had made a mistake -- only 30 had been killed. They estimated
500 prisoners had been taken.

Steven Canby, an adjunct professor of military affairs at Georgetown University,
said that it would be "impossible to determine" with any accuracy precisely how
many Iraqis have been killed across the breadth of Iraq and Kuwait.

But other analysts noted that the Pentagon has a great deal of information,
including photographs taken by satellites and aircraft, and complete lists of
targets hit and bombs dropped, that would allow it to make a reliable rough
estimate, perhaps within a margin of error of several thousand.

Joshua Epstein, a military analyst at the Brookings Institution who specializes
in empirical measurements of combat effectiveness, said a formula could be
constructed based on a list of the targets struck, the estimated population
densities at and near the targets, the lethal radius of the explosives dropped,
and the demonstrated accuracy of similar weapons in tests.

Kenneth S. Brower, a Pentagon consultant and international research fellow
associated with Sandhurst, the British military school, said that he believes
only a few thousand Iraqis have been killed so far. Most of them were probably
soldiers, he estimated.

War in Suez an Example

He said that experience in the so-called War of Attrition between Israel and
Egypt along the Suez Canal in 1969 and 1970, when Egyptian forces were dug in
and Israel's air force bombed them with impunity, demonstrated that it took an
average of eight tons of bombs to kill a single Egyptian soldier.

Even when the bombing turned to Iraqi divisions in the field, the focus was on
destroying equipment and supplies rather than simply killing soldiers.

"The United States is not trying to kill people as much as it is to reduce the
capacity of Iraq to prosecute an organized war effort," said Loren B. Thompson,
deputy director of the national security program at Georgetown University.

"General Schwarzkopf's main concern is that when you get into the body-count
business, you end up perverting the bomb damage assess," he added. "You have a
talisman, a single measure of success that really isn't related to whether you
are winning the war."

At the same time, he said, when damage is listed in terms of tanks destroyed or
airfields cratered, as the Pentagon has done, "you avoid talking about lives
lost, and that serves both an esthetic and a practical purpose."

Political Dangers

In practical terms, counting the dead invites not only mathematical errors but
political dangers.

As the number of Iraqis killed becomes known it might inflame Arab public
opinion in Jordan and the occupied territories of Israel, where Saddam Hussein
has many supporters. The casualty figures could also fray the alliance's
solidarity by making the war unpopular in nations like Egypt and Syria, which
have joined the coalition.

At the same time, the mounting death toll may well horrify many in the United
States who are opposed to the war on moral grounds.

How many civilians are killed is an especially important question in this
regard.

"I would say hundreds of civilian deaths, thousands of civilians wounded, tens
of thousands traumatized and millions of refugees," said Mr. Thompson.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Marines looking through abandoned possesions near an Iraqi tank
yesterday in Khafji, Saudi Arabia. The tank was destroyed by allied troops.
(Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: War Notebook;
This Time, 'Good to Go' Is American Battle Cry

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 880 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Feb. 2


"Sorry about that" was repeated by American soldiers so often in Vietnam that it
became a disillusioned catch phrase for that war. Thus far in the Persian Gulf
war, the comparable phrase is the far more bouyant "good to go."

The phrase means "ready and eager," and to American officers the difference is
cause for optimism. The Vietnam veterans among the officers heap praise on the
young soldiers.

Some of the marines received their first bloodying this week, both in the fight
at Khafji and further west along the border where Iraqi tanks staged a series of
probing attacks. They took it laconically, by the accounts of pool reporters and
others at the front.

Cpl. Edmund Willis was at the trigger of a TOW anti-tank missile mounted on a
light armored vehicle on the Kuwaiti border when an Iraqi tank column advanced
into his crosshairs out of the early morning blackness.

"I just shut everything out of my mind but my job," Corporal Willis said. "I had
the target. I could see the target's muzzle pointing toward us."

He took out two Iraqi tanks.

By this morning, the Iraqis in that sector west of Khafji had pulled back to the
concealment of an enormous date plantation in Kuwait, after being pounded by
fighter-bombers and attack helicopters.

"They have pulled back and appear to be regrouping," said Lieut. Col. Jan Huly
of the Marines. "With so many fires burning, it is still impossible to get an
accurate kill count, but they certainly took a significant battering."

After five months of training in the desert, marines in another unit are growing
quiet now, on what may be the eve of battle. They have sent packets of letters
and momentos home, clearing the decks.

"If you haven't learned how to fight and survive now," Sgt. Bob Bowles told the
riflemen in his squad, "you never will."

 Woman Seeking Combat

Specialist Donna Brown is determined to serve in a combat unit. The United
States Army has been trying to see that she does not.

A big obstacle, she said, was officers afraid that their careers would be
jeopardized.

"They told me if you get hurt, somebody else is going to get in trouble," she
said. "They said America's not ready for women in combat. The media will splash
pictures of blown-up females across the front page, and the United States can't
handle that."

Specialist Brown, a tiny figure whose helmet carries the slogan "La Unica
Mujer," Spanish for "the only woman," said she wanted to make a stand for
women's rights.

"I hate to see the guys always getting eighty-sixed," she said, using military
jargon for killed in action. "Not fair."

She joined the Army Reserve in 1983 and switched from a hospital to a
firefighting unit as a clerk-typist. The unit, which trains to put out aircraft
and other fires, is attached to an airborne combat engineer batallion that would
probably be involved in any allied land offensive.

"These guys have been trained to go into combat," she said. "It would be neat to
be up there. Not dead, though."

Sorry for Iraqis

For Major Ibrahim of the Kuwaiti Navy, it is a world turned upside down. For
eight years his country helped Iraq in its war against Iran, and he disliked
Americans because of their steadfast support of Israel.

Now, he is serving aboard an American ship, the guided missile frigate Curts in
the Persian Gulf, interrogating Iraqi prisoners and harboring bad feelings about
the Palestine Liberation Organization and its leader, Yasir Arafat.

"After all those years we helped them, they help Saddam at the critical moment
for us," the 34-year-old naval officer said of the Palestinians.

His talks with the Iraqi prisoners have only saddened him more, he told a pool
reporter aboard the ship.

"They're not criminals," he said of the Iraqis. "We are brothers. We look alike.
We understand each other's Arabic. There's little difference between me and
them.

"When I interview them, some of them say: 'Please don't write down my name. If
you tell someone, they will kill my family.' The men understand that Saddam is
going against the whole world, but they are afraid."

 The War on Canvas

One of the first paintings Comdr. Chip Beck did here was a portrait of President
Saddam Hussein. It adorned a bomb that has since been dropped on Iraq.

Armed with a sketchbook and a camera, Commander Beck is a combat artist,
commissioned by the Navy to capture the war on canvas in paintings that will
hang in the Naval Historical Center in the Washington Navy Yard. He watched
fighters take off from the flight deck of the aircraft carrier Ranger the day
the war began, and is now at the front with the Marines and hopes to be with
them if they storm Kuwait City.

In normal life a State Department officer concerned with the third world,
Commander Beck, a reservist and Vietnam veteran, says he hopes to capture the
desert war in a realistic style.

"The fatigue on a soldier's face, the lines around the eyes of a Bedouin who has
spent his life in the desert and now must confront war -- those are the things I
concentrate on," he said.

"Anybody who has been in war is probably opposed to it in some fashion because
it is not a pleasant experience," Commander Beck said. "I will try to show
people the way of war and the folly of it."

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The Troops;
Copter Pilot, After Battle, No Longer Sees Quick War

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 894 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Feb. 2


For the Marine pilot, Michael Steele, what he'd read in books and heard in
lectures about the prowess of Iraqi soldiers was finally tested this week, and
Major Steele left the confrontation all the more anxious about the fight to
come.

"This war will not be a cakewalk," said Major Steele, whose helicopter squadron
became the first American military unit to engage in a firefight with large
numbers of Iraqi troops on this side of the Kuwait border.

"Nobody who is going to go face-to-face with the Iraqis -- cold steel to cold
steel -- believes it will be a cakewalk," he said. "Nobody here is saying that
we'll be home by Easter."

View Shared by Others

It is a pessimistic view shared by others at the Saudi airfield where Major
Steele and his unit, the 369th Marine Light-Attack Helicopter Squadron, are now
based, and from where they launched the successful campaign with Saudi troops
this week to retake the coastal town of Khafji from Iraqi invaders.

It is a view shared, too, by other front-line American soldiers and airmen who
dispute the optimistic projections now being offered by some of the American
generals and admirals who are running the Persian Gulf war.

While unimpressed by Iraqi strategy and still convinced of an eventual allied
victory, front-line troops say that Iraqi ground troops will put up a fight that
their colleagues in Iraq's air force and navy have as yet been unwilling to
wage.

The land war to drive Iraqi forces from Kuwait will go on not for weeks, but for
months, they say.

"The Iraqis are less organized than I expected, but they fight hard," said Capt.
Mike Rocco of Staten Island, a Marine pilot in a separate squadron of Cobra
attack helicopters that participated in the recapture of Khafji, the first major
land battle of the war.

'Many People Will Die'

"I wouldn't say this war will be quick," he said. "Many people will die."

Major Steele, 36 years old, from Aurora, Colo., has the look of the
quintessential American airman with his brown leather bomber jacket, zippered
olive green flight suit and confident jut-jawed grin -- Gary Cooper come to the
Persian Gulf.

His nickname, stenciled on the side of one of the Cobras parked at the base, is
Steely Dan.

But his is a different generation of American pilots, one that has moved beyond
the stereotypes that once seemed to flourish in the military and painted an
enemy as more brutal than cunning, more desperate than determined.

"In a lot of the war movies made in 1940's, you always had the Japanese
portrayed as some sort of monkey type of guy," he said. "I don't have an Iraqi
stereotype, a camel driver or whatever. I have respect for their fighting
ability."

Iraqis Showed Tenacity

The Iraqis' tenacity, if not their ability, was on display in the opening rounds
of the fierce 36-hour battle for Khafji, the coastal city only 10 miles south of
the Kuwaiti border, he said.

Shortly after midnight on Wednesday morning, Major Steele was on duty -- "strip
alert," the marines call it -- when the call came in that 25 Iraqi vehicles had
crossed the border from Kuwait into Saudi Arabia and were heading south.

His four-helicopter squadron scrambled within minutes, the stubby weapon racks
on the Cobras crammed with the flares used to locate enemy armor, and the
rockets to destroy it. The Cobras' mission is to support ground troops and the
helicopters fly as close to the scrub-covered desert floor of Saudi Arabia as
they dare.

"We may be 50 feet off the ground," Major Steele said. "We may be 10 feet."

Missiles Hit Convoy

When they arrived at a dusty roadway about a mile north of the center of Khafji,
the pilots discovered a convoy of six Iraqi armed troop carriers the size of
large trucks. The troop carriers were parked, the small cannons in their roof
turrets silent.

The Cobras attacked, Major Steele unleashing a rocket that slammed into the
roadway.

Three of the troop carriers started their engines and fled into the night. But
not so the others; although hopelessly outgunned by the swarming Cobras
overhead, the three troop carriers stayed and prepared to fight.

"The return fire we got was sporadic and it was not well aimed," Major Steele
said. "But there was return fire. Each one of them fired a round."

The helicopters immediately returned a hail of fire and, the Cobra pilot said,
almost certainly destroyed two of the troop carriers. Another appeared to get
away.

Expected a Fight

The Iraqis, Major Steele said, had lived up to their reputation to fight even if
the fight was not balanced, even if they might have no choice but to die in a
battle against a clearly more powerful foe. "I expected some of them to fight
and they did," he said.

It is a scene that Major Steele expects to see played out again and again
through the weeks and, he suspects, the months of the war against Iraq.

"The Union was supposed to take Richmond in three weeks, we were going to win
Vietnam in a week and a half," he said, leaning against a menacing-looking Cobra
painted in desert shades of tan and powder blue, the helicopter that bears his
nickname. "I'm very cognizant of not being too optimistic."

"There are 500,000 people up there," he said, motioning to a point not far away
across the northern desert. "Some of them are going to fight. I know that."



LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: United States Marines riding through the streets of Khafji,
Saudi Arabia, yesterday. The coastal city was returned to allied control after
the first major land battle of the war, which led many front-line American
soldiers to predict a more bloddy land war than they expected earlier (Reuters).

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Bush's Holy War: The Crusader's Cloak Can Grow Heavy on the Shoulders

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 3; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1505 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AS President Bush gambles for greatness in the Persian Gulf, he finds himself in
a rare predicament.

The pragmatic President who plied Realpolitik for the first two years of his
Administration is suddenly on a moral crusade. The President who always tended
to shy away from rallying the American public to any cause for any sustained
period is now offering a passionate disquisition on good versus evil, right
versus wrong, a just war, a moral use of force, virtue and vice, religious
values and the will of God.

In explaining the war in the Middle East and building support for it, Mr. Bush
must blend the proper elements of strategic realism and morality. If he errs on
the side of realism, without offering a greater good, he demoralizes the troops
and the country and encourages the notion that this is a conflict involving no
more than trading blood for oil, as the protesters suggest. If he offers too
much moral umbrage, too many overdrawn comparisons to Hitler, he runs the risk
of so enlarging the war objectives that he could not accept anything less than
total capitulation; how can you leave Evil Incarnate to run Iraq?

Wars are just, after all, precisely insofar as their aims and means are limited,
keeping the violence in proportion to the reason for fighting.  That is what
makes them different from holy wars, in which there are no restraints or
boundaries because it is God's will to slaughter the infidel.

For better or worse, by talking so aggressively about right and wrong, Mr. Bush
has set a new moral standard by which to measure his future foreign policy. "If
you claim to act from moral motives on one occasion, your motives will be
questioned on other actions," said Michael Walzer, author of "Just and Unjust
Wars." "There has to be a balancing of the moral ledger over the long haul."

The Democrats have already indicated that they will hold President Bush
accountable for some consistency on the issue. In his response to the
President's State of the Union address, Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine said
America must seek a world "where justice and human rights are respected
everywhere."

"Students massacred in China, priests murdered in Central America, demonstrators
gunned down in Lithuania -- these acts of violence are as wrong as Iraqi
soldiers killing civilians," Mr. Mitchell said. "We cannot oppose oppression in
one place and overlook it in another."

There will be some awkwardness about the President's returning to the "let's
make a deal" style of policy-making that he practiced for two years with his
friend Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d -- guided not by the sort of
ideologies and moral edge that influenced Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan, but
more completely by instinct, reasonableness and a sensitivity to American
economic interests. The White House has not given a high level of attention to
Amnesty International reports in the last year detailing abuses in such
countries as Iran, Burma, Sri Lanka, Egypt, Brazil and Saudi Arabia. And while
the State Department's annual report on human rights calls Iraq's record
"abysmal," it also sharply berates Syria, an American ally in the gulf war, and
to a lesser degree criticizes Kuwait, Turkey, Saudi Arabia and Israel.

But just before he began the bombardment of Baghdad, Mr. Bush said "the moral
purpose" of the war could be found in an Amnesty International report detailing
the tortures and killing of Kuwaitis by Iraqi soldiers.

"I don't know about the rest of the American people, but I care," the President
told People magazine. "Kids there who were passing out leaflets in Kuwait were
picked up by the Iraqis. They were 15 or 16. They were tied to a stake in a
square in Kuwait and then they were made to wait 'til their parents came and
then they were shot. Does the world give a damn about that any more? I do, and I
think those kids out there in the desert understand, too."

A senior Bush adviser was asked before the war why the lives of the Chinese
young people were less a subject of vocal American moral outrage than the lives
of the Kuwaiti young people. "Regimes doing it to their own is different because
there's relatively little you can do about that," the White House official
replied. "And the President thinks it's particularly horrible when an outsider
comes in and visits these horrors on people."

Of course, Saddam Hussein has killed his own people, too, and with poison gas,
but when he did it the United States was still in its time of Middle East
pragmatism, hoping that Mr. Hussein's Iraq, however brutal, could be kept on a
leash while continuing to balance the fanatacism of Iran. The United States had,
after all, been hoping for that since Iraq invaded Iran in 1980.

The President's newfound vocal morality may make it more difficult for him to
make the sort of trade-offs that he has made to keep the anti-Iraq alliance
together, or it may at least give his critics ammunition when he does. The most
dramatic of these maneuvers included refusing to strongly criticize Mikhail S.
Gorbachev after Soviet security forces killed 21 pro-independence demonstrators
in the Baltics, and posing for a smiling picture with Hafez al-Assad, even
though the State Department notes that the Syrian leader's record on human
rights is almost indistinguishable from Saddam Hussein's and even though it is
believed that Syria is harboring the perpetrators of the bombing of Pan Am
flight 103.

Political leaders must use moral rhetoric to justify wars because they have to
defend, both ethically and politically, the act of killing people. On a purely
cynical level, it is necessary to build a consensus. As Nietzsche once wrote,
"Morality is the best of all devices for leading mankind by the nose."

But the United States is a nation with a streak of piousness and a belief that
morality must be part of public policy, and leaders who fail to morally engage
Americans risk a backlash. Patrick Glynn of the American Enterprise Institute
noted that when Lyndon Johnson tried to keep Vietnam on a back burner and avoid
a moral dialogue, fearing that his social programs might be swept aside if war
fever raged and the political right benefited, the war protesters started the
moral debate for him.

Mr. Bush may be known for the malleability of his political principles, but his
advisers say he truly believes he has the moral high ground in the gulf. As one
of his aides earnestly put it, the week America went to war: "This is not about
oil. This is about right and wrong."

Mr. Bush is, after all, from the Eastern upper class that dominated the foreign
policy establishment for decades, certain of its own morality and its right to
lead. Within that class, he was among those committed to the principle that
America had an obligation to intervene to help less powerful countries and to
hold the line against aggression.

In June 1940, 16-year-old George Bush listened raptly when Henry L. Stimson,
Franklin D. Roosevelt's Secretary of War -- who later would take a major
responsibility in developing the atom bomb and deciding to drop it on Japan --
spoke at the graduation at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass. Colonel Stimson,
who believed that internationalism went hand in hand with moral responsibility
and that it was America's duty to civilize the world, told his young listeners
he envied them "the opportunity" to choose between "right and wrong" and stand
up for good against evil.

Last week, Mr. Bush cited Plato, Cicero and St. Thomas Aquinas in arguing that
"the first principle of a just war is that it support a just cause."

"It is a war with which good will prevail," he told the National Religious
Broadcasters Convention. "Our cause could not be more noble." In his
proclamation for a National Prayer Day today, he said that, "entrusted with the
holy gift of freedom, and allowed to prosper in its great light, we have a
responsibility to serve as a beacon to the world."

While some American commentators have questioned whether it was prudent for Mr.
Bush to go to war, Saddam Hussein makes such a seductive villain that few
pundits have questioned the President's assertion that this is a just war.

St. Augustine developed the just-war theory in the fifth century, on the premise
that there are worse evils than physical destruction; it has been the dominant
Christian ethical position on war ever since. "We go to war to gain peace," he
wrote, and St. Thomas Aquinas added the refinement that the invaders should have
"a rightful intention."

Ethicists are heartened that the country is engaged in a moral debate. And, they
point out, morality is not like logic. It is not always consistent and it is not
always pure. A leader must act appropriately to each occasion, applying prudence
and hopefully some consistency. But they also agree that now that Mr. Bush has
shown his moral edge, he may not be able to sheathe it after the Iraqis are
punished. As Mr. Glynn put it, "He may end up being carried along by this ball
he's begun rolling."

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush, visiting Fort Stewart, Ga., on Friday, snaps a
picture with a woman's camera. (Agence-France Presse)(pg. 1); President Bush
speaking on Friday at the Cherry Point Marine Air Station in North Carolina.
(Reuters)(pg. 2)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 3, 1991, Sunday, 1Late Edition - Final

The World;
For the Economy, the Gulf War Has Little Impact -- So Far

BYLINE: By PETER PASSELL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1372 words


WAR has a way of putting lesser matters in a different perspective, but as a
number of politicians and economists noted last week, it does not make them
disappear. Washington must still cope with the age-old issues of guns vs.
butter. And mercifully, economists say, if there is ever such a thing as the
right time to fight a war, this is it. Unless Iraq manages to wreak havoc in the
Saudi oilfields or shocks American consumers into a prolonged and unaccustomed
bout of self-denial, it will barely cause a ripple in the economy.

Astonishingly expensive weapons are going up in smoke in Operation Desert Storm
-- a single Patriot missile costs as much as a year's worth of Head Start for
500 pre-schoolers. But as Robert Hormats of Goldman Sachs International notes,
"this is a prepaid war" -- the weapons are coming out of the enormous stockpiles
amassed for a no-holds-barred defense of Europe, and most will probably not be
replaced after the fighting is over.

No war, of course, can be fought entirely out of inventory. The Pentagon is
shopping for hundreds of items ranging from sand-resistant boots to anti-nerve
gas injectors.

At least one big-ticket item, fuel, is being picked up by the Saudis. And unlike
Korea or Vietnam, this war is being fought during a recession. With excess
capacity in almost every domestic industry, war production need not come at the
expense of consumption or business investment.

Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, warned last week that
one real risk is that the war will retard the economy, not overheat it. A big
spike in oil prices or a mass strike by consumers would work like a tax
increase, paring demand and deepening a recession that, in light of the latest
unemployment figures, is looking increasingly serious.

Stimulating Demand

But neither seems likely. Worldwide inventories of oil are apparently sufficient
to buffer anything short of a wipeout of Saudi oil operations. And though
consumer confidence has yet to rebound from prewar jitters, few analysts think
the war itself will keep shoppers out of stores for very long.

Wars typically stimulate demand for goods and services, straining productive
capacity and driving governments to extraordinary efforts to contain civilian
buying power. In World War II, for example, Washington simply ordered companies
to stop making low-priority items and rationed many others. These direct
constraints were supplemented with high-pressure appeals to buy war bonds.

In the case of Vietnam, President Lyndon B. Johnson dared not ask Congress to
cut domestic spending or take more out of workers' paychecks, and the public was
hardly in the mood to save. The result was inflation -- what Richard Nixon the
Presidential candidate called "the cruelest tax."

This time around, argues William A. Niskanen, the head of the Cato Institute,
who was an economic adviser to President Ronald W. Reagan, circumstances are
different. Great quantities of costly munitions are being expended in the air
war, and a ground assault could use up hardware at an unprecedented rate. But
conventional weapons inventories, built up over the last two decades to defend
Western Europe against the Red Army, far exceed most analysts' estimates of
projected needs.

Consider, for example, the TOW infantry missile. According to Steven Alexis Cain
of the Defense Budget Project, the Pentagon has purchased some 267,000 TOW's
since 1974. And while procurement is only a "rough estimate" of inventories, it
is difficult to see how the Army could use up more than a small fraction of them
against Saddam Hussein's few thousand tanks and armored personnel carriers.

A similar story can be told about the pinpoint-accurate Tomahawk cruise missile,
used to wipe out command and communications facilities in the wee hours of the
war. Some 200 Tomahawks were launched -- leaving 2,200 of the $1.35 million
weapons. The Pentagon is doing some buying. The Commerce Department reported
last week that factory orders for machines and other durable equipment were up
4.4 percent in December, with the gain due largely to orders for military goods.
But thanks to the recession, the economy apparently has the capacity to meet
military demands without breaking a sweat.

The gain made up less than half the 10 percent decline in factory demand in
November, and left total orders a full 7 percent below last year's level. It is
always possible, Mr. Niskanen concedes, that war demand will cause economic
bottlenecks -- laid-off auto workers in Detroit won't jump on the first plane to
Arizona, where jobs riveting helicopter fuselages are going begging.

Disguised Blessings

The industry that might have been most greatly affected by shortages of
specialized workers was air transport, which lost thousands of pilots in the
call-up of reserves. But the call-up has proved a blessing of sorts, trimming
payrolls while every airline had too many seats and too few passengers. The
callup had similar effects in other industries undergoing layoffs.

It should thus come as no surprise that Robert Reischauer of the Budget Office
argues it would be premature to offset increased military demand with higher
taxes. Indeed, the Fed chairman, Mr. Greenspan, suggests the greater risk is
that the war will actually lengthen and deepen the recession by curbing total
demand.

The doubling of oil prices after the August invasion of Kuwait drained domestic
purchasing power -- and with it any doubts that the American economy was in
recession. Oil prices ebbed in December, as Saudi Arabia made good on its
promise to make up for supplies lost in Iraq and Kuwait. And they fell sharply
when it appeared that the liberation of Kuwait would be swift and easy. But a
successful Iraqi attack on Saudi refineries and loading operations might again
push crude prices toward $40 a barrel.

Awash in Oil

Philip Verleger, an economist at the Institute for International Economics in
Washington, notes that the world is now awash with oil. Commercial inventories
are at their highest since the early 1980's, and the industrial economies are
committed to selling 2 million barrels a day from strategic reserves to cover
temporary shortfalls in production.

Tom Wallin, an analyst at the Petroleum Intelligence Weekly, adds that seasonal
oil consumption patterns are also working in the allies' favor: energy demand
will dip to the annual low in April or May, giving the allies breathing room to
repair any damage to the oil infrastructure.

With or without higher oil prices, the war could cause the economy to contract
if Americans put away their credit cards for the duration. "You risk consumer
confidence deteriorating," Mr. Greenspan told the House Banking Committee
Thursday. "This economy is obviously subject more than at anytime I have seen in
the recent past to changes in psychology."

But it is important to distinguish shoppers' decisions to stay home to catch the
war news -- what has been dubbed "The CNN factor" -- from decisions to forgo
consumption that reflect more fundamental concerns about their financial
security. It is hardly surprising, argues Mr. Reischauer, that people think
twice in the early days of a war before buying a new Cadillac. But he finds it
improbable that the war worries would generate enduring changes in spending.

Historically, he notes, changes in consumer confidence are the effect rather
than the cause of real changes in the economy. People may buy less because they
fear unemployment. "But most analyses," he concludes, "suggest that expectations
don't in themselves explain much."

The odds are still high, then, that the gulf war will neither generate new
inflationary pressures nor add much to the pain of the current recession. That's
good -- or is it?

In past wars, the effects have quickly been felt at home in the form of higher
prices or material shortages. That has translated into a sense of shared
sacrifice with the soldiers at the front -- or in the case of Vietnam, a check
on the militancy of policymakers. This time around, harsh economic realities
will not help fill the gulf of perception between those who do the fighting and
those who watch it on TV.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Table: "Fighting from Inventory" lists U.S. inventories of selected
weapons deployed in the Persian Gulf. (Source: Defense Budget Project)

Graphs: "Fuel Supplies are Strong" shows global oil supplies. "Industrial
Capacity: Room to grow" shows industrial capacity utilization in the United
States. "Consumers are cautious" shows the Conference Board's index of comsumer
confidence. "Oil production keeps pace" shows worldwide production and
consumption of oil. (Sources: PIW's Global Oil Stocks & Balances; Federal
Reserve Board; The Conference Board)

Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Never Saw a Protest I Didn't Like, but Now. . .

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 392 words


To the Editor:

Having grown up in the 1960's, I've never seen a protest I didn't like. I might
not have always agreed with the shouted objectives or postered profanities, but
it seemed such an American thing to do. Our house in Amsterdam, N.Y., always
flew the Stars and Stripes on national holidays at a time few others did. The
only thing that disturbed me more than seeing protesters burn the American flag
was finding out how few of my fellow citizens bothered to vote.

In times past I fasted for Biafra (remember?), marched on Washington for peace
in Vietnam and was arrested for blocking the draft board in Albany. Still
wanting to do my patriotic bit, I served in the Peace Corps. I've lobbied
against U.S. involvement in Central America. In 1989 I even got my face in
Newsweek for demonstrating on behalf of free speech in the Salman Rushdie
affair.

Of late I have petitioned the President and written letters to my Congressional
representative not to go to war in the Persian Gulf. Now that we are at war,
things have changed.

I will not be participating in this Saturday's march on Washington. Oh, I had
planned to join the demonstrators in Times Square the day after fighting started
but I didn't go. My heart wasn't in it.

I've tried to understand my lack of enthusiasm. One difference is that this time
the President asked Congress for permission to commit our troops to battle. This
doesn't make the war right or moral, but it does reinforce our heretofore badly
abused Constitution. More important, unlike Vietnam, where the body bags started
coming home years before U.S. citizens realized a war was going on, this time
we've all had months to make our views known.

If nothing else, we shall soon learn whether the "lesson of Vietnam" is that the
United States should muzzle the media while hitting the enemy with everything
we've got (as the Pentagon seems to believe), or instead that technological and
military superiority don't always defeat a people determined to defend their
home soil or sand, as the case may be.

And so I pray and cry and tie yellow ribbons on my door. Once this nightmare is
over, I sincerely hope all Americans will ask our elected officials just how and
why we got ourselves into this mess -- and then shout, march and vote
accordingly.

(Rev.) JOSEPH R. VENEROSO
Maryknoll, N.Y., Jan. 24, 1991

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Never Saw a Protest I Didn't Like, but Now. . .;
Pride in America

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 271 words


To the Editor:

This week's unbelievable events are cause for reflection and retrospect. The
fighting in the Persian Gulf is not similar to the Vietnam conflict, nor is
Washington's current Administration similar to the Democratic Kennedy-Johnson
Administration that so haplessly dragged us into Vietnam. The goals of the war
with Iraq are clear, and we have a President and Cabinet fully committed to the
swift, decisive resolution of this crisis. Far more is at stake than cheap oil;
the balance of power in the Middle East and the preservation of the United
Nations' power to prevent militarily strong nations from absorbing smaller ones
will be the most important results of this conflict.

The intricate planning of the attack by military leaders and its flawless
execution by our servicemen and women have been nothing short of awe-inspiring.
For the first time in several years I can honestly say I am very proud to be an
American; yet I am even more proud of our all-volunteer military that is bravely
facing danger in the name of freedom.

It is with much anger and disgust that I see the so-called "peace movement"
mobilizing to once again disgrace America by flag-burning, demonstrations and
disrupting nonmilitary government operations. The way such "peace activists"
treated soldiers who served in Vietnam when they returned home from torturous
combat was and still is a national disgrace. This is a different time, a
different cause and one hopes we are a different nation. The men and women of
our armed forces deserve nothing less than our full support.

CHRIS A. HARMON
White Plains, Jan. 18, 1991

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

WAR IN THE GULF: The Marines;
War Is Vivid In Gun Sights Of the Sniper

BYLINE: By CHRIS HEDGES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1153 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Feb. 2


In an age of lasers and computers, of guided missiles and smart bombs, the
intimate tragedy of war perhaps seems most apparent when seen through the sights
of a sniper's rifle.

"When a sniper pulls the trigger, he can see the expression on a man's face when
the bullet hits," said Sgt. Mark E. Anderson, chief scout of the platoon of
Marine snipers and scouts breaking camp and getting ready to move at dawn the
next day to the front lines along the Kuwaiti border.

Hundreds, perhaps thousands, of allied troops have been moved north in similar
fashion in the last few days, in what a ranking officer called a "shadow-boxing
match" with Iraqi forces.

"Saddam Hussein knows where we are and we know where he is," said a battalion
commander, who asked not to be further identified. "We will move a lot now to
keep him off guard."

'Art of Killing'

The grand strategy of battle meant little to Staff Sgt. Douglas A. Luebke, the
noncommissioned chief of the platoon, and his men -- other than that for the
first time, they will be called on to go into combat, to do the job many have
trained years to carry out. They will crawl unseen within yards of enemy lines
and, firing three shots from a fixed position, take out enemy soldiers one by
one.

"It is the art of killing," Sergeant Luebke said. "We have to be perfect."

The snipers said they were trying to avoid thinking of their Iraqi opponents as
men with families and children. Several said the reputed mistreatment of
American prisoners of war had steeled them for their task.

"I try not to think about the other man's personal life," Sergeant Anderson
said. "I concentrate on him being the enemy. If I were to give him sympathy, I
don't think I would be effective."

"The more Iraqis I kill, the less of my buddies get killed," said Lance Cpl.
Marlan L. Reaves from Odessa, Tex.

In a testament to the black humor that comes with soldiering, platoon members
wrote a song about their work to the tune of "Walking in a Winter Wonderland."

When Sgt. Richard R. Barrett began one verse, several men joined in, their
voices drifting across the desert encampment.

As my M-40 fires,
His life will expire.
I shot to the head,
My target is dead.
Walking in a sniper wonderland.

Firearms are hardly new to most snipers. Nearly all the marines in the platoon
come from the country, where they grew up with weapons. They talk about stalking
an animal and a man in the same breath. Most are passionate trap and skeet
shooters. Their sentences are punctuated by the squirt of chewing tobacco and
the insertion of profanity as adjectives.

Several in the platoon chuckled as they watched a marine from the city try to
sever a plywood beam with an ax rather than a saw.

Most are poor, or lower-middle-class, and, while they are members of a volunteer
military, they roundly detest the "college kids" protesting the war in the
United States.

"They are pansies, these rich college kids," said Lance Corporal Reaves as he
let loose a jet of brown saliva. "They are just scared of being drafted and
doing what we do."

"Just because they were brought up in a higher-class family doesn't mean they
don't have to fight," said Cpl. Christopher F. Teel, from Ocean Spring, Miss.

A Book to Live By

The only book snipers all seem familiar with -- other than the Bible -- is
"Ninety-Three Confirmed Kills," an account of life as a Marine sniper in the
Vietnam War by Carlos Hathcock.

"You can't get into this sniper unit if you haven't read it," said Sergeant
Barrett, who has been a Marine sniper for six years.

The bonding of the unit, which will act as the eyes and ears of the battalion
from forward positions, is tight. Platoon members are disdainful even of fellow
marines, who in turn chafe at the snipers' arrogance.

"We are cocky as hell," Sergeant Luebke said. "It is the image we portray,
because we know we are the best in the battalion."

"You put me anywhere and I can put it in the head from 800 yards," Sergeant
Barrett said.

Sergeant Anderson, when he heard he was to be transferred as a drill instructor
rather than be sent to the gulf, pleaded with his superiors to get an extension
to go to war, even though he leaves behind a pregnant wife.

"I didn't want them to go to war without me," he said. "I had a responsibility
to be here. The easy way out would have been to go to the drill field."

"This is my second family," he said, sitting in his foxhole next to stacks of
vanilla pudding cans that the marines picked up from an abandoned Army camp.

The work of forward scouts and snipers is usually done at night, when two-man
teams creep slowly toward enemy lines, dressed in camel-colored camouflage
smocks and wearing paint on their faces.

The scouts and snipers call in artillery and aerial fire and try to kill enemy
soldiers who operate heavy weapons like machine guns or anti-aircraft weapons,
usually at dawn or dusk.

They carry M-40 A1 sniper rifles, which they set up on tripods, and precision
7.62-millimeter ammunition.

The Marine sniper rifle, painted steel gray, is simple in design. It has a heavy
stock, a thick stainless steel barrel, a mounted telescopic sight and bolt
action, rather than being semiautomatic. The simplicity of design, and
durability, allows snipers to make all major repairs on the weapon themselves.
The marines wrap black electrical tape around their rifle barrels to keep them
free from sand. They carry them in what they call a "drag bag," which hooks
around their shoulders and can be pulled along the ground as they crawl forward
to their positions.

The scouts also carry blue field notebooks where they work out the range and
distance of a target.

There are a dozen snipers in the platoon and each moves with an observer who
helps locate the target. The two-man teams will lie close to enemy lines,
sometimes for a day or two at a time.

When many snipers begin to nod off, they open their small round tin of
Copenhagen snuff and rub a little in their eyes.

The snipers had to pass a rigorous three-month Marine Corps course where they
were temporarily stripped of rank and referred to by their instructors as
"pigs."

Anyone who wears glasses, smokes or is left-handed is excluded. The attrition
rate in each course is more than 50 percent, according to the snipers.

"When you graduate you become a hog," said Sergeant Anderson, as he pulled a
cord, with a bronze-colored 7.62-millimeter bullet on it, from under his shirt,
"and then you get to wear one of these -- a hog's tooth."

As the unit got ready to leave camp, flames leapt up from rectangular holes
across the desert floor. Competing with the fading sunlight, the marines --
their eyes squinting against the acrid black smoke -- stood below ground and
slowly fed boxes of supplies, plastic maps and large white intelligence sheets
on Iraqi units page by page into the fires.


LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 10, 1991, Sunday

CORRECTION:

A front-page article last Sunday about Marine snipers in the Persian Gulf
misidentified a book widely read by a sniper unit. It is "Marine Sniper: 93
Confirmed Kills," by Charles Henderson.


                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Oakland Journal;
Schools Resist Call of the Military

BYLINE: By KATHERINE BISHOP, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 708 words

DATELINE: OAKLAND, Calif., Jan 31


Oakland Technical High School is a campus of nearly 1,600 students, 93 percent
of them black, Hispanic or Asian. Unlike some other inner-city high schools, it
appears to be winning the war against drugs and gangs and is keeping its old
buildings well-maintained and nearly graffiti-free.

But in this school, students and parents complain of another source of concern:
the tactics of military recruiters.

Like thousands of schools around the country, Oakland Technical has been making
its senior class list available to military recruiters. The lists have names,
home addresses and telephone numbers, and people here say the recruiters have
made liberal use of them.

"Some kids have been called 10 times by the same branch of the service," said
Dr. Gerald Kramer, the school's principal. "They say they are not interested and
they still get called again and again."

In January, a week before fighting broke out in the Persian Gulf, the Oakland
Board of Education voted unanimously to stop giving recruiters the lists from
its six high schools. A week after the war began, the Los Angeles School Board
followed Oakland's lead, ending a 20-year practice.

The resolutions do not affect the ability of the military to come to campus and
contact interested students, like any other potential employer.

Sheila Jordan, the Oakland School Board member who sponsored the resolution and
whose son attends Oakland Tech, said the vote came after a public meeting in
which there was "an incredible outpouring from both parents and students."

Ms. Jordan, who was active in the peace movement during the Vietnam War, said
that for her generation the times have "such a ring of familiarity with
demonstrations, war, being upset with the government." But to these teen-agers,
the experience is a new one.

"A lot of the students are very confused," she said. "They don't want to be
unpatriotic, but they feel specially targeted. There is a high level of
political consciousness around race and oppression here."

Barbara Sorensen, a spokeswoman for the Army Recruiting Command, denied that
minority and poor students were being singled out for recruitment. Rather, she
said, many young people whose horizons seem limited view the military as
providing them with training and college money.

State education law allows schools to give students' names to the military, and
many districts continue to do so.

Rick Jahnkow, program coordinator for the Project on Youth and Non-Military
Opportunities, a group based in San Diego County that informs high school
students about career and college alternatives to the military, said many
schools went well beyond giving the names of students. Thousands of schools give
the military's vocational aptitude test or allow recruiters to administer it and
use the results for recruiting. "These recruiters are the best-trained
salespeople in the world," Mr. Jahnkow said.

Some students say that while they dream of a college education the military
seems to be the only way it is economically possible. Mr. Jahnkow says that even
in California, with its enormous system of tuition-free community colleges and
state universities, many students whose parents did not attend college
mistakenly think there is no other way for them to go either.

Like many other critics, Mr. Jahnkow said recruiters deliberately focused on
inner-city schools in areas with large black and Hispanic populations and high
unemployment rates. "They try to do more outreach to schools where kids are more
vulnerable," he said. "Recruiters don't put effort into schools where they know
the kids have options."

Along corridors filled with boisterous teen-agers on their lunch break, Breeze
C. Murphy, a senior at Oakland Tech, said he had been called by every branch of
the service. "They talk like they're selling a used car," he said. "They said I
didn't even have to agree with the United States foreign policy, that I should
just do it for the money and the benefits. Service for the good of the country
is one thing. But they're inducing selfishness."

Ms. Sorensen of the Army Recruiting Command said: "We're not going to apologize
for the opportunities the Army offers. Money for college is part of the reward
for service."

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Peace Accord Adjustments Sought

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 659 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 3


In an effort to break an impasse on a United Nations peace plan for Cambodia,
the country's four warring factions will be asked to meet again in the next few
weeks, Western and Asian diplomats said today.

The idea is to adjust the plan, which was drafted in December, to meet
objections from Phnom Penh and Hanoi without derailing it altogether.

Over the weekend, representatives of Indonesia and France, the co-chairmen of
the suspended Paris International Conference on Cambodia, at which anypeace
treaty would be signed, met in Hanoi with Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach of
Vietnam.

The Indonesian Foreign Minister, Ali Alatas, and a French minister for Southeast
Asia, Edwige Avice, were accompanied by Raffeudin Ahmed, the United Nations
Deputy Secretary General in charge of Cambodia.

They went to Hanoi, the diplomats said, to persuade the Vietnamese to support
the peace plan drafted by China, France, Britain, the Soviet Union and the
United States, the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, and
to work on Phnom Penh to do the same. But Mr. Thach said that, while he now
understands the peace plan better, it needs unspecified "improvements." He said
Vietnam would support any settlement that all Cambodian parties could agree
upon.

To that end, he suggested another meeting of the Supreme National Council, which
includes members of all the Cambodian factions.

They are the Vietnamese-backed Government in Phnom Penh, led by Prime Minister
Hun Sen, and three opposition groups that form a loose alliance: the Communist
Khmer Rouge, under whose rule more than a million Cambodians died from 1975 to
early1979, when the current Government was installed after an invasion by
Vietnam; the followers of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, and the Khmer People's
National Liberation Front, led by Son Sann, which comprises rightists who
overthrew Prince Sihanouk in 1970 and who were ousted by the Khmer Rouge in
1975.

Fair Elections Are Goal

The peace plan, an effort to stop the long civil war, calls for the Supreme
National Council to have a largely symbolic role, ceding authority to United
Nations officials to monitor, control and, if necessary, run the ministries of
finance, interior, defense, foreign affairs and information to insure that
elections for a new Government are free and fair.

The opposition factions say they nowagree with the plan. But the Phnom Penh
Government, with the most to lose from any settlement, has been dragging its
feet, intermittently encouraged by Hanoi. Mr. Hun Sen, who is regarded by other
party leaders as opportunistic and too flexible, has had his autonomy curtailed
by Chea Sim, an older, more ideological figure.

On Sept. 17, barely a week after a meeting in Indonesia at which all Cambodian
factions accepted the outlines of the plan, Mr. Hun Sen lost his concurrent
position as Foreign Minister. The Foreign Ministry was reorganized, and allies
of Mr. Chea Sim were installed.

In some sense resembling the boss of an American big-city political machine, Mr.
Chea Sim is concerned with patronage -- "jobs for the boys." But he and the
party also want to win any election that may result, and to do that,they need to
stress three matters above all: opposition to the Khmer Rouge, with which they
are trying to taint Prince Sihanouk by association; respect for Cambodian
sovereignty, and a crackdown on corruption, with which Mr. Hun Sen's family in
particular is popularly thought to be connected.

So a December meeting of the Cambodian factions in Paris, to discuss the draft
peace plan, was, not surprisingly, inconclusive.

The outcome of the talks matched what one senior Western diplomat called Hanoi's
"usual pattern" on Cambodia, "constantly calibrating the choice of going along
with the peace process to get aid and recognition, or waiting it out for the
West to get bored and hoping to get what they want anyway, with little change in
Cambodia."

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Covering the War;
Press and the Military: Old Suspicions

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1326 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, Feb. 3


The first fissures of a new credibility gap have opened before the Persian Gulf
war is a month old.

But this time there is a difference. Senior United States officers, notably Gen.
H. Norman Schwarzkopf, commander of United States-led forces in the gulf, have
rapidly moved to ease antagonism and suspicion between the American military and
American correspondents -- such a corrosive feature of the long and bitter war
in Vietnam.

Still, many of the more than 500 journalists assigned to cover the war express
intense dissatisfaction with the quality of information furnished to them by the
United States command and even more with restrictions on their ability to go see
for themselves.

One of the focuses of controversy is the daily briefing here in Riyadh, where a
senior officer gives skeletal details of the activities of the preceding 24
hours. In the view of correspondents who reported from Vietnam, it is
considerably less useful than the much-satirized "Five o'Clock Follies," the
daily briefing in Saigon, because far fewer facts are made available.

Longing for Old Saigon

Richard Pyle of The Associated Press, who worked in Saigon, said ruefully the
other day, "It's incredible, but I find myself longing for the give-and-take of
the follies."

On many occasions, information is withheld at the briefing when reporters in the
field, working under de facto censorship, have nonetheless written or broadcast
it. An example was an attack last week on a column of Iraqi tanks.

On other occasions, incorrect information is given out, like the contention that
American marines played no significant part in the battle for the Saudi Arabian
town of Khafji when, in fact, two reconnaissance units were in the town and
Marine helicopters, artillery and tactical fighters played important roles
there.

Also last week, Pentagon officials readily confirmed that an AC-130 plane was
missing while official spokesmen here would say nothing.

The military -- having been pilloried and laughed at for the "body count" that
was announced every day in Vietnam, giving the American command's ludicrously
precise tally of enemy casualties -- has gone to the other extreme in the gulf,
insisting that not even rough estimates of the damage done to enemy troop
strength and combat readiness can be made public.

Some tensions are clearly inevitable between briefers, intent on withholding any
information that might be of value to the enemy and any that might harm allied
troops, and reporters, eager to paint as complete a picture of the war as
possible and to test the assertions of the spokesmen.

A Language All Their Own

There are obvious cultural differences, too, between the highly disciplined
military men, with their odd words and phrases, like "attrit" for "wear down"
and "collateral damage" for "civilian casualties," and the reporters, who make
their living by questioning authority and doubting official pronouncements. To
them, Pentagonese is a laughable language.

Fears about giving aid and comfort to the enemy, as old as war itself, are, of
course, heightened when the briefings can be watched in Baghdad on Cable News
Network broadcasts.

The quality of the briefers matters, too. When the war began, the command relied
on a group of inexperienced lieutenant colonels. Recently, various generals have
taken turns. None has been very satisfactory, from the reporters' viewpoint.

But when General Schwarzkopf has taken the stand, and when Gen. Colin L. Powell,
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has briefed in Washington, the flow
of information has been much freer -- presumably without giving President Saddam
Hussein information of military value.

On Friday night, with Brig. Gen. Pat Stevens 4th answering the questions, the
mood in the briefing room became so sour that General Schwarzkopf, who was
watching on television, called in a number of reporters for an off-the-record
session. Known for his attentiveness to public relations, the general was said
to have been fearful that the briefings, seen live in the United States as well
as Baghdad, would begin to affect public opinion if permitted to degenerate into
wrangling sessions.

The result was a new rule, limiting the televised portion of the briefing to 30
minutes, with time for more questions afterward, the answers to which cannot be
specifically attributed to the command or its spokesmen. General Schwarzkopf and
a number of his subordinate commanders here have also made themselves available
for an unusually large number of interviews.

A War Seen at Second Hand

None of this would matter so much if more reporters could see the war for
themselves. But the Pentagon has imposed a system of pools on combat coverage,
in which only small numbers of correspondents are permitted in forward areas,
under military escort, while most must stay in Dhahran, a city in eastern Saudi
Arabia, waiting for pool reports from their colleagues in the field.

Before the war, many feared that the escorts would censor reports based on
political or public-relations concerns rather than security concerns, but that
has not happened. Many of the pool reports have arrived very late. The big
problem is that few of the pool reporters have been assigned to ground forces,
and that handful has been kept well back from the action.

No pool reporters were permitted to witness the fighting at Khafji, for example,
so they had to quote staff officers far from the scene, who glorified Saudi and
Qatari troops for political purposes, and understated the fierceness of Iraqi
resistance.

The best accounts of the fighting at Khafji came from reporters and
photographers who got there on their own, in violation of the Pentagon ground
rules. Such trips, potentially dangerous, have become commonplace in the last 10
days, and the pool system may be on the verge of collapse.

Col. William Mulvey, the Pentagon official dispatched to Dhahran to manage the
forward information office, has repeatedly promised to increase the number of
pools, to allow more reporters to join ground troops and to generally improve
access. But he has lost the confidence of the press corps as the days have
rolled by with no major change, and questions have mounted about the fairness of
the entire system.

Colonel Mulvey has given various explanations for the paucity of ground forces
pools, including the unwillingness of ground-force commanders to accept
reporters, unavailability of helmets and flak jackets and difficulties with
transportation and communications. But some United States divisions have no
correspondents at all with them, and several middle-ranking field commanders,
eager for publicity, have told correspondents that they are welcome if they can
find some means to get around the pool system and ground rules.

The 'Lesson' of Vietnam

However many assurances they are given to the contrary, reporters are convinced
that senior military officers, many of whom think critical reporting destroyed
public support for the Vietnam War in the United States, are determined to do
everything they can to minimize critical reporting here.

"They are creating the credibility problem," said Otto Kreisher of the Copley
News Service. "You're seeing the imprint of Vietnam on everything that the
military does here."

A number of news organizations, excluded entirely from the pools, have brought
suit against the Government in New York, contending that the pool system, as now
constituted, illegally discriminates against them. Among those are The Village
Voice, Harper's, The Nation and Mother Jones.

In response to the suit, the Justice Department said Saturday that "the use of
pools is not intended to be a permanent feature of media coverage of hostilities
in the Persian Gulf." That sounded like a retreat, but the department's brief
did not say when the system would be abandoned, and there was no sign of change
here.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Correspondents covering the gulf war have expressed
dissatisfaction with briefings held by officers in Saudi Arabia. On Friday, with
Brig. Gen. Pat Stevens 4th of the Army answering the questions, above, the mood
became so sour that Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the theater commander, called
some reporters in for an off-the-record session. (Associated Press)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Sudden Revival for East Asian Oil

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1291 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE


In the months before Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, East Asia was beginning to
despair of its role as a producer and refiner of oil and feared that its huge
dependence on the Middle East for crude oil would only rise as this region's
continuing economic boom sent fuel consumption soaring.

But war in the Persian Gulf has changed that -- at least for now. The region is
stepping up efforts to drill for oil and several governments are scrambling to
profit from the demand for crude oil, both in the short term and the long.
Suddenly there is fresh interest in exploring the South China Sea, from the
coast of Vietnam to the shores of Borneo, along with a host of projects to
increase the output of existing wells and to build new refineries.

For now, the biggest beneficiary is Singapore, which has long been a "swing"
refiner because of its ability to make up for specific shortfalls in a fuel.
Singapore has been an oil trading center, but never an oil capital. Temporarily,
at least, that has changed. The refineries on the islands off Singapore's shores
are running above capacity. On the horizon, full tankers are bobbing around,
unable to move because there is no room for storage ashore. Saudi Arabia, long
one of Singapore's biggest suppliers, has suddenly become one of its biggest
clients -- mostly for jet fuel for allied warplanes.

'Running at Full Tilt'

"All of us are running at full tilt, many even faster," said Cheng Hong Kok, the
president and chief executive of the Singapore Petroleum Corporation, the
biggest local refiner listed on the Singapore stock exchange. "With Kuwait
looking like it will not be operating for a long while and many tankers afraid
of moving through the gulf, we may be producing like this for some time."

Of course, this boom could be short-lived. For one thing, if oil prices stay
relatively low several projects will probably be scrapped.

Moreover, the refining boom will continue only as long as crude oil flows
readily from the Middle East. And though stockpiles are high now, there are
growing fears that a long war could plunge some of the world's fastest-growing
-- and least oil-efficient -- economies into a severe slowdown.

East Asia does produce some oil, but it depends on the Middle East for nearly
three-quarters of its crude oil. Some studies suggest that over the next decade
dependency will worsen, as countries like Malaysia and Indonesia deplete their
reserves and the region's demand increases.

A recent study by the East-West Center in Honolulu predicted that East Asia's
oil exports in the next 10 years, now a major source of foreign exchange, would
decline significantly as production was diverted to domestic demands.

Decline Reversed

For Singapore, the latest turn of events is an unexpected change. The refining
business had shrunk here since the mid-1980's, with the Government estimating
refinery output at 800,000 to 900,000 barrels a day, though the industry had
capacity for more than a million barrels. Shell, which has dominated Southeast
Asia's oil markets since colonial days, mothballed some operations in the
mid-80's. Recently they reopened, and other refiners here say they have been
installing new equipment to increase output.

In a nation that leaves little to chance, this sudden boom is not exactly what
Singapore had in mind to revive its role in the oil business.

Gong Wee Lik, the deputy director of the industry development division for
Singapore's powerful Economic Development Board, said Singapore had been moving
for some time into specialized petroleum products, hoping, for example, to
produce plastics and other materials that could be turned into circuit boards
for the country's numerous electronics makers. Instead, it finds itself trying
to make up for Japan's sudden shortfalls in kerosene and the United States'
sudden interest in a quick supply of jet fuel.

Searching for New Fields

A number of neighboring countries plan to open refineries in the next few years,
including a giant plant near Malacca, the ancient trading city of Malaysia.

As a result, the war in the gulf has stimulated exploration.

"There is such a heightened sensitivity now that if you can find any oil away
from the Middle East, you will go for it," said Lisa Totto, a researcher at the
East-West Center. "And Asia needs it so much, there there does not seem to be
such a big problem finding capital for exploration."

Malaysia's state oil company, Petronas, is already worried about meeting its
promise of increased production during the gulf crisis, and it is renewing its
interest in fields off Sarawak and Sabah, the two Malaysian states on the island
of Borneo.

Indonesia, the region's largest producer, is offering incentives to recover oil
from fields that many producers had all but abandoned. It has entered a number
of exploration contracts with foreign companies in recent months. By some
estimates, more than $4 billion will be spent by American and European companies
in the next five years to hunt for oil in Indonesia. Still, the country's
production is expected to fall, as existing fields begin to dry up.

Oil executives here say that much of the problem is the difficulty in exploring
many of East Asia's most promising areas. Many lie in deep water, and a few in
deep jungle with no roads. "These are areas that will be explored only if the
war drives oil up to $40 a barrel or so," said one American executive in
Malaysia, who insisted on remaining anonymous. "Otherwise, no government is
going to convince anyone to take the risk."

Political Hurdles

More than a few of the obstacles are political. One of the more promising oil
producers over the next few years is Vietnam, which by the most optimistic
estimates may have reserves of one to two billion barrels. American oil
companies are barred from exploring there because of the longstanding United
States trade embargo against Hanoi. But that is hardly slowing Japanese
businesses, which are buying most of Vietnam's current crude-oil production, and
are negotiating for exploration rights.

Malaysia, Vietnam and other East Asian nations are also in the race, and the
decrepit few hotel rooms in Hanoi are filled these days with Asian business
executives hoping to strike a deal with a Government still uncertain how to
exploit its offshore riches.

In the last two years, Vietnam has signed about 10 contracts with overseas oil
companies to explore its reserves and to share any resulting oil. Under one such
contract, completed recently with the Broken Hill Proprietary Company of
Australia, Broken Hill will spend the next five years exploring, and bear all
costs if no oil or gas is found. But if they are found, Broken Hill's capital
investment will be reimbursed and it will have an interest in the oil field.

Myanmar, formerly known as Burma, is another potential producer, though on a
smaller scale. But the Government there is still trying to keep the lid on a
smoldering democracy movement and is fighting rebellions in its northern
territories. Few foreign investors, even the Japanese, traditionally Myanmar's
biggest source of foreign aid, seem willing to take the risk.

Malaysia and Thailand are arguing over fields in the Gulf of Thailand, though a
joint-exploration agreement now seems likely to work. And then there are the
Spratly Islands, a desolate and otherwise forgettable cluster that is claimed by
the Philippines, Malaysia, Vietnam, China and Taiwan, all of which believe that
the chain might be sitting on top of one of East Asia's most lucrative fields.

When battling over Kuwait is over, the islands are believed to be a good
candidate for the site of the next power plays for oil.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Mobil Oil Corporation refinery in Singapore, where oil
producers and refiners are benefiting from the Persian Gulf war. Saudi Arabia,
long one of Singapore's biggest suppliers, is now one of its biggest clients.
(Robin Moyer/Gamma-Liaison) (pg. D1)

Chart: "Leading Sources of Southeast Asian Oil" shows locations where Southeast
Asian obtains its' oil. (Sources: Wood Mackenzie; East-West Center' Singapore
Petroleum) (pg. D4)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Hard Lesson for Army Reserve: How to Write a Will

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words

DATELINE: GROTON, Conn., Feb. 2


Like reserve soldiers all over the United States, the men and women of the
aviation-repair unit of the Connecticut Army National Guard here are watching
events in the Persian Gulf with a mixture of fear, anticipation and resignation.
The war is lasting longer than many originally thought, and rumors are rife that
the unit will be shipping out soon to Saudi Arabia.

Over the weekend, four military lawyers injected a new ingredient into the
complicated emotional mix: pragmatism. It is time, the solders were told, to
decide what they want done with their remains, their cars, their stamp
collections, their pets andother personal effects should they die in the Middle
East.

All weekend long the guardsmen, dressed in the jungle camouflage of the last
war, pondered the legal implications of the current one. For most, that meant
discussing, drafting, revising or executing wills, as 250 of their Connecticut
Guard colleagues now in the Gulf have already done.

"We're being flooded with requests, and I'm trying to stem the tide as best as
possible," said Capt. Michael J. Tuohy of West Hartford, the guards' full-time
lawyer, who brought 50 newly drafted wills with him today for execution. "It may
be a natural human reaction: everyone thinks he's next."

In 15-minute chunks in the assembly line, the soldiers met with the lawyers,
whohelped them grapple with legal devices like guardianships, living wills and
powers of attorney. In the process, the soldiers had to clarify ambiguous
personal relationships, chart out their children's lives, and, in some cases,
confront their own mortality for the first time.

"At 24, 25, you should be thinking about your life," said Alex Dolly, 25, of
Norwich,an aircraft armaments mechanic and father of two. "There's so much I
haven't seen or done, and here I am writing a will, getting ready to pass on.
It's scary. It spooks me."

Some of the new testators were grandfathers, veterans of combat and communal
will signings in the Vietnam era. Others, teen-agers with the faces of Civil War
drummer boys, were barely old enough legally to inherit anything themselves
without a guardian. Even so, they find themselves bequeathing their minimal
estates -- guns, guitars, stereos, Toyotas, furniture, even, in one instance, a
collection of china dolls -- to families, buddies and girlfriends.

In her first will, Keisha Gathers, 19, of New London, a supply clerk, has left
every thing to her mother except her new engagement ring, which would go back to
her fiance. "Anybody can die at any age but I never thought I'd be doing a will
at 19," she said. "I just turned 19, matter of fact."

In two separate "legal-services stations," set up off a hangar filled with
disemboweled planes and helicopters, the soldiers discussed intimate matters of
life and death with their new lawyers.

They doubled as witnesses for one another, and engaged in occasional badinage.
"Does he appear to be of sound mind?" Lieut. Col. Bartholomew (Pat) O'Donnell,
one of the lawyers, asked a witness of his client. "He's in the Guard, so it's
questionable," the witness replied.

Generally, though, the mere presence of lawyers gave an immediacy and solemnity
to the war that CNN never could. The usual Saddam Hussein jokes and John Wayne
bravado suddenly ceased when the soldiers sat down with the lawyers.

Drafting Additonal Wills

"It's like the Grim Reaper," said Colonel O'Donnell, in civilian life a lawyer
with the Travelers Insurance Company in Hartford. "Every time they see us coming
they think 'we're going.' "

Capt. John Grasso, a lawyer in Glastonbury, elaborated. "The whole thing seems
to hit them very hard," he said. "They think of it as an easy thing but then I
pose hypotheticals and I sense they begin to realize they're discussing their
own death." As he spoke, his law partner in civilian life, Maj. Patrick V.
Boatman, was drafting additional wills in the next room.

The lawyers began the program two years ago, long before Iraq swallowed up
Kuwait. The effort was the brainchild of Colonel O'Donnell, who had vivid,
painful memories of his fellow G.I.'s signing wills en masse at Travers Air
Force Base shortly before boarding transports to Vietnam.

"These are people -- fathers of children, husbands, wives, sons, fiances," he
said. "Somewhere along the way in Vietnam we dehumanized things a bit, and if we
don't do that this time, it will be much easier to support the troops."

Single Parents and Half Siblings



Even for soldiers with few worldly possessions, the testamentary tasks have
grown more complex since Vietnam. Increasingly, the equation has come to include
single parents, stepchildren, half siblings and former spouses. "Traditional
families no longer exist," Colonel O'Donnell said. "That's why trying to use
form wills out of a book is crazy."

Though Paul E. Conner, a pilot from Belchertown, Mass., is 41, he never had a
will before. "It was one of those things I just put off," he said. But with his
chances of going to the gulf "90 percent," he said, he felt he could no longer
procrastinate.

"I was in Vietnam twice, but I was only like 19 the first time, so I don't
recall even doing a will," he said. "It means more to me now because I have a
family and property to leave people."

Roy Perkins, 43, an accountant and helicopter pilot from Hartford, also had no
will while serving in Vietnam. Now, things were more complicated, and he had two
important questions for Major Boatman. Would his fiancee have better access to
information about his status -- that is, if he were to be wounded, missing in
action, captured or killed -- if she were his wife? Conversely would she be
liable for his debts if his new accounting business went bankrupt while he was
overseas?

In neither case, Major Boatman counseled, would marital status make much of a
difference. "You're going to have to treat this as a matter of the heart," he
said. Before he walked away, Mr. Perkins said he had decided to get married
before being mobilized.


LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Capt. Michael J. Tuohy, lawyer for the Connecticut Army
National Guard, helping members of the aviation repair unit with their wills.
The unit is preparing for possible deployment to the Persian Gulf. (Bill Powers
for The New York Times); Staff Sgt. Donna Carlisle signing her will after
meeting with lawyers at the National Guard station in Groton, Conn. (pg B3)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1211 words


War in the Gulf A8-A10

Allied planes pummelled supply lines and the reinforced bunkers in which Iraq
has hidden many of its aircraft. A B-52 crashed in the Indian Ocean, but
officials said it had not been downed by hostile fire. Page A1

Iraqis who fled Baghdad say nowhere is safe from the bombs A8

Armored vehicle is checked for faulty transmissions A8

The final deployment of U.S. forces is underway, creating traffic jams on the
roads leading to the front and bringing the allies nearer to the point where
they could launch a ground assault on Iraqi troops. A1

Soldiers envision a land war of extraordinary violence A9

News analysis: A new credibility gap has already opened between military leaders
and war correspondents. But unlike their counterparts in Vietnam,military
officials are trying to ease the antogonism and suspicion. A9 Lebanon arrests
P.L.O. leaders and sends troops to the south A9

Ripples from the war reach a distant Latin America A10

A resumption of the draft is unlikely. Defense officials say there will be ample
active and reserve manpower for the war without a draft, which would require an
act of Congress and further divide the nation. A10

Reservists face legal complications when they are called up, so lawyers visited
a Connecticut Army National Guard unit to help soldiers decide what to do with
their remains, cars, pets and other personal effects. B1

Mayor Dinkins stresses solidarity on visit to Israel B3

Oakland Journal: Schools move to limit military recruiters A12

International A2-A7

Western ventures in the Soviet Union have been slow to get off the ground, and
with the nation sliding deeper into political and economic chaos, many companies
are far less gung-ho about plans to invest there. A1

Residents of Chernobyl are returning to ghost villages near the entombed remains
of the nuclear accident, and Government officials have concocted a vacation
scheme to lure tourists to the forbidden radiation zone. A1

Poland asks Western creditors to forgive its foreign debt D1

Italy's Communist Party has faded. The party, once the largest Communist group
in the West, has transformed itself into the Democratic Party of the Left,
adopting a new symbol and a fresh image. A3

A struggle over the Chinese language has emerged -- part of the fight for the
nation's soul. The hard-line leadership wants to restore Maoist phrases, while
young people tug the language toward the West. A6 Cambodia's four factions will
meet soon to try to break a persistent impasse on a United Nations peace plan.
The meeting is intended to address objections Phnom Penh and Hanoi have to the
draft of the plan. A7

India's Prime Minister dismissed the popularly elected government of the
southern state of Tamil Nadu. The ouster has been followed by widespread riots,
demonstrations and a suicide by self-immolation. A5

A small right-wing party in Israel joined the Cabinet. The acceptance of the
Moledet party, which advocates expelling Palestinians from the occupied
territories, gives Prime Minister Shamir a stronger majority. A3

News analysis: President de Klerk startled his supporters and critics once
again. A year after he legalized anti-apartheid groups and freed Nelson Mandela,
he proposed eliminating the laws of apartheid. A2

Rio de Janeiro Journal: Samba schools and Carnival pride A4

National A12-A15, B6

People are living with cancer longer. For an increasing number of Americans, the
diagnosis of cancer is no longer an automatic death knell, but something to
treat -- and cope with -- for 5 years, 10 years or more. A1

The collision between two aircraft in Los Angeles came after a series of
communications problems. Officials said a air traffic controller was unaware she
had cleared the planes to use the same runway. A13

The Los Angeles Raiders's insignia -- a pirate on a silver and black field --
has become increasingly popular among gang members from Los Angeles to Boston
for reasons only slightly related to sports. A12

USX agrees to a pact with steelworkers, averting a strike A12

News analysis: The budget for 1992 that President Bush will unveil todaywill
include items worth scrutiny, like military and Medicare spending, and others
that can be ignored, like the projected size of the deficit. A14

Bush's budget includes increase for science and technology A14

Washington Talk: The rap against PAC's and the defense A15

The nation's governors were grim at their meeting in Washington, saying that the
recession had found them so bereft of funds that they faced unprecedented budget
deficits and threats to essential services. B6

A scandal gives impoverished East St. Louis a windfall B6

Treasury plan to limit bank deposit insurance is defended D1

Analysts say cut in interest rates will give little relief D1

Regional B1-B5

The fiscal crunch in New York City, after months of dire and often confusing
pronouncements, is becoming an unpleasant reality -- shorter library hours,
dirtier and bumpier streets and broken street lights. A1

The Martin Luther King Jr. Towers, a sprawling public housing project in Harlem,
has been a safety net in a troubled neighborhood. But like other projects, it is
buckling under poverty, homelessness and crime. A1

Twelve heroin users have been killed in four cities by a batch of poisonous
heroin sold in the Bronx. But officials said the tide of overdoses caused by the
drug, which is known as "Tango and Cash," have subsided. B1

Experts say fatal batch of heroin is evidence of a new trend B2

A two-state, 12-mile, 90-m.p.h. chase ended with the arrest of a 17-year-old
from Newark, who, the police say, roared through barricades and red-lights and
the wrong way on one-way streets, while shooting wildly. B1

Rising property taxes in New Jersey have hit the less affluent particularly
hard, rousing the political ire of modest homeowners, like those in Edison
Township, who have traditionally supported the Democrats. B1

Yes, it really was 64 degrees in New York City yesterday B2

Neediest Cases B5

Business Digest D1

SportsMonday

Baseball: Franco's travails C4

Basketball: Pitino thriving C1

Magic Johnson suffers concussion C3

Knicks finally settle on starting 5 C3

Suns beat Pistons C3

Carnesecca talks memories C6

Column: Berkow on the Rose case C4

Features: Question Box C7

On Your Own C10

Hockey: Islanders and Whalers tie C4

Outdoors: Chasing cottontail C10

Obituaries D10

Frank Anthony Rose, ex-president of University of Alabama

Pete Axthelm, sports author and TV commentator

 Arts/Entertainment

Frohnmayer reverses on grant C11

A sociologist's urban ramblings C11

Film: "Straight for the Heart" C14

Word and Image: Sociopaths on TV parade C11

Yesteryear's Coney Island C11

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A16

Yellow ribbons

Thaw U.S. policy in Korea

College sports: Losing money?

The welfare hotel that isn't

Letters A16

William Safire: Congress to the rescue A17

Anthony Lewis: The old order A17

Zbigniew Brzezinski: Limited war, maximum advantage A17

Ed Volk: "What does it mean to seal a room?" A17

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The Draft;
Despite Pentagon Denial of Plans, Many Are Looking Over Shoulder

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 789 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 3


Although Selective Service offices around the country report a surge in
registrations by 18-year-olds and a barrage of telephone inquiries about the
possibility of a resumption of the draft, Defense Department officials insist
there is ample active and reserve manpower to see the war in the Persian Gulf to
its conclusion.

Reinstitution of the draft, discontinued in 1973 near the end of the Vietnam War
when the armed services shifted to an all-volunteer force, would require an act
of Congress and would almost certainly further politicize the debate about the
war in the gulf.

Selective Service officials said they could begin delivering men to examining
stations within two weeks of any legislative action because the service's
computers already include the names and addresses of 14 million men from 18 to
26 years of age. But military manpower experts on Capitol Hill insist that no
one in Washington is considering that far-reaching step.

At the Pentagon, officials said they do not envision such heavy losses that
troops could not be replaced by turning to active or reserve units stationed
elsewhere. There are no contingency plans for a draft nor any loss figures that
would set off planning for a draft, the officials added.

A Low Casualty Rate

So far, fewer than 100 of the 500,000 American troops in the gulf have been
killed or injured, more in accidents than in combat. Most of the troops involved
in the operation are regulars, but some are from Reserve and National Guard
units that have been activated.

In all, the United States has 2.1 million troops on active duty and 1.6 million
in the Reserves and the Guard. About 200,000 reservists and guardsmen have
already been activated, and the Pentagon has said it may call up about 115,000
more.

President Bush has authorized the activation, if necessary, of up to a million
reservists and guardsmen. They may be held on active duty for up to two years.

"The Department of Defense continues to be satisfied that the size of the force
we have now, active duty and reservists, is sufficient to do the job," said
William Caldwell, a Pentagon spokesman. "We do not plan to call for a draft. We
don't need more people."

Politically Counterproductive

Martin Binkin, a military analyst and manpower expert at the Brookings
Institution, said a resumption of the draft would not produce new troops before
the end of a short war, and would almost certainly be politically
counterproductive.

Although all indications are that Washingtion is not contemplating a resumption
of conscription, Selective Service officials said many young men and their
parents continue to worry about such a possibility.

"We've getting a lot of phone calls, a lot of questions," said Lew Brodsky, a
Selective Service spokesman in Washington. "We've also noted a surge in
registration, which means that men who have turned 18 but have been slow about
registering are beginning to report in, an obvious indication that the
possibility of a draft is on some minds."

Federal law requires that all male citizens of the United States register their
names and addresses with the Selective Service within 30 days after they turn 18
years old. Few ignore the requirement, but some are late in meeting it.

Draft Boards Are Ready

Mr. Brodsky and draft officials elsewhere around the country say they are
prepared to move if Congress reinstitutes the draft. But they say no special
preparations have been made.

"It's business as usual for us," said Marian Kiely, a draft official in Atlanta.
"We've got draft boards trained and ready to hear cases. But there's nothing new
in any of this. We've been ready to do this for years."

If a draft is reinstituted, men who turn 20 in the calendar year in which the
draft begins would be called first. The order of call would be determined by a
lottery.

Some men would be deferred if they were still in school, although most would be
given only enough time to finish the current semester or to graduate if they
were seniors. Selective Service regulations no longer provide for the long-term
education deferments that were available in the Korean and Vietnam wars.

Some men would be deferred if their induction into the armed forces would cause
financial hardship on their families. But Selective Service regulations no
longer automatically provide hardship deferments for married men with children.
And some men would be turned away because they could not pass the mental and
physical examinations.

"Once we finally deliver someone to an examining station," Mr. Brodsky said,
"the odds are only 50-50 that he'll pass everything and end up in uniform. It's
always been that way, for as far back as the draft goes."

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF;
Backers of Gulf War Turn Out For a Capital Demonstration

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 100 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 3


A crowd of 3,500 people marched around the White House today to show support for
President Bush and the Persian Gulf war. The marchers waved flags, jeered at
peace demonstrators and burned an Iraqi flag.

About 400 motorcycle riders led the parade down Pennsylvania Avenue, past a few
dozen antiwar demonstrators in Lafayette Park who kept up a drumbeat for peace.

At a rally on the grassy Ellipse between the White House and the Washington
Monument, the crowd heard from several congressmen and Adrian Cronauer, the
onetime G.I. disk jockey portrayed in the movie, "Good Morning, Vietnam."

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF;
War Summary

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 405 words


AIR RAIDS AND ANOTHER LOSS

As attacks on the lifelines of 545,000 front-line Iraqi troop went on unabated,
an American B-52 bomber plunged into the Indian Ocean while returning to base on
Diego Garcia. Three crewmen were rescued, and the search continued for three
others missing in the crash, possibly caused by mechanical failure.

MOVING THE BEANS AND THE BULLETS

As the number of allied troops passed 500,000 with the arrival of reinforcements
from Germany, desert highways took on the look of an American expressway at
rush-hour; bumper-to-bumper. The largest quick-order military deployment in
history in in its last stages.

CREDIBILITY GAP REVISITED

The atmosphere at military briefings has turned noticeably testy as
correspondents disparage the information as short on facts and at times
misleading. Some veterans complain that their briefers seem even less
informative than those of "five o'clock follies" memory in Saigon.

WAR LOSSES

ALLIES FORCES

Troops: Two airmen were killed in a crash in Kuwait and three were missing in
the crash of the B-52. This would bring the daily tally of American losses to 14
killed in action, 26 airmen missing in action and 8 confirmed as prisoners of
war. The U.S. Central Command in Riyadh did not provide an overall count. A
Saudi spokesman said 18 Saudi soldiers were killed in the fighting at Khafji
last week, 29 were wounded and 4 were missing. A Qatari spokesman said he had no
casualties to report. Aircraft: In addition to the B-52 bomber lost on its way
back to base, an AH-1 Cobra with two aboard and a UH-1 helicopter carrying four
crashed over Saudi Arabia. But the U.S. Central Command's briefer in Riyadh did
not add them to the daily cumulative count of aircraft losses because, he said,
they were believed to be "non-combat-related." The command said combat losses as
such stood at 15 American and 7 other coalition aircraft, for a total of 22.

IRAQI FORCES

Troops: The number of Iraqi prisoners grew to "some 800," according to the
United States command. No reliable data on other or military or civilian losses
were available.

Aircraft: The Riyadh command's count of aircraft destroyed while parked or
bunkered rose sharply to at least 99 and as many as 140, since some bunkers
sheltered more than one. The number of aircraft shot down stood at 27, and 89
aircraft and crews remained sequestered in Iran.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 5, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The U.S. Commander;
COMMANDER CLAIMS GAINS IN BREAKING IRAQI ARMY'S WILL

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1502 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, Feb. 4


Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the American commander in the Persian Gulf, said
today that he doubted the allies could ever undermine the determination of
President Saddam Hussein to keep fighting. But he said that he thought the will
of the Iraqi Army could be broken and that his forces were "making great
progress in that direction."

In a relaxed interview here with a half-dozen American correspondents, the
general talked for more than two hours, assessing his foes, explaining how he
would decide when to recommend a ground assault on Iraqi troops in Kuwait and
defending his command against assertions that it had caused widespread civilian
casualties. He also discussed his own reactions to war and named some of his
heroes.

Asked whether Iraqi forces were starting to fall apart, the general replied:
"There's been a lot of speculation that cracks are starting to appear. That's
probably the case, but I would hate to try to define how big the cracks are, how
critical the cracks are, what the result will be."

Battleship Shells Kuwait

The United States stepped up its naval assault on Iraqi targets in Kuwait today
with bombardment from the 16-inch guns of the battleship Missouri, on whose deck
Japan formally surrendered to end World War II. The American command also said
aerial bombing missions in the war had averaged about one a minute. [Page A12.]

In the interview, the 56-year-old general challenged reports of fierce
resistance by Iraqi troops in the battle of Khafji last week .

"What we have heard is that any time a significant amount of fire was brought to
bear on anyplace where the Iraqis were, they began to give up," he said.

'Eyeball-to-Eyeball'

"I don't think their military is holding up very well," General Schwarzkopf
said. He said President Hussein struck him as a man who took a "very rudimentary
tactical approach to warfare," always seeking "a head-on-head,
eyeball-to-eyeball, nose-to-nose slugfest," eschewing finesse and insisting on
far more central control than was militarily effective.

"Saddam Hussein is sort of like Goliath, out there storming around in front of
our troops and saying, 'come on out here and fight me,' " he said.

General Schwarzkopf insisted he was determined to take his time before ordering
a ground attack. Asked whether he was constrained by the approach of hot weather
and of the Islamic religious observances of Ramadan in March, he replied: "I
feel no hot breath down my neck. All of those things are important, obviously,
and we're taking all of them into consideration. But the one thing that's more
important than anything else is that we accomplish our objectives with a minimum
loss of human life."

His worst moments, he said, come "when you recognize human lives are involved in
decisions you make."

"I agonize, I agonize," the general said. "I wake up 15, 20 times in the night.
My brain's just in turmoil over those decisions. I get enough sleep, but I don't
get very much rest. My nightmare is anything that would cause mass casualties
among my troops. I don't want my troops to die. I don't want my troops to be
maimed."

But General Schwarzkopf readily conceded that if there was a ground war, it was
likely that poison gas would be used against front-line allied forces. Air
attacks, he said, could never destroy Mr. Hussein's huge stocks of chemical
agents because the locations of many are not known.

Chemicals Not Invincible

"As much as we all hate the thought of chemical weapons, they are not so
terrible that it makes the enemy absolutely invincible if he uses them," the
longtime infantry officer said. "Look at the example of the Iran-Iraq war. They
used chemicals against the Iranians, and the Iranians weren't anywhere near as
well equipped as we are, and yet the Iranians prevailed."

How will he make up his mind, then, that the air war has done its job of wearing
down the Iraqis' fighting ability? It is a momentous question because the
general's opinion, to be conveyed to the White House by Defense Secretary Dick
Cheney, is expected to carry great weight with President Bush, who will make the
final decision.

"It will be partly intuitive," General Schwarzkopf replied. "It has to be,
because you don't have perfect knowledge of the enemy. It will be a compendium
of actual results, measurable results, estimated results, anecdotal reports, and
gut feel, and you kind of put all of that together and suddenly you'll say, 'By
golly, it looks like right about now.'

"What you're really looking for is a measure of the effectiveness of the
military organization you have to fight. It's not a numbers game."

The Decision He Faces

Seeking to explain the fateful decision he faces, General Schwarzkopf said a
hill on which 100 enemy troops were dug in could be taken by sending infantrymen
up its slopes to certain death, one by one, until the enemy's ammunition was
exhausted, or it could be leveled by firing artillery at its crest for month
after month.

"But obviously," he said, "the best way to accomplish your mission lies
someplace between the two extremes. That's what we're dealing with here. It's a
question of accomplishing the mission with a minimum loss of human life and in
an effective time period. Therein lies the military decision."

A tall, powerfully built man who clearly loves to talk and tell tales, General
Schwarzkopf underlined some of his points by recalling movie scenes. A case in
point was his sharp reaction to suggestions that the United States, in bombing
Iraq so relentlessly, was exceeding its United Nations mandate to evict
Baghdad's forces from Kuwait.

'A Contorted Morality'

"It's a contorted morality that says that because the Iraqis are the guys in the
black hats, they're allowed to go out and do anything they want to do," the
general argued. "They can gas innocent women and children, they can loft Scuds
against civilian populations, they can use human shields -- all of those things
are O.K. for them. But because we're the guys in white hats, we have to stand
up, allow ourselves to be shot, take on overwhelming numbers, and not use the
weapons that we have available. I just don't understand that mentality."

With considerable passion, General Schwarzkopf insisted his pilots were "not,
not, not, not" bombing civilian targets, despite Iraqi assertions to the
contrary. While he did not deny that errors had been made, he said that what he
called extraordinary precautions were taken, involving not only the selection of
aircraft and types of bombs but even the direction of the bomber's approach to
targets.

"I would never tell you that we have 100 percent assurance that 100 percent of
all the targets we're hitting are exactly what we think they are," he conceded
later. "Warfare is not that precise a business."

Taking Cover in Schools

A number of Iraqi headquarters have been moved into what appear to be school
buildings, General Schwarzkopf said. Asked whether he now felt free to bomb
them, he replied: "We are a moral, ethical people, and therefore we're not going
to do business that way. Yes, sure, it gives them an advantage, but we are not
going to reduce ourselves to that level of immoral conduct just to even the
score."

When he was young, the general said, he admired Alexander the Great because "he
did everything his troops could do, and he did it better."

But now, he said, his heroes are two Civil War generals, Ulysses S. Grant and
William Tecumseh Sherman, and one from the Vietnam era, Creighton S. Abrams, who
succeeded William C. Westmoreland in command there.

Why?

"No. 1, they're all muddy-boot soldiers," General Schwarzkopf said. "No. 2, I
feel like none of them ever worried about who got the credit, they just worried
about getting the job done. No. 3, I think all of them probably intensely hated
war, and yet at the same time, when they had to, waged war ferociously. They
didn't enjoy doing it."

Generals as War Lovers

"I guess that's probably more important than anything else," he continued. "If
anyone thinks this is an enjoyable experience, they're dead wrong, dead wrong.
I've known a lot of generals who were war lovers. They scare the living hell out
of me, and they're also not very good generals, not by my measure. Custer loved
war, and look at what he accomplished."

Finally, he said: "They were ordinary. They never considered themselves
extraordinary. They never, I don't think, considered themselves particularly
dashing and handsome and romantic in their uniforms."

The toughest thing in his life, General Schwarzkopf said, was his discovery on
his return in 1969 from a second tour of duty in Vietnam that the American
people had turned against the war and against the armed services.

"We all do our jobs based on past experiences," he said. "We learn as much from
negative as from positive experiences. Obviously Vietnam was a big experience
for me. But it's not correct that I'm obsessed by Vietnam."

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 5, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Looking to Grow Rich, And Be Happy, in Texas

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 786 words


Small Fortunes Two Guys in Pursuit
Of the American Dream
By Edward Zuckerman
296 pages. Viking. $19.95.

The "Two Guys in Pursuit of the American Dream" that the journalist Edward
Zuckerman profiles in his new book are both Texans and they are both
entrepreneurs. Both come from modest backgrounds and both dream of using their
business skills to invent new lives for themselves. There, however, the
similarities apparently end.

Pete Binion, as Mr. Zuckerman notes, is "a Texan of the old school." Having
grown up on a succession of small Texas farms, he enlisted in the Marines in the
late 1960's, went to Vietnam and returned home to study animal husbandry and
become a rodeo rider. Now, happily married with three children, he has sunk all
his family's money into a ranch, where he hopes to breed Senepol cattle.

Pete believes that he can introduce the Senepol, an obscure breed developed on
the Caribbean island of St. Croix, to Texas and that one day it will rival such
long-established breeds as the longhorn and the Brahman. He also plans to use
his knowledge of animal science to start a company named Universal Embryonics.
(He rejected the name World Embryonics as too limited.) The company, he
believes, will operate on the cutting edge of cattle reproduction technology,
bringing combined benefits, in Mr. Zuckerman's words, to "world agriculture and
Pete Binion and his family."


Mr. Zuckerman's other subject, Jim Teal, has dreams that are considerably less
visionary. He simply wants to make a lot of money and have a good time. As
described by Mr. Zuckerman, Jim comes across as an obnoxious good old boy. His
idea of a good time is golf with topless models or a wild party in his yellow
RV.He is not above trying to collect insurance money by goading a drunken driver
into running into his car.

If Jim lacks conventional scruples, however, he's also a hard-working hustler.
At age 18, he was a dollar-an-hour chicken breader at a Kentucky Fried Chicken;
by 30, he was the owner of a Wendy's hamburger franchise and he had more than a
million dollars in Wendy's stock. Since then, he has run a male stripper bar and
a hot-tub business, which faltered amid the growing fears about herpes and AIDS.
When Mr. Zuckerman first meets Jim, he has started a T-shirt business featuring
shirts emblazoned with popular comic-strip characters like Skyler the Bird and
Bill the Cat.

Cutting back and forth in alternating chapters between Jim's story and Pete's
story, Mr. Zuckerman creates a compelling and often very funny portrait of these
two Texas businessmen, with whom he spent two and a half years. Observant yet
nonjudgmental, he is able to give the reader a vivid sense of these two men's
lives, as well as an understanding of how their stories fit and don't fit the
traditional Horatio Alger mold. He demonstrates how luck and timing and judgment
can make or break a small business, how circumstances beyond one's control can
exert a profound -- and often devastating -- influence on individual lives. We
see how American's suspicion of red meat and cholesterol can have a direct
effect on ranchers like Pete Binion and how recession and bank failures can
affect a struggling businessman like Jim Teal.

In addition, Mr. Zuckerman gives the reader a colorful picture of contemporary
Texas as glimpsed through the lives of his two heroes and some of those they
encounter. He takes us to football games and golf courses, to shopping malls and
trade fairs, to barbecues and dances, and he introduces us to a motley group of
people, including a woman who persuades her wealthy husband to buy some cattle
because she likes their color, a man who specializes in armadillo cartoons and a
cowboy who dreams of owning a house with three walls of hard-cover books and a
picture window.

Unfortunately, neither Jim nor Pete prosper with their businesses. Pete is
unable to find buyers for his Senepol cattle. He loses his ranch and eventually
goes bankrupt. Jim and his partner also go out of business. After years of
driving around in limousines, he begins living on his unemployment benefits of
$217 a week.

Both, however, remain incurable optimists. Last seen by Mr. Zuckerman, they are
busy working on the second acts in their lives. Jim thinks there is money to be
made in getting Federal and city funds to help subsidize mobile home parks for
the homeless; Pete has returned to school to prepare for a new career in
hazardous-waste management. He writes Mr. Zuckerman that he and his "family,
pets and friends are healthy and doing well." He is relieved that he no longer
has to worry about a failing business. "Life is a joy," he writes, "I'm living
in heaven."

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Edward Zuckerman (Mario Photographers/Viking)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

As Many Fall, Project's Survivors Struggle On

BYLINE: By DON TERRY

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2783 words


On a crisp winter afternoon, a half-dozen middle-aged black men huddled around a
chess table in the shadow of the Martin Luther King Jr. Towers in Harlem.

The men grew up together in the project. Back then they didn't play much chess.
When they were teen-agers, they called themselves the 115th Street Boys or the
Imperial Knights, a rumble-ready gang of lean, tough youths from the ghetto.

Thirty years later, still hanging out together in the project when work and
family allow, they call themselves the Survivors.

'So Many Brothers Never Made It'

Many of their friends and dreams died young long, long ago. But these men --
Vic, Walt, Rog and the other "brothers" -- have made it through the hard times,
the gang fights, the closed factories and the bitter disappointments that have
fallen on them and theirs like a harsh rain.

"I'm lucky to be alive," said Victor Buford, a 48-year-old former boxer who
fought for as little as $50 a night before things really got bad. "So many
brothers never made it. I'm a survivor."

King Towers, in the words of Walter Drayton, another regular at the chess table,
"is full of survivors." Like many of New York's working-poor neighborhoods,
these three city blocks framed by Fifth and Lenox Avenues, 112th and 115th
Streets, are a place of considerable permanence and continuity amid adversity,
where the average tenant spends 21 years and many stay for generations.

Some of these survivors have moved up to the middle class and away; they have
fulfilled the promise of the projects but still return. Others are growing old
at King Towers and lack the money, the hope or even the inclination to live
anywhere else. Others still dream of escape.

To talk to them all is to talk of life in a hard place, getting harder. The
surrounding neighborhood has been punched and kicked by crime, homelessness and
numbing poverty for years. Now the blows are beginning to pile up, staggering
even the most traditionally stable sections of Harlem, including King Towers.

"Growing up, there were black-owned stores in the neighborhood," Mr. Buford
said. "We had role models, people to look up to. That's all gone now. The
community has been dismantled. Drugs are killing us."

"So many politicians have their hands in the till," said Roger Shepherd, a
37-year-old kitchen aide at a state hospital. "Cops, too. Now they want to blame
the poor for New York falling. It's crazy."

Still, they are survivors.

"Why do we stay?" asked Mr. Drayton, who is 42. "Did you hear that, Victor? He
wants to know why we stay. We stay because this is home. This is where we were
raised and where we raised our kids. This is where we know everybody and
everybody knows us.

"And, there ain't nowhere else to go. The system has us in a jar with the lid on
tight."

In King Towers, home is both castle and prison.

Hard Times
Hold Onto a Job With Both Hands

A few days later, a gypsy cab pulled into King Towers. In Harlem, yellow cabs
are like buffalo -- rare.

The driver jumped out and helped a frail old woman climb slowly down to the
street. He carried her grocery bags to the sidewalk and then called out to a
young woman walking along the street with a child.

"Will you help her inside her house?" the driver asked.

"No," the woman said. "Why don't you?"

"I can't leave my car out here," he said. "I hope you drop dead."

The cabby drove off, leaving the old woman looking scared on the curb. Then Mr.
Shepherd, who had been standing nearby, stepped forward and carried the woman's
bags to her apartment.

"I never come out this late," the woman said.

It was 5 P.M.

'Relieve the Pressure'

Mr. Shepherd grew up in King Towers. He and Mr. Buford are cousins. And though
he now lives in the Bronx, he stops by the project almost every day to see his
friends and his family.

"Times are real hard," Mr. Shepherd said. "The job I have now, I'm holding onto
with both hands."

Mr. Shepherd walked slowly around the project and paused in front of the Two Way
Market, a grocery and liquor store on 115th Street.

"They got as many liquor stores around here as churches," he said. "When you got
so much tension you got to do something to relieve the pressure. That's where
the liquor stores come in."

He continued walking toward the corner of 115th and Lenox Avenue, a popular
hangout for the project's young people, some of them waiting to buy or sell
drugs.

"They," Mr. Shepherd said, meaning the government, "want us to settle for a
little piece of nothing, like the Indians on the reservation. They got us
fighting and killing each other for crumbs."

He sighed deeply. "In a way, the ones in jail are like political prisoners
because they refused to settle for less."

The Success
Come Back To Give Back

Charles Williams, a 40-year-old administrator at Harlem Hospital, spent most of
his first 25 years in King Towers. He earned a master's degree in social work
and a ticket out of the projects.

But while he lives in the Bronx now, he has not forgotten his roots. He holds
onto them tightly, proudly, sadly. He is president of the advisory board of the
King Towers community center. "This will always be home," he said.

Mr. Williams is constantly on the telephone trying to convince other former
residents "who have made it" -- police officers, teachers, a Federal drug agent
-- to return and become role models for the development's young people, many of
whom are being pushed and dragged by circumstance and misguided choice toward a
life and premature death in the streets.

"Those of us who have made it must come back and give back to the community," he
said. "Basically, we've got to change what's happening in King Towers, the way
we treat each other."

Four nights after Christmas, the Survivors held a reunion dance in a recreation
center a few blocks from King Towers.

"None of us have ever left each other," said Robert J. Truesdale, a member of
the 115th Street Boys who grew up to serve in Vietnam, move to the Riverdale
section of the Bronx, work as an area manager for Paine Webber and send his
daughter to Princeton.

"A lot of us got killed over the years, but the rest of us make a point to get
together," Mr. Truesdale said. "We've been best men at each other's weddings,
godfathers to each other's children. We've been there for each other. I can
remember a time when we had holes in our pockets. There are a lot of guys in
here making $60,000 a year now. We've been to hell and back."

They have also been to too many funerals to remember.

3 Funerals in One Week

During one week in November, they gathered to bury three men from King Towers,
all in their mid-40's. One man overdosed on drugs; another died of cirrhosis. No
one at the dance knew what had killed the third man.

"The streets are eating up everybody," said Richard Finney, 42.

Mr. Buford, one of the organizers of the reunion dance, was himself almost
devoured by the streets.

He had tried his fortunes as a fighter after returning home from the Army in the
mid-60's. But he was lucky to make more than $100 a fight, while some of his
friends were "getting rich selling drugs."

"I started dealing, and that was my downfall," he said. "I had money, clothes,
women. But you lose your soul being a drug dealer." Not only did he sell drugs,
he used them and became heavily addicted. It took him five or six tries to kick
his habit.

'I've Helped Destroy My People'

"Then I said to myself and the Almighty, 'Thank God, I'm still alive,' " he
said. "I said, 'I know I've helped destroy my people and I'm sorry.'

"I feel God kept me alive to do something more than that -- to help my people,
especially these young brothers on the corner."

Mr. Buford and the other Survivors are hoping to raise enough money to buy a
building and turn it into a community center.

"We want to help these young kids coming up," Mr. Drayton said. "Unless the men
of the community stand up and give these kids some direction, we're finished.
We're in a war, fighting for our youth."

"There are so many talented people here," Mr. Buford added. "But that talent
isn't brought out because everybody is struggling. The pace is very fast. Kids
grow up too fast. They don't have time for a childhood. I think it's designed to
have our young people on the street. If you kill the youth, you kill a
generation."

The city's Housing Authority already operates a youth center at King Towers, but
it is underfinanced and understaffed. After paying staff salaries, the center
can spend about $1,400 a year.

The center's director, Dianne Henderson, insists that "I'm pretty good with
money." In her few months at King Towers, she has been searching for volunteers
and role models to run recreational, educational and cultural programs. So far,
many have promised to help, but few have stepped forward.

Ms. Henderson has found that talk is as cheap as a Saturday night special.

The Pioneer
'My Son Died Instantly'

For 40 years, Louise Vails has watched the ebb and flow of life at King Towers
from a window of her first-floor apartment. She and her husband raised 10
children in the project, including their youngest, Nelson, who went on to win a
silver medal for cycling in the 1984 Olympics.

"He made all of America feel proud that year," Mrs. Vails said. A framed
photograph of her son standing between Ronald and Nancy Reagan hangs on her
living-room wall.

Mrs. Vails was eight months pregnant with Nelson when one of her children,
18-year-old Albert, was killed on the stoop of her building. He was returning
home from his job at a purse factory when a young man came up behind him and
shot him in the head. They had had a dispute at a party a few days before.

"My son died instantly," Mrs. Vails said. "I never thought about moving. It was
just one of those things. It could have happened anywhere."

Mrs. Vails, who is 72 years old, is both a survivor and a pioneer.

On Welfare, Then Off

When she and her family moved into the project in 1951, only 2 of the 10
rust-colored high-rise buildings were completed, and the development was known
as the Stephen Foster Houses. The name was changed shortly after the 1968
assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.

Her husband, Robert, drove a cab and worked in a hospital laundry room. He died
in 1986. Mrs. Vails was a nurse's aide for 22 years. For a short time in the
early 50's, while only Mr. Vails was working, the family received some welfare
assistance. But "we got off of it as soon as I started working," Mrs. Vails
said.

"Everything around here is, I'd say, 100 percent better than in the past 20
years," she said. "A lot of the young fellas who used to do bad things have
grown up. They got married. They have families. They have jobs. Even the grounds
are cleaner.

"The only reason people I know move out of the projects is to buy a house. But
other than that, I never heard no one say the projects was bad. I myself
wouldn't live anywhere else. Two of my children were born here."

One of Mrs. Vails's sons is a retired cowboy, another an Army recruiter. One
daughter is a head nurse at a hospital in San Francisco; another is a secretary
at a college. She has a son who is a printer, another who is a supervisor at a
drug-rehabilitation center and another who is a retired correction officer. She
has 19 grandchildren and 7 great-grandchildren.

"There is a lot of good in these projects that people don't hear about," she
said. "You got good and bad people everywhere. There are bad people in the
Waldorf.

"My children didn't have the best of everything, but we gave them the best we
could. It's not where you live; it's how you bring your children up. This
apartment isn't a mansion, but it's a home full of love."

The Future?
'These Kids Aren't Listening'

There is a lot of talk at King Towers about the young people and their future.
More often than not, one way or another, it is mixed with talk about drugs.

At the chess table one day, a sad-faced man named George Brown spoke in a voice
just above a whisper.

"These kids aren't listening to us," he said. "We ain't selling no drugs, so we
ain't no role models."

He looked away from his friends. His voice was laced with shame.

"My son said to me, 'Dad, I'll be glad when you get a job.' He's 12 years old.
That hurt me. I'm trying."

So is Michael Smalls. It was 11:30 in the morning, and Mr. Smalls, a husky man
of 35 with a pair of dark glasses perched on the end of his nose, was doing what
he does most mornings, afternoons and nights: hanging out in front of his
building in King Towers.

"Another one of my friends got killed last night," said Mr. Smalls, who is
unemployed and trying to get a job with the Housing Authority. "I'm out here
trying to put together the bits and pieces."

A young man approached, his baseball cap pulled down against a brisk wind.

"Did you hear about Kenny?" Mr. Smalls asked the man.

"Yeah, I heard he got killed," the man said. "He got shot in the back of the
head on 126th Street."

'This Is My Reward'

Mr. Smalls said his friend Kenny had been involved with drugs for years but had
a good heart and a family that loved him.

"I wish we could make people take a chill pill and stop all this killing," he
said. "I hate it around here. I guess it's really a self-pity thing.

"I had the talent to play myself out of here with basketball, but I messed up in
school. This is my reward."

In a sixth-floor hallway a few buildings away, a man lay sprawled in the dim
afternoon light.

"He's a crackhead," a neighbor explained. "That's where he sleeps during the
day. His mother lives there. She puts him out in the morning when she goes to
work and lets him back in when she comes home at night.

"She's afraid he'll sell everything in the apartment for crack. A crackhead will
do anything for a dime."

Epilogue
'I Call It A Development'

Marguerite Ryner, the vice president of the tenant association, has raised three
children and mourned two husbands in her 36 years in King Towers. By now, most
of her long-time friends and neighbors have either moved out or been chased out.

Mrs. Ryner, though, wears her ambivalence about King Towers like a gas mask,
putting it on and taking it off, depending on the assaults of the day. One day
she is disillusioned and bitter, ready to move out with the dawn. The next, she
is determined and firm about staying and fighting to "make King Towers a decent
place to live again."

"I don't like to call it the projects," she explained. "I call it a development,
because that's what we're doing, developing this place into a community."

Mrs. Ryner was standing in the hallway just outside her apartment on the 10th
floor of her building on Fifth Avenue. She is extremely proud of this hallway:
Six years ago, she and a group of neighbors painted a mural over every inch of
its institutional, off-white walls. They covered the walls in dark reds, browns
and yellows. They painted pictures of karate fighters, couples eating dinner,
flowers and comic-book superheroes.

But what they really painted was a declaration: This is our home.

Mrs. Ryner tapped the floor with her cane and ran her other hand over the mural.
"We've got to do it over again," she said sadly. 'As you can see, the graffiti
people have been here."

What Life Has Become

Mrs. Ryner, who is 65 years old, moved into the development in 1954, the year it
was completed. She had been living in one room of a boarding house with her
husband, a railroad cook. Their family was growing. They needed more space. She
has three grown children, two daughters and a son.

"The development was beautiful," Mrs. Ryner said. "Everybody got along. We kept
our development clean. No graffiti. No robbing. No stealing. No drugs."

Mrs. Ryner shook her head at what life has become at King Towers.

"This drug nonsense doesn't stem from the poor people, the lower-echelon group,"
she said. "This stems from above. The Federal Government sanctioned Noriega. In
order to clear out this drug situation, you got to clear out the Federal
Government in Washington."

Even a walk to the corner newsstand can be dangerous. One early morning when she
was out walking her dog, Christmas, Mrs. Ryner saw a 35-year-old man she had
known all his life shooting at another man across the street.

When the man saw her, he yanked the gun behind his back and said, "Mrs. Ryner, I
didn't mean for you to see that."

"I still love it here," Mrs. Ryner said, frowning at the memory of those
early-morning gunshots. "But I don't love it enough to stay here and be
miserable. Working people have a heck of time trying to survive."

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Life in The Towers: Home In a Hard Place - Last of three articles.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Walter Drayton, left, and Victor Buford outside the Martin
Luther King Jr. Towers, where they grew up together. Both still live there.
(Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times) (pg. A1); At the King Towers housing project
in Harlem, the average tenant lives in the complex for 21 years; some stay for
generations. "There ain't nowhere else to go," said Walter Drayton. "The system
has us in a jar with the lid on tight."; "I never thought about moving," said
Louise Vails, a former nurse's aide who raised 10 children in the King project,
one of whom was killed on the stoop of her building. "It was just one of those
things. It could have happened anywhere."; Marguerite Ryner, the vice president
of the tenant association, has raised three children and mourned two husbands in
King Towers, which she doesn't call a project. "I call it a development," Mrs.
Ryner said. "We're developing this place into a community. (Photographs by Fred
R. Conrad/The New York Times) (pg. B2)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: THE DESERT;
In the Table-Flat Land, Sand, Wind and Flies

BYLINE: By CHRIS HEDGES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 627 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Feb. 5


Across the northern desert of Saudi Arabia, tons of war materiel and men are
pouring into the front lines along the border with Kuwait and Iraq.

Long columns of trucks, jeeps, tanks and armored personnel carriers have cut
tracks across the hard desert sand, churning up deep ruts, scarring the
landscape in confusing criss-crosses and throwing up billows of dust.

The table-flat desert, stretching for miles in every direction without so much
as an incline, a tree or a cactus, is hypnotic in its monotony.

Travelers on the trip north, enveloped in the thin grit that seeps in through
the floorboards and closed windows, seem to drive endlessly toward the same
point on the horizon.

Like Clenched Fists

The stark environment empowers the brutal instruments of war. Armored vehicles,
lacking the cover of hills or trees, stand exposed like clenched fists, the
weapons always drawing the eye because of the sameness that surrounds them.

The wind, whipping across the vast flatland, forces soldiers to pull up the
hoods on their jackets and turn away. It cuts conversation to a few shouts and
defies anyone's efforts to keep clean.

Soldiers, thrown into relief when standing next to the metal leviathans,
suddenly look vulnerable and insignificant.

Existence along the wide barren stretches that lie in front of Kuwait seem ruled
by these mechanical monsters, resting under camouflage nets, poised to spit out
bullets and shells.

It is to the machines that the men now attend, cleaning them and repairing the
parts. When troops move across the sterile world they now inhabit they do so
inside the ungainly transports, sealed in darkness, unable to communicate above
the din of the engines and released only when the rear door swings open and
allows them to stumble into the harsh sunlight.

Reliving Combat Emotions

"Now I know it's war," said Chief Warrant Officer Joseph W. Threat, who fought
in Vietnam and who, like many combat veterans, is reliving emotions that have
been dormant for more than a decade. "No one who has been through war wants to
do it again. Let's just hope it's quick."

The move north has changed the tenor of encampments. There is less banter in the
north and the men, working feverishly on their foxholes now that they are within
range of Iraqi artillery, say they are finding more snakes, scorpions and rats
than in the past.

The Bedouins, who lived here until a few days ago, have moved their goats and
sheep farther south, leaving behind scattered litter from their camps.

Armored transports plow through the rusted tins, green plastic bags and
carcasses of goats, their hides covered with the fat black flies that seem to
seek men out at night when they most wish to close their eyes and lose
themselves to sleep.

Some Arabs Remain

A few Arabs remain in the small villages along the border, observing the
frenetic pace of the war machinery. Children who do not wave watch the large
machines move through the dirt streets.

Village elders in one border town sat around a fire built on a concrete
outcropping in their house, and listened to the rumble of vehicles.

Several men sat sipping bitter coffee, poured in demitasse china cups from a
bronze coffee pot in the embers, on the carpeted floor.

A woman in a black veil peered quickly into the room and disappeared.

The Arab men said they would not move, not for the shelling they could hear at
night or the firepower they could see at day.

The elders, wearing their long robes and kaffiyehs, ascribed this temporary
disruption to a higher power, beyond human control or comprehension.

"All this is God's will, praise be to God," his father, Mohammed al-Moteri,
said. "There will be war and again there will be peace."

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: DEMONSTRATIONS;
Backers of Policy Seize Initiative in the Streets

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1206 words


As happened in the Vietnam era, a war overseas is bringing with it a struggle
for the allegiance of Americans at home.

This time, however, to a degree that has probably seldom been matched in the
nation's history, many of those taking to the streets in demonstrations and
rallies are showing support for the war effort rather than opposition.

The result is perhaps the most vivid confluence of public relations and military
action in the nation's history. It reflects both the extraordinary nature of a
televised war watched simultaneously by Saddam Hussein and millions of Americans
and the inescapable reminders of the way protesters in the Vietnam War era
captured the public debate and changed the course of the conflict.

To some extent, the current surge of patriotic demonstrations is reminiscent of
flag-waving parades sending off troops to the Civil War or World Wars I and II.
But to many observers, the contrasts with the current shows of patriotism are
more telling than the similarities. To them, the differences reflect the post-
Vietnam recognition by both ordinary citizens and policy makers that the public
relations war at home can be as influential as the battlefield overseas.

Social Divisions Reflected

"This pattern is quite different from sending off the troops in 1917 or 1941,"
said Gerald Linderman, a professor of history at the University of Michigan. "In
the past, the shows of support were demonstrated solely at the troops; now
they're equally directed at other elements within our society. Sending off the
troops in the past was an expression of a large measure of social unity. Today,
the pattern is one exemplative of social divisions."

By far the largest demonstrations since the war began were the anti-war rallies
in Washington and on the West Coast Jan. 19 and 26. But from a trickle of small
local demonstrations in places like Atlanta and Norfolk, Va., in the first days
of the war, the nation has seen a groundswell of dozens of demonstrations
supporting the troops in towns around the country. They have been far more
extensive than the Vietnam-era demonstrations in support of American policy,
like ones mounted by construction workers in New York.

This past weekend, there were rallies supporting the war effort from Rochester
to Dallas, and from Virginia Beach to Washington. A conservative group is
planning demonstrations around the country next weekend, and a Vietnam veterans
group is planning a demonstration in support of the troops in Washington on Feb.
16.

Never Mind 'Silent Support'

"This can't be like Vietnam; we can't give silent support," said Howard Ungar, a
47-year-old estimator for a painting company in Pittsburg, Calif., who has
organized several pro-war rallies and now heads a group called the Coalition for
Troops Support. "We need to counteract the messages the protesters are putting
out, and the longer the war goes on, the more important our support is."

Most of the rallies in support of American policy in the Persian Gulf have been
locally organized grass-roots efforts led by local officials, veterans groups or
interested residents.

In Alvin, Tex., Stevie Johnson, a 32-year-old court stenographer, wanted to
attend a rally in support of the troops but could not find one. When she asked
the town Mayor if any demonstration was planned, he put her in charge of
organizing one.

"I've never organized anything like this before in my life," she said. "But in
five days we rounded up a sea of people who wanted to express their support. I'm
not a nurse on the front lines, but I consider this as service to my country to
take an active part to support our troops for the duration of the war."

Organized Lobbying

But the show of support for the war also stems from concerted organization by
backers of American policy and from effective lobbying of the public by the
Administration to a degree not seen during the Vietnam era.

One prominent group supporting the war effort has been the Committee for Peace
and Security in the Gulf, a coalition of both liberals and conservatives. But
much of the organized support comes from conservative groups or those active in
military concerns.

The American Security Council, a 35-year-old policy research organization
published a newspaper advertisement in which former Presidents Ronald Reagan,
Gerald R. Ford, and Richard M. Nixon and others supported President Bush's
policy.

A conservative group called the Coalition for America at Risk spent more than a
million dollars on advertising in favor of the war effort. Its members included
prominent conservatives, like John Singlaub, a retired Army major general and
one of the most active figures in providing aid to the Nicaraguan contras, and
the conservative fund raiser Richard Viguerie.

One of its members, William R. Kennedy Jr., is registered with the Justice
Department as an agent for the Kuwaiti Emergency Relief Fund. He said his
representation in the group had nothing to do with his work on behalf of Kuwaiti
businessmen and officials.

Yielding the Stage

The Coalition for America at Risk has since yielded the stage to the Freedom
Task Force under the leadership of Sam H. Zakhem, the United States Ambassador
to Bahrain in the Reagan Administration. The Freedom Task Force has worked in
several directions to support the war effort.

Among other activities, the group has provided financial support in the form of
T-shirts, buttons and other materials for Students Mobilized Against Saddam
Hussein, recently organized on campuses around the country. It helped publicize
last week's support-the-troops demonstration in Washington.

Gary Jarmin, whose American Freedom Coalition plans support-the-troops rallies
across the nation next week, said the biggest difference between now and the
Vietnam era may be that this is a more conservative time than the 1960's and the
cultural trends now favor the war effort.

"The conservative movement is light-years ahead of where we were 25 years ago,"
he said. "During Vietnam, the antiwar movement rode the coattails of the
cultural revolution that was going on. The average, conservative mainstream
American was sort of swept over by the tide without really understanding what
was happening. This is a very different time."

Not Much Pain Yet

Members of the current antiwar movement say the surge of sentiment in favor of
the war largely reflects the early, relatively painless days of the war and a
traditional rally-round-the flag effort in the war's initial days.

Some add that it also reflects the enormous advantages those supporting the war
have in shaping public opinion - from the instinctive sense of many people that
patriotism means supporting the war effort, to the limitless media access
available to the President and military officials, to the enormous gap in
resources between the Government, business, and conservative groups supporting
the war effort and those opposing it.

"On the one hand, you have people with almost unlimited access to money and the
media, and on the other you have a group like ours, which can't even pay our
phone bill," said Bonnie Garvin, a spokesman for the National Campaign for Peace
in the Middle East.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A rally in Montpelier, Vt., in support of the troops in the
Persian Gulf was part of a surge of such patriotic demonstrations around the
country. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1126 words



WAR IN THE GULF A8-11

Air power might not be enough to drive Iraq from Kuwait, President Bush said. He
has ordered his top two military advisers to visit the Persian Gulf to assess
whether a ground assault will be necessary. Page A1

The effect of the allied bombing on Iraq's elite ground forces in a
well-entrenched "strategic reserve" in northern Kuwait and southern Iraq has not
been substantial, Pentagon officials said. A1

Allied warplanes dropped payloads on Baghdad, Basra and Tikrit, President Saddam
Hussein's hometown, amid new signs that the air campaign is deeply disrupting
Iraqi civilian life and military activity.  A8

Iraq suspended the sale of fuel oil, bringing further deprivation to a wintry
land suffering from shortages of food, water, electricity and gasoline. A11

For confident pilots, a cautionary word A9

In the table-flat land, sand, wind and flies A9

War spurs navigation by satellite D1

War puts strain on North African countries A11

Israeli Air Force heavily bombs targets near Sidon, Lebanon A11

Israel slackens curfew on Arabs A11

Many of the public demonstrations over the war are shows of support rather than
opposition, a reflection of how vividly people remember the way protesters in
the Vietnam era captured the public debate. A9

INTERNATIONAL A2-7

Arms control efforts are slipping as the Soviet military's influence in Moscow
grows, Administration officials say. Among other deals, the agreement cutting
conventional forces in Europe is in jeopardy. A1

The Kremlin's police crackdown was stepped up with the announcement of a 50
percent increase in army patrols in the cities, along with an effort to bring
criminal charges against a prominent millionaire proponent of free enterprise.
A1

In advance, Gorbachev calls Lithuania vote irrelevant A3

A space station will plunge to earth in a rain of fiery debris today or
tomorrow, Soviet and American officials said. The outpost was the centerpiece of
the Soviet space program. A6

Pope sees Walesa; calls for aid for Poland A2

U.S. to close nuclear sub base in Scotland in 1992 A7

Patancheru Journal: A town in India, once a farming community, was turned into
an industrial zone and quickly became one of the most polluted places on earth,
according to environmentalists. A4

40 Colombians die in series of guerrilla attacks A5

China legal scholar faces death penalty in democracy trial A5

NATIONAL A12-19

The nation's banking system would undergo sweeping changes in a plan presented
by the Administration. The plan would eliminate many of the barriers and
regulations that were installed by the Government after the national banking
crisis in the 1930's. A1

The methods used by airports to prevent plane collisions on the ground would be
significantly changed under proposals being made by the F.A.A., the head of the
agency said. A1

The drought has made farming the focus of much discussion about how to manage
California's water shortage. Farmers use 85 percent of the state's available
water. A12

A plant to handle radioactive wastes from aging tanks at a nuclear reservation
will not be built for at least two years, the Energy Department announced,
provoking anger among officials of Washington State and the E.P.A. A12

Black Americans may be suffering from high blood pressure at an excessive rate
because environmental factors like poverty, diet and the stress of racial
discrimination could be outweighing genetic factors, a study says. A16 Doctors
need to focus on asthma with greater vigilance as it is becoming an increasingly
significant cause of death in the United States, Federal health officials said.
A19

President Bush's budget director, Richard G. Darman, gave a low-key defense of
the 1992 budget to Congress, confessed earlier errors and charmed at least a few
senators who had been put off by his cocky self-assurance in the past. A14

Plan to shift $15 billion faces uncertain fate A14

Seven lawmakers and others indicted in Arizona probe A12

No terrorist link to bombs is found A13

Judge bars doctor from using suicide machine A13

REGIONAL B1-4

The garbage collection industry in New York City, widely viewed as controlled by
organized crime, could become more competitive under a Government effort to sell
collection routes to some of the nation's biggest waste disposal companies. A1

Nearly half of the major contracts that New York City allots, from heavy
equipment to social services, are awarded without competitive bidding, according
to a study released by the City Comptroller. B1

The Board of Eduction's spending practices are being criticized by officials in
and out of the New York City school system. One case involves support of
dropout-prevention programs thought to be ineffective. B1

Those who survive the struggle of growing up amid the adversity at the King
Towers housing project often live there through several generations. Several men
who meet regularly to play chess used to be members of a street gang. A1

Suburbs would be devastated by the cuts in state aid in Governor Cuomo's
proposed budget, according to mayors around the state, who say the cuts would
require them to raise taxes and to cut services. B1

Governor Cuomo defends his budget and no-tax pledge B3

Local officials criticize Bush budget plan A15

Jail is planned in Brooklyn, and foes rise B1

Car thief suspect dies in struggle with the police B3

New Jersey is establishing an office on women and AIDS B4

Neediest Cases B4

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

The Living Section

Food

High-tech takes on truffles C1

Paris schools add a course, a la carte C1

Living

Pinball's back and wizards tilt with joy C1

Honest, earthy clothes for men C1

Arts/Entertainment

Aftermath of the Rock in Rio festival C11

Bierstadts in Brooklyn C11

Music: Neil Young at Madison Square Garden C11

Word and Image: Battered woman's syndrome C11

Graham Greene's short stories C16

Obituaries

Dean Jagger, actor D21

Pedro Arrupe, Jesuit chief for 18 years D22

LuEsther T. Mertz, arts patron D22

Sports

Basketball: Magic set back Knicks B7

Villanova defeats St. John's B7

Column: Vecsey on reporting hockey injuries B7

Football: Belichick hired by Browns B7

Education Page B5

Despite terrorist fear, overseas studies go on

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A20

Who's entitled?

Hero to the hopeless

Scholarships under the rug

Letters A20

Tom Wicker: Why Democrats lose A21

Leslie H. Gelb: Gulf military questions A21

Flora Lewis: The next Soviet challenge A21

Robert E. Sullivan Jr.: From Passaic to Riyadh . . .  A21

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Gulf Military Questions

BYLINE: By Leslie H. Gelb

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 745 words


President Bush is to be commended for not micromanaging the Persian Gulf war.
But his passion against interference hints that he may be overreacting to
President Johnson's management of the Vietnam War -- and giving his generals too
much running room.

Lyndon Johnson did involve himself, incorrectly, in choosing bombing targets in
North Vietnam. But he had reason to worry that bombing would provoke Chinese and
Soviet intervention, and it was thus his duty to set overall air strategy. As
for ground strategy in South Vietnam, that was almost entirely the province of
military commanders -- for good and ill.


This is not to suggest criticism of our military's performance in the gulf. On
the contrary, it has been marked by high competence.

The point is that Mr. Bush may be so mesmerized by "Johnson's mistake," and thus
so determined to stay out of his generals' hair, that he may not fully
appreciate a central truth: Our military is a vast corporate bureaucracy with
its own blinkers -- excellent at many tasks but, more so than other
bureaucracies, not very good at questioning its own thinking and way of doing
things.

Specifically, my concern is that Mr. Bush's deference to the military as he
approaches decisions on ground combat will sway him from asking the following
kinds of tough questions:

* How well have we really been doing in interdicting supplies from Iraq to
Kuwait? The answer is critical for judging how much more to bomb these routes
before attacking Iraqi forces in Kuwait.  Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf said last week
that we had been 90 percent effective. But some Pentagon intelligence experts
say the figure is much lower.

If Mr. Bush simply asks the Pentagon to reconcile these two estimates, the reply
will always be that the field commander is right. But the facts here are so
important that the President and Defense Secretary Cheney should look at the
data and examine how the estimating is being done.

* What about the Iraqis' stockpiles in Kuwait? They may have food, water and
ammunition to last for months. If so, Mr. Bush would want to continue bombing
supply routes even longer than planned to force Iraq to use up those reserves.

More basically, does our military actually know much about these stockpiles? If
not, perhaps sending in commando teams to snatch Iraqis might fill the
information gap.

* Are our troops as prepared as they can be to meet a chemical attack? U.S.
commanders say they have this matter under control, but serious questions have
been raised.

The latest question was last week on ABC's "Primetime Live." The editor of
Jane's N.B.C. Protection Equipment (the military bible in this field), said that
U.S. gas masks and protective clothing were not nearly as good as our NATO
allies' equipment.  Before sending U.S. troops to battle, Mr. Bush has to check
out this alarming report.

* Has the military's corporate machinery disgorged so much about U.S. intentions
for a ground attack that Iraqi forces are just waiting in all the right places?
Everyone seems to know that the likely scenario calls for American and British
forces to wheel around Kuwait and cut across the southern part of Iraq toward
Basra.

The military mind has a habit of fixating on a plan and carrying it out
relentlessly and without artifice. But surprise is essential to prevent Iraq
from concentrating its forces at the likely attack routes.

In World War II, General Eisenhower knew the Germans were expecting him to
attack across the channel in Normandy. But Ike created feints that compelled
Hitler to divert forces from Normandy.

Maybe Saddam Hussein should be given good reason to fret about an attack on
Baghdad and not Basra.

On such questions as these, military briefings for high civilian officials are
wondrous to behold. Orderly, comprehensive and positive, they can overwhelm
listeners. Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney have heard them all before, but never on this
scale and from their present perch.

The gulf is also the first war directed by Generals Schwarzkopf and Powell.
These two have shown great intelligence and political sensitivity, but they have
not been fully tested in their four-star roles. Until they are, Mr. Bush cannot
know whether they will turn out to be George C. Marshalls or George C. Scotts.

Meantime, George Bush is Commander in Chief, and the American people will hold
him responsible for the conduct of this war, just as they did Lyndon Johnson for
Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 7, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Bush Signs Agent Orange Bill To Compensate Ill Veterans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 122 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 6


President Bush ended a two-decade dispute today by signing a bill to compensate
Vietnam War veterans exposed to the herbicide Agent Orange.

The measure permanently extends disability benefits to Vietnam veterans
suffering from two types of cancer presumed to be caused by Agent Orange:
non-Hodgkins' lymphoma and soft-tissue sarcoma.

Agent Orange was sprayed by American troops in Vietnam to defoliate jungle
cover. For years, the Government said there was no proven link between the
herbicide and the two types of cancer.

While some controversy still remains over the effect of Agent Orange and its
primary component, dioxin, the bill came to the President's desk with the
unanimous approval of both the House and the Senate.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 7, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Metro Matters;
War of Words: Gulf May Figure In Cuomo Future

BYLINE: By SAM ROBERTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 773 words


When Robert Abrams declared his candidacy for the United States Senate this
week, he dodged a compelling foreign policy question: would he have voted to
authorize war against Iraq -- as the Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato,
did -- or would he have given sanctions more time to work?

Mr. Abrams, a Democrat, replied that he now supports the President. Anyway, he
suggested, the question was hypothetical because, as New York State's Attorney
General, he was not privy to pivotal intelligence. To which David Garth, the
political consultant, retorted: "Next to Bobby Abrams, Mario Cuomo is a profile
in courage."

Governor Cuomo has been less ambiguous about his ambivalence. Yet some people
who looked to him for national leadership may have been disappointed or
confused.

Had he been more outspoken, the Democratic Governor might have been accused of
diverting attention from the gulf in his budget. His intellectual arguments were
misinterpreted. Mr. Cuomo praised Israel, from afar, for its "magnificent
restraint," though his bows to symbolism were not as overreaching as the visit
by Mayor David N. Dinkins to Israel this week -- a gesture that united some
blacks and Jews in their belief that the trip was gratuitous.


Last November, Mr. Cuomo was quoted as saying that the United States could
negotiate something that leaves Iraq "a little bit on the water, leaves them a
little bit of the oil and then puts in a United Nations task force to monitor
chemical and nuclear weapons capacity."

"I was accused of appeasement -- 'see, he doesn't know anything about foreign
policy,' " Mr. Cuomo said this week. "And what was the final position of
President Bush? As I recall it, it was, 'release the hostages, remove your self
from Kuwait, let the Emir be reinstated.' Then, what happened to reparations?
What happened to nuclear? What happened to chemical weapons? What about the
brutality? Are you telling me that wasn't a deal that gave an awful lot? Mine
was much, much tougher."

Last month, he left less latitude for misinterpretation. "If limited to the
choices presently before the Congress," he said, "I would prefer the position
advocated by Senator Sam Nunn, but if the Administation resolution is adopted,
then Saddam Hussein should know that all Americans will support the resolution
and the President."

Mr. Nunn had sought to extend sanctions. Mr. Cuomo would also have empowered the
President to attack Iraq's nuclear and chemical weapon capabilities -- to
"defang Saddam Hussein" -- if war became inevitable (a position not unlike Mr.
Abrams's).

"I said that while I am not a congressman, while I am not a senator, while I
don't get a chance to vote, if I was in Congress I would not have gone to war
when they went to war," Mr. Cuomo recalled. President Bush, he said, had poorly
prepared the public for war and was ill prepared for its aftermath.

"It is a mistake to pretend you can have a new world order without having first
a new American order," Mr. Cuomo said. Mr. Bush was "being too cute by half" by
acknowledging certain domestic needs and then by largely ignoring them, he said,
adding, "You made a choice -- bankers before babies."


Why had the President intervened in the Persian Gulf? the Governor asked,
fielding the rhetorical question himself: was it to curb aggression? Then why
not intervene in Afghanistan or in Tibet? You mean aggression where our vital
interests are concerned? That's oil. No, jobs. Then, what about Iraq's nuclear
arsenal?

"And now the reason for the war," Mr. Cuomo said, "is, there is a war."

Would sanctions have succeeded? "How would you ever know?" he said. "How would
you ever prove it? Now the question is how do you end this thing? It's like my
budget -- you have to come with alternatives. I don't think at this point the
President can throw down our arms and say, 'I surrender to Saddam Hussein.' It
would destroy the coalition. It would destroy Israel.

"We must win because Saddam Hussein must lose. The President must be constantly
mindful of disengagement with honor. But the armed forces have the full support
of all of us -- every Democrat and good American. There is no choice for decent
people. And we have to avoid the mistake we made in Vietnam, of blaming the
armed forces for a wretched political judgment."

Where had the Governor stood on the Vietnam war? "I don't even remember," he
replied. "Nobody ever asked me. I was not relevant. Now, after all these years,
I'm barely relevant." The outcome of this war may determine whether the Governor
grows more relevant as a national political figure or less.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 7, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Far Fewer Boat People Coming to Hong Kong

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 555 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Feb. 6


A Hong Kong official says that efforts by the United Nations to persuade
Vietnamese to stay home are having some effect in limiting the flow of boat
people, especially from northern Vietnam.

The colony's refugee coordinator, Clinton Leeks, is still adamant about the need
to repatriate -- forcibly or otherwise -- Vietnamese boat people who do not
qualify as refugees and who therefore cannot be settled elsewhere. But he
acknowledged some progress in reducing the number arriving.

Robert van Leeuwen, chief of mission for the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, said the reversal had been dramatic. In 1989, 34,116 arrived by
boat, 93 percent of them from northern Vietnam, and only 5,883 departed. Hong
Kong officials talked darkly of pushing Vietnamese back out to sea.

But in 1990, only 6,599 arrived -- 7 percent of them from the north -- and
13,478 departed, bringing the total caseload down to about 52,000.

Vietnamese are still coming; 533 arrived in December and 429 in January,
normally a quiet time because of the bad sailing weather. But few are coming to
Hong Kong after long, dangerousjourneys by boat. The great majority now are
ethnic Chinese from southern Vietnam who take te bus north and cross into China,
then travel by land to the Pearl River, only a day or two away by a relatively
safe riverboat.

Two reasons are given for the sharp decline in the number of northerners coming
here. First, most Vietnamese who have agreed to return home have been
northerners, and they have been spreading the word to their neighbors that
resettlement in the United States is very unlikely. Second, the High
Commissioner's special adviser for Southeast Asia, Alexander Casella, has
persuaded the Vietnamese Government toprovide information on the issues of
emigration and the camps.

Vietnamese television crews have been brought to Hong Kong and Thailand to film
the difficult conditions in the camps. Newspapers and magazines have run
articles about the rules on refugee status and the much safer but slower option
of the Orderly Departure Program, under which 60,000 Vietnamese left legally for
the United States last year and nearly 100,000 are expected to leave this year.

With fewer Vietnamese arriving here and with legitimate refugees being
resettled, tensions are easing.

But the number of Vietnamese screened by Hong Kong officials and the High
Commissioner and rejected as refugees is piling up, and too few are volunteering
to return home. About 14,000 have already been denied refugee status, and as
interviews with about 28,000 not yet screened proceed, the number without
refugee status is growing by roughly 800 a month.

Because no other country will resettle them, they are required to return to
Vietnam under an international agreement worked out in 1989. But since the
United States refuses to sanction the forcible or involuntary repatriation of
these people, they sit in Hong Kong and other camps in Southeast Asia.

The situation infuriates Hong Kong officials like Mr. Leeks, who believes the
only answer is to treat Vietnamese like others without refugee status and ship
them home. "The Vietnamese don't want to be here -- they want to be in America,"
he said. "So we are handling America's immigration problem, and doing it in Hong
Kong, not at Los Angeles airport."

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 7, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Tricks, Miracles and Consequences

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 24; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1081 words


The Miracle Game
By Josef Skvorecky
Translated by Paul Wilson. 436 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $22.95.

At the opening of Josef Skvorecky's huge, rollicking new novel about
Czechoslovakia in the 20th century, "The Miracle Game," Danny Smiricky, the
narrator, is standing in a chapel in the town of Hronov, holding a carved figure
of St. Joseph. Suddenly, Danny loses his grip, and as the figure hits the floor,
it splits in two, opening "like a book."

Danny reports: "When I looked into the statue I felt the touch of God's hand
once more, and I knew that, against His own interests, He was giving me a sign.
The phallic protrusion on the bottom of the statue was not an integral part of
the saint, but was in fact a plug glued into a cavity bored in the base of the
statue."


Whatever this means to Danny we will not learn for some 400 pages, if at all.
But it prompts him to recall the moment 21 years earlier, shortly after the
Communist takeover of his country, when, during a service in the chapel, while
the priest, Father Doufal, was recalling the miracle that led to its founding,
the figure of Joseph suddenly bowed to the congregation.

Was this another miracle, as the simple folk of Hronov believe? Or was it a
trick played with wires and pulleys by Father Doufal, as the Communist secret
police insist? Or was it a trick set up by the Communists, intended to discredit
the Catholic religion and give the police an excuse to torture Father Doufal to
death?

All these possibilities occur to Danny Smiricky, the writer protagonist whom
readers of Mr. Skvorecky's previous novels know from "The Cowards" and "The
Engineer of Human Souls." He will pursue their resolution for the balance of
"The Miracle Game," among other obsessions on which he endlessly expatiates. But
whatever happened in that chapel, the real miracles of Mr. Skvorecky's novel are
how the author succeeds despite the many handicaps he has saddled his book with,
and how the reader keeps laughing despite the ponderous weight of the book's
subject.


So much is wrong with "The Miracle Game." The issue of whether the statue really
bowed is simply not a very compelling one, even if it is connected to the
remarkable persistence of religious faith under Czechoslovakia's Communist
regime. The parallel to the miracle of the Prague Spring of 1968 on which much
of Danny's memories are focused seems simultaneously too vague and too obvious,
as does the comparison of Catholicism and Marxism with which Danny likes to
shock some of the party members with whom he forever debates.

Perhaps the recent collapse of Eastern Europe's regimes has made it hard to take
Communism seriously enough as a subject for biting satire.  In any case, Mr.
Skvorecky goes on at far too great length in his ridicule, mixing actual events
and characters with the broadest satire. And when he awards Danny a Ford
Foundation grant to visit an American college, and sends him to a left-wing
rally in which a radical leader harangues the crowd on the beauties of Maoism,
the burlesque is almost insulting, as if the movement growing out of the Vietnam
protest could be compared to the Stalinist state apparatus, even as a joke.

And yet it is hard to resist Danny Smiricky's narrative. Hardly has Danny
finished puzzling us with his epiphany involving the protrusion from the statue
of Joseph, when he writes: "The history of my part in the miracle also began
with a phallus -- not a symbolic one, but my own, afflicted with a bad case of
gonorrhea that I could only have got from a Russian teacher called Irena
Znenahlikova."


He then regales us with his adventures as a young teacher in a social workers
school for young women that grow so hilarious at times that one has to laugh out
loud for pages on end, particularly when the girls take their final exams and
the staff is forced to drug the chief examiner to keep him from recognizing the
results of the regime's stupidity.

Why couldn't Mr. Skvorecky keep his satire on this delightful level of farce,
instead of mixing in what sound like transcripts of actual events? Of
considerable power is his account of the eventual Soviet crackdown on the Prague
Spring, when Czechoslovakia was "liberated" from the "white terror" by
"adolescents from the land of the bright future." But it would have been much
more effective if he had confined this episode to the sort of scenes he paints
when Danny, having undertaken to drive an actress friend and her children to
Paris in his car, encounters a Soviet tank officer who, in front of his troops,
insists on removing from the actress's trunk and inspecting in the light of the
setting sun one of her low-cut brassieres.

"In that moment I longed to be a painter," Danny says. "Not an abstract
expressionist, but a realist like Akademician Gerasimov, in order to capture, in
his idealized photographic style, that strange scene: the pink light, the
glowing countryside, the sophisticated war machinery, and against that
background the racy scrap of underwear and, transfixed by it, the childish blue
eyes of a people who can be made to do anything at all."


Maybe the trouble lies in the translation, from the Czech. The dialogue is
impossible, a peculiar concoction of English and American slang that mixes
expressions like "hubby," "I kid you not," "spiffy," "Jeepers creepers," "Jiminy
Cricket" and "the bloody limit." A character reports of her chess-playing skill,
"Something in my noodle goes ping!" A student at the health school with whom
Danny has a life-long affair keeps calling him "Sir," which may be accurate but
makes her sound like Peppermint Patty's sidekick in Charles Schulz's "Peanuts."

As Mr. Skvorecky's readers know by now, he is possessed by a large vision of his
country's history. As he haltingly conveys in "The Miracle Game," it encompasses
the subtle smells of his homeland and the light of the moon above it. It is a
hugely and comically perverse vision, all twisted out of shape by the 20th
century: "Why, for God's sake, must everything be made up of details?" Danny
asks. "If I could have had Father Doufal's faith, I might have said that the
minor details were the work of the devil. The work of God is vast, general,
redolent of the sandalwood of the future . . . a 600-pound pig. . . ."

But in "The Miracle Game" this vision fails to come through satisfyingly. The
reader is crushed by that 600-pound pig. One would settle for a lot less pig and
little more of the devil.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Josef Skvorecky (Jerry Bauer/Alfred A. Knopf)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 7, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

PUBLIC & PRIVATE;
Regrets Only

BYLINE: By Anna Quindlen

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 755 words


It's often used as a sour quip, the sentence "Hindsight is always 20-20," a
dismissive remark, a coda.  But then you see hindsight with tears in its eyes,
and realize that perhaps this is one of our greatest tragedies, that our
mistakes become clear to us only when we see them over our shoulders, trailing
us like an ugly dog.

Hindsight is 20-20 for Robert McNamara, the Secretary of Defense who raised the
Vietnam War from its childhood through its horrid years as an uncontrollable
early adolescent.

Hindsight is 20-20 for Lee Atwater, the twangy campaign whiz who never met a
clever, nasty remark he didn't like and who helped make George Bush palatable,
and President.

Both men are troubled by their pasts, which would be only terribly sad if it
were not that their pasts are our history. Because of that, their torment is a
national tragedy, and their regrets prefigure our future.

Mr. Atwater writes in the current issue of Life magazine about the days since he
discovered that he had a malignant brain tumor. The pictures are heartbreaking.
Somewhere inside the bloated, limp body in bed and wheelchair is the sassy
guitar player who celebrated the 1988 Republican victory by throwing a blues
concert.  But you can't see him here.

He talks about the triumphs, but what it all comes down to is this: that he has
found God and discovered the sheer meanness of his professional style. "In
1988," he says, "fighting Dukakis, I said that I 'would strip the bark off the
little bastard' and 'make Willie Horton his running mate.' I am sorry for both
statements: the first for its naked cruelty, the second because it makes me
sound racist, which I am not."

Mr. McNamara appears in Time, talking to Carl Bernstein, and his words make you
want to weep, for him and for our bungled opportunities. Of Vietnam he says,
"because of misinformation and misperceptions, there are misjudgments as to
where a nation's interests lie and what can be accomplished." It is a statement
with great resonance these days. Of the exaggeration of the Communist threat he
concludes, "We could have maintained deterrence with a fraction of the number of
warheads we built."

The regrets of two men, one aging, the other dying. Mr. Atwater helped poison
the level of electoral discourse, so that those two words may never seem seemly
in tandem again.  Mr. McNamara was a primary architect of the war that cost this
country thousands of young lives and its illusions about itself. In different
ways, at different times, they contributed to the notion that we are a nation of
bullies.

Can George Bush's second thoughts on the war in the Persian Gulf be many decades
behind?

It reminds me of fathers who come to their children, now grown, and say: "These
are the mistakes I made.  Please forgive me." And we do forgive, but we are
saddled with our characters, shaped by those mistakes.

It reminds me of what that graceful writer Paul Fussell, who is at work on an
anthology of writings about war, once said: "If we do not redefine manhood, war
is inevitable."

And Mr. Atwater's words about one of his daughters, pretending to interview him:
"She had seen me interviewed so many times on TV, perhaps she thought that was
the only way she could find out the truth. Watching her, I felt guilty about the
degree to which my career -- and my illness -- have robbed me of crucial time
with my children."

And Mr. McNamara, who says that his wife's death may have been hastened by the
national trauma of Vietnam -- "she was with me on occasions when people said I
had blood on my hands" -- and who is asked by Mr. Bernstein about the people who
really know him, the real McNamara, the inner man. Here is the answer:

"People don't know, and probably not my kids. And let me tell you that's a
weakness. If you're not known emotionally to people, it means you haven't really
communicated fully to people. I know it's a weakness of mine.  But I'm not about
to change now."

We're not about to change now.  Manhood stands with its old definitions:
aggression, winning at all costs, work over family, control over vulnerability.
And, finally, regrets as corrosive as Mr. Atwater's disease, as sad as Mr.
McNamara's eyes -- about what we did in the world, about who we are at home, two
things that are inseparable.

War was inevitable. And inevitable, too, someday, will be the hindsight, the
documents that tell us this was unnecessary and ill advised, the advisers who
reveal their misgivings years too late. The regrets, in hindsight.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 7, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Salvador E. Luria Is Dead at 78; Shared a Nobel Prize in Medicine

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section D; Page 24; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 837 words


Salvador E. Luria, a biologist and physician who shared a 1969 Nobel Prize for
his pioneering work in medicine and physiology, died yesterday at his home in
Lexington, Mass. He was 78 years old.

Dr. Luria suffered a heart attack, said a spokesman for the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, where Dr. Luria had taught since 1959.

He won the Nobel Prize for research he did in a loose association with Max
Delbruck of the California Institute of Technology and Alfred D. Hershey of the
Carnegie Institution's genetics research laboratory in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.

The three were cited for their "discoveries concerning the replication mechanism
and the genetic structure of viruses." Their work began the transformation of
genetics and contributed to the foundation on which modern molecular biology
rests. It shed much light on how viruses work and how more complex organisms
reproduce and pass on hereditary characteristics.

Active in Peace Movement

Dr. Luria, who was born in Turin, Italy, was also widely known as an active
member of the peace movement and was outspokenly critical of the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon and the American intervention in Vietnam.

Apparently because of his candor and independence on such issues, his name
appeared on a Federal blacklist of 48 scientists in 1969, the year he won the
Nobel Prize.

The National Institutes of Health, which drew up the blacklist, never specified
why Dr. Luria, a Jew who became a United States citizen in 1947 after having
fled Fascist Italy nine years earlier, should be barred from the institutes'
panels.

Dr. Luria was also a critic of what he regarded as a lack of safeguards on
nuclear power. In 1976 he joined other scientists in calling for a halt to the
building of new atomic power plants.

Besides the work that won the Nobel Prize, Dr. Luria organized a teaching and
research program in microbiology at M.I.T. and later founded the M.I.T. Center
for Cancer Research, which he directed from 1972 until 1985.

A Highly Esteemed Title

Although he retired from M.I.T. in 1978, he remained active there. At his death
he was Institute Professor Emeritus, a title that M.I.T. reserves for the most
esteemed members of its faculty.

Dr. Luria's interest in the humanities rivaled his achievements in science. In
1985 he said scientists who "exile themselves from the arena of social
struggles" were failing the societies they were supposed to serve.

He urged his science students to develop interests in the humanities. Besides
his lectures in science, he offered a course in world literature to graduate
students at M.I.T.

In 1974 he won a National Book Award in the Sciences for a nonacademic work,
"Life: The Unfinished Experiment." The book, which was published by Charles
Scribner's Sons, was translated into Italian, French, Spanish, German and
Japanese.

'Active Participant' in Politics

While Dr. Luria was angry over his blacklisting, it did not prevent him from
confronting issues he regarded as important. "I made up my mind that as a
citizen I would be an active participant in American politics," he once said,
"taking advantage of the democratic opportunities that were not available to me
in Italy."

He added: "What scientific achievement I have reached is due to the freedom
provided in this wealthy country to all aspects of intellectual enterprise."

He advocated "human standards of justice, decency and compassion," and, in a
letter to The New York Times in 1982, he said he thought that the Israeli
military campaign in Lebanon "violates those standards."

Salvador Edward Luria was born in 1912 and was graduated from the University of
Turin, summa cum laude, in 1935. He became a radiology specialist in Rome, but
fled Italy in 1938 and continued his research in Paris before immigrating to the
United States in 1940.

A Teacher and Lecturer

He did graduate work at Columbia University for two years, and then did more
work at Vanderbilt and Princeton universities.

He taught at Indiana University from 1943 to 1959. Before joining M.I.T. he also
lectured in biophysics at the University of Colorado, and was Jesup Lecturer in
zoology at Columbia. In 1959 he was Niewland Lecturer in biology at the
University of Notre Dame.

He served since 1984 as senior scientist at the Repligen Corporation, a
biotechnology company in Cambridge, Mass.

Among his affiliations were the National Academy of Sciences, the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences, the American Philosophical Society and the
American Academy of Microbiology. He was president of microbiology academy in
1967 and 1968.

He held many honorary doctorates, including ones from the University of Chicago,
Brown University and the University of Palermo.

Surviving are his wife, Zella Hurwitz Luria, a professor of psychology at Tufts
University in Medford, Mass., and a son, Daniel, an economist. Funeral
arrangements are private but M.I.T. said a memorial service would be held at a
date to be announced.

NAME: Salvador E. Luria

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Salvador E. Luria (The New York Times, 1973)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 8, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF;
American Is Slain in Turkey

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 261 words

DATELINE: ADANA, Turkey, Feb. 7


A gunman assassinated a retired American serviceman today who was employed at an
air base used for bombing raids on Iraq. A terrorist group said he was killed
because of the Persian Gulf war.

An anonymous caller to newspapers and news agencies in Istanbul said the victim
was killed by Dev Sol, an underground leftist group. The caller said: "We
punished a C.I.A. agent in Adana. The bases cannot be used for the bloody games
of U.S. imperialism."

The American was a customs specialist employed by Vinnel, Brown & Root, a
company providing services to the Incirlik base outside Adana, a United States
Embassy spokeswoman said. Incirlik is about 400 miles from the Iraqi border.

The embassy spokeswoman identified the employee as Bobbie Mozelle, 44 years old,
of Detroit. Hewas a Vietnam veteran who retired from the Air Force as a master
sergeant two years ago.

Mr. Mozelle was shot as he got into his car at 7:05 A.M. local time to go to
work, the Anatolia news agency said. He died immediately after being hit by four
bullets in the chest and stomach, the agency added.

The shooting occurred in front of Mr. Mozelle's apartment building. He was
married to a Turk who is to the United States awaiting the birth of their child,
the news agency said.

In recent weeks, assailants have planted bombs at more than a dozen buildings or
vehicles in Turkey linked to the United States or members of the coalition
fighting in the gulf war. Dev Sol has claimed responsibility for the bombing
campaign. It said it was protesting the coalition's role in the war.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 8, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

ABROAD AT HOME;
The Surgical Myth

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 751 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU


In the months leading up to the war we heard a good deal about "surgical"
military action. If sanctions did not quickly force Iraq out of Kuwait, we were
told, the United States and its allies could achieve that result by surgical
strikes.

The word has come into fashion since the Vietnam War, evidently as an antithesis
to that long, messy and tragic conflict. "Surgical" suggests a neat, swift and
curative military solution.

When the Persian Gulf war began, the vision of a clean, quick cure was
encouraged by the display of high-tech U.S. weapons. Television, using official
film, showed laser-guided bombs going down the chimney of a military building in
Iraq. It seemed that this war could be won without terrible costs in either the
lives of our soldiers or Iraq's civilian structure.

We still have only a limited, censored knowledge of the war. But we have a
pretty good idea that the easy vision was wrong in both respects. The bombing
has done severe damage to the social infrastructure of Iraq. But in all
likelihood it has not done enough military damage to spare the United States and
its allies the casualties of a ground war.

Iraqi propaganda has it that America is aiming its missiles and bombs at
civilians. We can put that claim to one side. It is as clear as it ever can be
that our intention is to hit only military targets.

But it is equally plain that such an enormous tonnage of explosives cannot be
used without causing damage to civilian facilities. In Baghdad, a city of four
million people, water and sewage systems are reportedly not functioning.
Reliable accounts say that Iraq's roads, bridges, water and power stations and
refineries have been devastated. Refugees have told horrifying stories of their
flight from air attacks.

The punishment has been so intense that one might have expected Iraq to give way
and withdraw from Kuwait in order to stop it. But that expectation founders on
the reality of Saddam Hussein's character. He does not care what his people
suffer, what ruin he brings on his country. He cares about power.

Saddam Hussein may well believe -- we are beginning to see -- that he gains
politically even as his country is wrecked. He reckons that every bomb dropped
on Iraq wins him new sympathy among Arab and other Islamic people. That has in
fact happened even in countries that have sent forces to Saudi Arabia, such as
Morocco and Pakistan.

Moreover, every day he survives attack by the superpower and its allies wins him
admiration among the millions who resent Western wealth and power. If Saddam
Hussein ends this war out of Kuwait but still in charge in Baghdad, he will
present himself as the hero of the struggle to resist Western domination.

As for the impact of the bombing on Iraq's military capability, American
officials in both Washington and Saudi Arabia are now saying that three weeks of
the air campaign have not fatally weakened Iraqi combat effectiveness. So
Patrick E. Tyler reported in The New York Times.

The U.S. Air Force had projected that it could reduce the fighting capability of
Iraq's forces by 50 percent in weeks, but that has not happened. The key
Republican Guard units on the Kuwaiti border remain intact. Enough supplies have
been getting through to them and other forces in Kuwait so that they have not
yet had to dip into stockpiles.

The Americans who have actually encountered Iraqi forces respect their will to
fight. Philip Shenon of The Times interviewed pilots at a front-line Saudi air
base, and he found that they did not have dismissive stereotypes of Iraqis.

"They are less organized than I expected, but they fight hard," Capt. Mike
Rocco, a Marine helicopter pilot, said. "I wouldn't say this war will be quick.
Many people will die."

Maj. Michael Steele, another Marine pilot, said: "This war will not be a cake
walk. . . . Nobody here is saying that we'll be home by Easter." After
describing an incident in which U.S. helicopters attacked Iraqi troop carriers
and the Iraqis fired back, he said:

"The Union was supposed to take Richmond in three weeks, we were supposed to win
Vietnam in a week and a half. I'm very cognizant of not being too optimistic."

The military realities on the ground, and the political realities beyond, both
give reason for foreboding. As President Bush weighs the decision on whether to
launch a ground offensive, we can begin to imagine the costs of this war. We
should not again tolerate anyone who talks about "surgical strikes."

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 8, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Draft: Unpopular -- and Unneeded

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 495 words


President Bush says he has "absolutely no intention" of reviving the draft. That
makes military sense and should calm millions of registered American males, and
mothers. But it won't quiet critics who regard the all-volunteer system as
unfair to minorities and inadequate to national needs.

The social equity argument for a draft is appealing and persistent. The
proportion of blacks and Hispanic Americans in the volunteer forces is far
greater than in the population. Under a draft with tightly limited exemptions,
the argument goes, the distribution would be fairer.

But full equity could only be achieved if the forces were much larger than now
needed, and only by curtailing minority enlistments or vastly increasing the
numbers of whites. The case for equity would now have to consider drafting
women, too.

Draft proponents also argue that conscription would induct more sons of
America's leaders, and make the leaders more cautious. But America has gone to
war three times in the last 50 years with a draft in force -- World War II,
Korea and Vietnam.

The United States had conscription for the Civil War, the World Wars and, after
a brief lapse, from 1948 until 1973. The history of protest, from devastating
riots in 1863 through draft-card burning a century later, would give any
President pause. Mr. Bush would risk deep disaffection now if he had any idea of
resuming conscription.

There are also practical and philosophical objections to a new draft. Assuming
the Persian Gulf war is short, draftees wouldn't be combat-ready in time. More
important, reinstitution of the draft would reverse America's reasoned
post-cold-war plan to reduce its military manpower -- and Mr. Bush's own gulf
war policy of reliance on collective international action.

President Nixon's official rationale for abolishing the draft in 1973 was
libertarian; he felt it amounted to involuntary servitude. But he also had an
urgent political need to calm the national antagonism that had developed over
Vietnam draft resistance and evasion. Seven years later, however, Mr. Nixon was
arguing again for a draft, to project a strong military posture, to get better
troops and to make sure that all classes shared the burden.

When President Carter reinstated registration in 1980, he was responding to the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Since President Reagan started prosecuting
evaders, compliance has run close to 100 percent; when war began last month,
there was a small rush to register by those who hadn't.

All through history, starting with George Washington, it has been argued that
military service is a civic duty; everyone should take his turn. But in the end,
this is not just a debate over conscription versus voluntary service. It
requires, among other things, a clear definition of the nation's world role.
Having justified a large military to contest Communism, does America now want to
maintain it as a global police force? Mr. Bush rightly says no.


LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 8, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: WASHINGTON AT WORK;
Voice of the Pentagon Delivers Press Curbs With a Deftness Honed on TV

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1691 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 7


During his 10 years as a reporter-cameraman for KTWO-TV in Casper, Wyo., Louis
A. (Pete) Williams once sneaked onto a restricted MX missile site to film a
stand-up. Now, as Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, he stands
at the lectern and earnestly defends restrictions on journalists.

"We thought we couldn't do this program without showing what one of these silo
locations with a Minuteman looked like," he said of his MX story. "We didn't
actually crawl under the fence or anything like that, but we got close to it."

But he refuses to liken the initiative he displayed back home to the efforts by
journalists in Saudi Arabia to violate stringent rules that severely limit
access to information and forbid them to file reports that have not been
submitted to military censors. Nor does he see any inconsistency in defending
those restrictions.

"I don't know that we were breaking any rules," he said of his visit to the MX
site. "No one told us we couldn't do that."

6 Pages of Restrictions

It is his ability to glide in and out of tough questions that helps make the
38-year-old Mr. Williams an effective voice for the Pentagon. His supporters and
detractors acknowledge that his smooth delivery, his studious demeanor, his
bland appearance and his ease in front of the camera have made the American
military seem kinder and gentler than in the days of the Vietnam War, even as he
is central to the most restrictive arrangments for battlefield coverage since
the Korean War.

Those arrangements have allowed the Bush Administration to set the tone for
coverage of the desert war from the press briefing room in the Pentagon.

After a series of long meetings with news executives about coverage of the war,
he took their recommendations to Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin
L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He came back with six pages of
restrictions that news organizations tried to reject outright, including
requirements that all copy and film be submitted to a security review and that
all coverage be limited to assigned "pools" of reporters. Reporters are not
allowed to live with military units, but must rotate in and out with military
escorts. The restrictions were relaxed slightly, but bureau chiefs are still
chafing.

"While he's a nice guy, he hasn't done much for us," said Jack Nelson,
Washington Bureau Chief for The Los Angeles Times. "It's pretty obvious they're
hoping to keep us secluded and so far they're getting away with it. I gather
Pete doesn't have the clout or if he does he doesn't use it."

Access to Powell and Cheney

Mr. Williams is regarded as effective in his job because of his access to Mr.
Cheney and General Powell. But if he challenged his bosses and fought for
greater access for journalists, he is not saying. The journalist in him says the
reporters are operating under "a cockamamie system," and that the military has
blundered at times, citing the fact that pools formed to cover the assault to
liberate Khafji were not brought to the battle until a full day after fighting
began.

But the bureaucrat in him takes great pains to justify the system, arguing that
the pools are the only way to manage the logistical nightmare of dealing with
nearly 1,100 journalists who all want to go to the front.

"The goal of the system isn't to deprive anyone of news," he said. "It's simply
to discourage information that would jeopardize military operations and endanger
human lives -- pure and simple. I think, by the way, that the public understands
this."

In an interview aired in May on the Wyoming station where he had worked, Mr.
Williams said, "There's a lot of bravado on the part of bureau chiefs and
editors, because they're not the ones who have to go." The reporters, he said,
don't want to go with the first wave.

Rocky Start at Pentagon

Mr. Williams, who has developed close working relationships with reporters by
never losing his temper and, they say, never knowingly misleading them, works
the press corridor of the Pentagon the way an ambitious House member works the
cloak room, greeting journalists by name, asking about their kids and their
vacations.

He never gives anything away. But he seems so charming that he came away
unscathed from a briefing when he said that he could not tell reporters why he
couldn't discuss the use of sea-launched cruise missiles "because then I would
be discussing it."

His relationship with Mr. Cheney is like a mutual-admiration society. Fellow
Wyomingites, they went to the same senior high school a decade apart in Casper.
For the last three years Mr. Cheney was a member of the House of
Representatives, Mr. Williams served as his press spokesman, dealing with issues
like errant wolves and park entrance fees.

Even Mr. Williams acknowledges that he got off to a rocky start when he moved
with his boss and was sworn in for the Pentagon post in May 1989, seven months
before the invasion of Panama. He blamed the "incompetence" of American military
leaders for the fact that the news pool arrived too late and got too little live
coverage and then took the onus on himself.

Late-in-the-Day Style

The Pentagon's official post-mortem singled him out, saying that he failed at
critical times to get pool planning organized, failed to push Mr. Cheney to
activate the pool early enough and failed to call for help from General Powell
when the pool arrived without transportation and logistical support.

People who know Mr. Williams well say that he works hard to hide nervousness on
the job, although they say it sometimes comes out in his perpetual motion --
pacing during meetings, playing with straws, fiddling with his computer,
adjusting his oversized clear-framed glasses, scratching the back of his head.

A late-in-the-day style of management and unwillingness to delegate also means
that decisions that could be made at 10 A.M. are not handled until after hours
or even the next day. Reporters say that because he is the only one in the press
office who has the information and because he is stretched so thin, he often
does not call them back until well after their deadlines. (General Powell also
has a hot line to Mr. Williams's office, installed as soon as he took over.
Members of the Powell staff are also often left in the dark, wandering the
corridors wondering what happened above their pay grade.)

For all his once-a-week haircut and his disarming one-liners, Mr. Williams was
once a gawky kid -- "kind of a supercharged nerd with all his pens lined up in
his pocket," said his brother, James Williams, now the operations manager of a
multi-event center in Gillette, Wyo.

A Taste for Jerry Lewis

He went to summer school at age 7 to learn how to touch-type and at age 8 was
producing a neighborhood penny newspaper called The Needless News. While his
older brother wrestled, ran track and played basketball and football, Pete,
rigged up a ham radio and closeted himself in a darkroom in the basement of his
father's orthodontics office. In high school, he became a champion at
extemporaneous speaking.

He compensated for his lack of athletic prowess when he became an adult by
taking up mountain climbing and cross-country skiing. And for five years he took
tap-dancing lessons every Tuesday night -- even performing once at a recital in
a tuxedo. His partner for the number "Me and My Shadow" was an 8-year-old in a
tutu.

His father, a World War II hero whose unit, Merrill's Marauders, operated behind
the Japanese lines in North Burma, wanted him to do something more professional,
like engineering, but at Stanford he majored in journalism.

For the last 14 years he has served as master of ceremonies for the local Jerry
Lewis telethon in Casper, acknowledging that the comedian's style of humor "is a
taste I have acquired." His only foray into national journalism was at National
Public Radio in Washington, but he was dismissed a few days into the job, told
that he had the wrong style for the show.

Irked Colleagues

Such is Mr. Williams's on-camera persona that when he acknowledged on "Larry
King Live" on Jan. 31 -- one of the many interviews he has given in recent
weeks, including People Magazine and Entertainment Tonight -- that he was a
bachelor, he was showered with letters from women who wanted to know if he
wanted a date -- or even marriage.

But marriage, or even a social life, does not seem to be part of his agenda at
the moment. A workaholic late riser who arrives at the Pentagon about 8:30 A.M.,
hits his stride about 10 P.M. and is known to call complicated strategy meetings
at 6 on Friday evenings, he has irked colleagues who are used to arriving at the
Pentagon at dawn but who want to leave 12 hours later.

"Pete is the epitome of the old military saying, 'Try to avoid working for a
bachelor,' " said Col. Miguel E. Monteverde, director of the office of Defense
Information and a staunch supporter of Mr. Williams's management style. Carol
Manlove, his special assistant, agrees. "It would be nice to find him a wife,
someone to take care of him," she said discreetly.

Susan Andersen, who dated Mr. Williams for five years when the two of them
worked for KTWO-TV, said, "If he had a wife, she'd be very neglected." A Wyoming
state representative who considers Mr. Williams a close personal friend, she
continued: "He always put his energy into his job, and in Washington all he does
is work. Frankly, I've never seen him make room in his life for a woman."

As his father, Louis, now retired and still living in Casper, put it, "Any girl
who'd marry Pete right now would be a nut."

Louis Allen (Pete) Williams

Born: Feb. 28, 1952

Hometown: Casper, Wyo.

Education: B.A., Stanford University

Career Highlights: 1976-85, radio and television reporter and news director in
Casper; 1985-86, director, Wyoming Futures Project; 1986-89, legislative
assistant and press secretary to Representative Dick Cheney; 1989, appointed
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs.

Interests: Mountain and rock climbing, cross-country skiing, piano, tap dancing.

NAME: Louis A. (Pete) Williams

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Louis A. (Pete) Williams, a Defense Department spokesman,
conducting a recent briefing at the Pentagon. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 8, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
Ski Star: 'The Gap Got Closer'

BYLINE: By George Vecsey

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 797 words


It took Diana Golden six months to get back to skiing after she lost her right
leg to cancer. Of course, the operation was in May, so she had to wait for snow.

The drive to compete, not just participate, has led Golden to 10 world-class
gold medals and 19 national medals and an Olympic demonstration gold medal for
disabled skiing. And yesterday in Washington, Golden was given the Flo Hyman
Award, one of the highest honors a female athlete can receive in the United
States.

Flo Hyman was one of the most charismatic athletes the country ever produced, a
volleyball player of great skill and soul who led the United States to a silver
medal at the 1984 Summer Games and then died while playing her sport in Japan
early in 1986.

Since then, the Women's Sports Foundation had given the award to Martina
Navratilova, Evelyn Ashford, Jackie Joyner Kersee and Chris Evert. Golden is in
good company, and vice versa.

One of the finest things about sport is that it occasionally produces heroes who
inspire other people, whether it be Bernard King coming back from a
rehabilitation center and then from a dreadful knee injury, or Rocky Bleier
coming back from wounds in Vietnam to playing in a Super Bowl.

Sometimes the "heroes" are merely "legends" who do something memorable on sheer
grit, like Kirk Gibson, who won a World Series game with a home run and hobbled
around the bases on an injured leg. At the time, people used the expression
"virtually one-legged."


Often, the issues in sports are murky. What do we do with a Pete Rose, who made
the most hits of any batter in baseball but was then thrown out of his business
for gambling while he was a manager?

Sports also give us our outright goats, people who disgrace themselves early and
often because they just can't help themselves. These goats do not have to be
performers.

At the present time, we have Victor Kiam, the owner of the New England Patriots,
and the owner of a razor-blade company that markets its products for women. When
several of his players made lewd comments and gestures to a female sportswriter
from Boston last fall, Kiam chimed in with insensitive comments. He later hired
himself an expensive public-relations consultant and got himself on national
television to proclaim that he was not such a bad fellow.

The furor had finally died down, when Rich Victor did it again. Appearing at an
all-male sports banquet in Stamford, Conn., Monday night, the silly fellow told
a rather ugly sexual joke involving the female sportswriter. It was the kind of
joke we men tend to make when we're by ourselves, which is why it probably is a
good idea not to let us be by ourselves.

Anyway, Victor has apologized. Again. But he has served his purpose by providing
us with a perfect public sporting goat, the foolish owner who can't keep his yap
shut. This is hardly an all-male affliction, as witness Marge Schott while her
Reds were winning the World Series.

Thank goodness for the heroes and heroines. Diana Golden lost her right leg
above the knee when she was 12 years old and soon enrolled with the National
Handicapped Sports, to learn how to ski all over again. The technical
instruction was more important to her than the emotional support.

"Donna de Varona was talking the other night, and she said, 'Without sport, we
are all handicapped,' " Golden said, referring to the former Olympic swimmer who
is now a broadcaster and an official with the Women's Sports Foundation.

Since her operation, Golden has devoted herself to doing things on ski slopes
that the vast majority of us could never do on two legs. She also earned a
degree in English literature from Dartmouth College, not too far from her home
in Lincoln, Mass.


While winning medals in competitions for the disabled, Golden dreamed of joining
open competition. Five years ago, the United States Ski Association passed what
has been called the Golden Rule, to allow two so-called disabled men and women
to join national events.

"You think about women, and people used to pat us on the back and say, 'Isn't
that sweet? She's competing,' " Golden said yesterday. "Now they don't do that
any more. It's the same with the disabled. People treat us with dignity. When I
started competing with nondisabled, I'd finish dead last, and then I'd go back
to my room and cry. My friends would say, 'That's all right. You're competing.'

"I kept getting closer and closer," Golden added. "In 1989, I finished dead last
in the nationals but I was getting closer to Tamara McKinney. I was 12-14
seconds behind, not 20 seconds anymore. The gap got closer."

Golden retired after the 1989-90 season, to concentrate on giving ski clinics
and designing equipment. "Oh, yes," she added. "I do some mountaineering and
rock-climbing, too."

NAME: Diana Golden

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Diana Golden (The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 9, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Where Now? Conservatives Wonder

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 8


Conservatives met here this week to plot their future in a world where Communism
is collapsing, Ronald Reagan is consigned to history and the current Republican
President has broken with conservative dogma and raised taxes.

But the conservatives' criticism of President Bush, which was so fierce just a
few months ago that there was talk of a conservative challenge to him in 1992,
has been muted by the war in the Persian Gulf.

And while the theme of this conference was "Where do conservatives go from
here?" many of the speakers spent as much time looking back to the glory days of
the Reagan era as charting the conservative movement for the 1990's.

There was a strong element of nostalgia throughout the Conservative Political
Action Conference, a three-day event that organizers said would draw 850 people
by the time it ends Saturday.

Jack F. Kemp, Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development,
delivered a long, impassioned paean to Mr. Reagan and his role in standing firm
against Communism. Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the former chief delegate to the United
Nations, was one of several speakers who argued that Mr. Reagan's military
buildup had been richly vindicated by the performance of new and high-technology
weapons in the Persian Gulf war.

She said that the war "shows the conservative vision of a strong America was
correct: it's important to be strong, it's important to be prepared, and it's
important to be able to defend ourselves from incoming missiles."

From Patriot to 'Star Wars'

One of the most popular lines of this conference was any reference to the
performance of the Patriot missile in the gulf, which often segued into a
renewed endorsement of a space-based missile defense system, or "Star Wars."

Several leading conservatives here said that the war, and the President's
handling of it, had markedly improved his standing on the right and reduced the
chances of a conservative challenge to him in 1992. David A. Keene, chairman of
the American Conservative Union, said the friction with Mr. Bush was "much more
muted than we would have predicted prior to the 15th of January."

And Mr. Kemp said, "President Bush, by his leadership in the Middle East and his
willingness to learn the lessons of Vietnam, has recaptured a lot of favor among
conservatives." Mr. Kemp, who was careful to note that "he never lost favor with
me," added, "It's given him a chance to demonstrate that he is a solid,
pro-defense, conservative, anti-aggression President."

Jeffrey Wright, chairman of Young Americans for Freedom, called for even
stronger measures against Iraq: the use of nuclear weapons. But other
participants in the conference quickly said they did not agree.

For all the focus on the gulf, there was an undercurrent of dissatisfaction with
the President's domestic programs and concern about the fate of conservatives
and Republicans at the polls.

Several analysts told the audience that the American electorate was still more
conservative than liberal, but said the Republican Party was not establishing
the ideological contrast that it needed to capitalize on that.

"If we are going to win, we are going to have to go back to those things that
got us here," said Arthur J. Finkelstein, a consultant for Republican
candidates. "We got locked in as looking elitist and for taxes in the last
election, and we can't let them do that to us again."

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jack F. Kemp, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development,
delivered an impassioned paean to Ronald Reagan at the Conservative Political
Action Conference in Washington. Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, who
thanked conservatives for their support in his re-election campaign last year,
received a warm reception at the conference. (Photographs by The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 9, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

VOICES OF THE NEW GENERATION;
Victory Through Word Power

BYLINE: By Eric Zicklin; Eric Zicklin is a writer.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 530 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


I don't mean to sound excited, but this is my very first war. And while I'm too
young to remember much of Vietnam, I've seen enough Presidential elections,
Olympic games (both boycotted and attended) and natural disasters to qualify as
a fairly seasoned media receptor.

I have, of course, been paying close attention to the Persian Gulf conflict.
Along with the fresh images of tearful farewells, adrenaline-pumped pilots and
field correspondents in gas masks, I've become increasingly fluent in the
strange dialect of war, the language of modern armed conflict.

What have I learned since August? Before actually fighting, I now understand,
you must engage in "diplomatic measures." These measures, designed to prove that
you've already tried to be diplomatic, consist of setting deadlines, enforcing
naval blockades and threatening to kick the opposition leader "in the ass."

Moreover, during the diplomacy stage, it's best to insist that your opponent
does not understand "what he is up against." Your opponent, you regret, will
respond only to "signals," such as a Congressional authorization for war. Of
course, once the war has started, the "madman" will suddenly be able to divine
troop movements and classified target locations from blurry shots of Tel Aviv.

I've learned alot from President Bush, too. The President has taught me that
"naked aggression will not stand" unless it's clothed in a snug U.N. resolution.
Then it "will persevere" and "cannot lose."

I've also come to understand that border violations of sovereign nations "will
not be tolerated," unless the names of the violated nations end in "nia" or
"via." If you would rather be friends with the violators than fight them, you
should "express concern" over their actions.

In the days leading up to the war, my learning curve steepened. Secretary of
State James Baker explained that if a nation is not relentlessly bombed, the
world is rewarding that nation for its most recent actions. And in America we do
not reward aggression, we top it.

I heard allied soldiers in the field say things like, "We're here to do a job,
and hope to do that job, so the job will be done." This, I've discovered, should
not be mistaken for the evasive doubletalk of a Steinbrenner-era Yankee --
instead it is the idiom of "well-trained professionals."

Since the hostilities actually began, I've learned that my friends and
classmates are fighting in the Persian Gulf to preserve my constitutional right
to shut up and "get in line behind the President."

I've also learned that "emir" means legitimate-leader-who-pays-in-cash, that a
"war crime" is a bare knuckled beating but that dropping loads of explosives on
a nation's capital is called a "sortie."

I've found, too, that "anti-missile missiles" are not contradictory but anti-war
soldiers are, that the "Star Spangled Banner" is a battle cry and that
"collateral damage" means civilians in the enemy's country die while terrorist
attacks are when civilians in an allied country die.

All in all, it's been quite an education. At this rate, perhaps I will be
sophisticated enough to understand our "objectives" by the time we have achieved
them.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TV VIEWS;
Watching the War: Viewers on the Front Lines

BYLINE: By CARYL RIVERS; Caryl Rivers, a professor of journalism at Boston
University, covered the media during the Vietnam War for Editor and Publisher
magazine. She is at work on a book titled "Sex, Lies and the Media: How Gender,
Race and Class Shape What We Read and See."

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29; Column 5; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1185 words


On day four of the war in the Persian Gulf, we had the television on all day,
with family members flicking from channel to channel. At one point, the picture
was bouncing between the movie "Top Gun" and the coverage of the war. I realized
with a start that I couldn't tell which was which. They both had martial music,
splendid graphics, high-tech shots of planes soaring into the sky. It was only
when Tom Cruise came on the screen that I knew which was the movie. Even then,
he didn't look much different from the pilots whose faces I saw on CNN.

The technology of entertainment television has blended with the techniques of
news coverage to the point where they are virtually indistinguishable. At least
two of the network war logos, with their desert sand colors, look at first
glance like the one for "Lonesome Dove," the CBS mini-series. Once, as we
switched away from the real good-guys-bad-guys drama to a rerun of "Miami Vice,"
the similarity was obvious. The action show and the networks' quick-shot
montages, with jets roaring and missiles firing and crewmen running across the
deck of a carrier, had exactly the same pace.

Even the footage of cruise missiles orbombs hitting the targets have their
entertainment equivalent. The television newswoman Cokie Roberts, watching a
film clip, commented that the film looked like a video game. She wondered if
this video wizardry would prevent people from realizing how deadly serious all
this was.

It's a good question. Our brains are hot-wired to the visual media to a degree
that can be somewhat horrifying. I walked by the set when CNN was showing only
the lights of Riyadh, and found myself thinking, "Oh, nuts. Nothing happening."

I was hooked by the war on TV. My addiction was fired by the music with the
pounding of the drums and the orange and red logos and the sonorous voices of
the announcers. And I did not think it unusual -- until I thought about it later
-- when I heard an announcer say: "Scud missiles aimed at Saudi Arabia. After
the movie."

I am not alone. One person I know referred to the war coverage as a long, badly
edited mini-series. All of us are subconsciously fitting the war into the
conceptual framework of the box that gives us "L.A. Law" and "Top Cops." And
what will this mean to the way we think about the war?

In the past, the form of news and entertainment coverage was different. In an
era in which so much information is delivered visually, this distinction is not
a trivial matter. As a child during World War II, I saw newsreels along with the
Saturday movie. Errol Flynn might frolic in Technicolor as Robin Hood, but the
grainy black and white newsreels spoke of reality and, in a strange way,
messiness.

The Vietnam War was in our living rooms, but it was on film, largely, and it
didn't look at all like "Starsky and Hutch." Or Nintendo. But today, the
production values of television -- the great graphics, the instant videotape,
the ability to let the viewer practically sit on the nose of a jet fighter as it
destroys its target -- have given us Instant War as Instant Amusement.

What does it mean when entertainment programming and news look, feel and sound
so much alike? When there is no difference in form between what amuses us and
what informs us?

First of all, the similarity creates the sense of unreality so many of us
experience. We know in our heads that the war isn't a TV movie, but why does it
feel so much the same? As I sat on the couch, crunching Doritos and cheering --
literally cheering -- as the Patriot missiles took out a pair of Scuds -- I had
this eerie sense that something was very wrong. One just shouldn't be munching
Doritos watching a real war -- that's for the Superbowl.

Do we need some kind of visual information to help us separate what is real from
what is not? Researchers suggest that people subconsciously get cues from the
form in which information is received, aside from the content. In fact, George
Gerbner, dean emeritus of the Annenberg School of Communication at the
University of Pennsylvania, suggests that entertainment television creates a
whole perceptual framework through which many people view the world, which is
much more powerful than news programming. If the medium is indeed the message,
then the form alone of entertainment programming pulls forth a whole set of
expected responses, even if we try to resist them.

The graphics and the pictures and the music -- by their very nature -- emphasize
the upbeat side of the war. It is cheerleader stuff: missiles and jets roaring
off, nighttime bombardment more colorful than the Fourth of July. Television
reporters occasionally tried to sound notes of reality. Bernard Shaw of CNN
wondered aloud about the flesh-and-blood young Iraqi soldiers under all this
wonderful "ordnance" we were seeing. I tried to think of that too -- and kept
getting carried away by the splendid show that television was putting on for me.
I couldn't control my Pavlovian response to media pyrotechnics.

If the war is in the heads of millions of Americans as another TV production,
will we subconsciously expect it to be just like the other stuff? That problems
will all be solved in the allotted time frame, that the good guys will win, the
credits will roll?

In my head, I know this is absurd, but I am not always in charge in there.
Research tells us that the constant viewing of images can desensitize viewers.
For example, men who are exposed to repeated images of violence against women
become less sensitive to the seriousness of rape. Will all these hours of
watching compelling high-tech war cloud our understanding that war is not about
graphics, but about killing people?

And what happens when the ugliness of war begins to surface? If we are so
mesmerized by the grand show on TV, are we ready for body bags? Young men and
women coming home mangled? Will the euphoria generated by this newest real-life
saga generate a terrible rage if this happens? By falling into the seductive
trap of cheerleader pictures, is TV failing to prepare us for what might be
ahead?

In this, the military may also be at fault. Burned by Vietnam, the Government
wants no pictures of dead Americans beamed back into living rooms. So reporters
are herded into pools, allowed to interview soldiers only with escorts. The
limited access may be combining with the great production values to give the
American people a mini-series for which the ending hasn't been scripted, an
ending that could enrage and horrify.

It's important that news media managers -- in quiet time away from the
competitive pressures -- think about this problem. Is there a way to re-create
the visual or stylistic borders around news programming that the old newsreels
used to offer? Should the news logos be designed in the same Day-Glo colors as
those for the game shows? How can the terrors of war be conveyed in a way that
won't turn viewers' stomachs but that can compete with the eye-grabbing
razzle-dazzle? Perhaps we can't construct a Great Wall between entertainment and
the news, but a few bricks might be in order.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Videotape broadcast by NBC of Baghdad after a bombing--a passive
medium calling for an active response (NBC/Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TV VIEWS;
Watching the War: Viewers on the Front Lines

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 911 words


As bombs fell on Tel Aviv, television danced with the censors and viewers were
jolted forever out of comfy, passive roles.

On an afternoon a week into the war, CBS cut from a Pentagon briefing to its Tel
Aviv correspondent, Tom Fenton, who had apparently heard sirens warning of a new
attack. There was confusion about whether the censors would allow him to say
that, though. The exchange that took place between Mr. Fenton and Dan Rather was
worthy of Lewis Carroll, but it was also a perfect example of the new,
interactive way this war has taught us to watch TV.

"Are we to draw any conclusions from the fact that you can't say if you heard
anything?" Mr. Rather asked. Does that mean "you did hear something?"

"You're putting me on the spot, Dan," the reporter answered, and even while Dan
was withdrawing the question, Tom was doing the best he could. "I'm not sure
what I heard, Dan." Aha! So he did hear something, viewers could conclude. But
having to ferret out that information was troublesome. Mr. Fenton was not the
only one on the spot.

For viewers, watching the war means staying alert, reading between the censored
lines, sorting through partial information, decoding reporters' messages. This
is television gone kaflooey, a mass medium demanding individual analysis, a
passive medium calling for an active response. It is exhausting.

Most viewers had assumed that television was not supposed to be this much work.
One of the reassuring illusions about TV was that we could settle back and let
Dan and Peter and Tom and their friends tell us what happened. But in the early
stages of this war we all became witnesses to the newsgathering process and
active arbiters of what might be true.

That was the case when CNN showed a woman being carried from a bomb site on a
stretcher and the anchor asked the Tel Aviv reporter, Richard Roth, if he could
say whether the bomb had hit a residential area. Mr. Roth answered that he'd
have to ask the censor at his elbow. "Sir," he went on, as if he were poking us
in the ribs, "can I say whether this is a residential neighborhood?" Attentive
viewers assumed it was, even before the censor cleared the information.

This active role is still an uneasy one. A strong sense of discomfort seemed to
lurk behind a comment from the audience during a recent "Donahue" show about the
press and the war. One presumably average viewer didn't want to hear anything,
she said, until the newspeople were sure it was true. She didn't want to be
bothered with speculation and unconfirmed reports. Without saying so, she was
longing for what she saw as the good old days of passive news watching, when she
could settle back and feel off the hook. Without realizing it, she was asking
for an Orwellian approach by which viewers could be fed disinformation as easily
as information and would never be able to sniff out the difference.

Television has never been as purely Orwellian as that, of course. When reporters
disputed Washington's official version of the Vietnam War, for example, or when
the Watergate hearings were broadcast live, or CNN's satellite was shut down
during the Tiananmen Square demonstrations, viewers were offered a window on
what goes on before the anchors read their scripts. Even for the generation that
grew up watching Vietnam, television's illusion of authority has never been so
thoroughly shattered as it has in recent weeks.

Yet viewers as well as critics insistently cast this change in backward-looking
terms. Already cliches about television's role in this war have taken hold. One
of the most widespread is that when reporters are reduced to photographs and
voices on a phone line, television acts like radio. That idea completely ignores
how TV is experienced.  A still photograph on a television screen -- now he has
his gas mask on, now he doesn't -- is nothing like a radio voice. It is
unsettling visual evidence that something is wrong, that television is not
behaving normally.

But however uncomfortable this interactive viewing feels, it is a great
improvement over television's old-fashioned pretense that news is truth that can
be spoon-fed. Television now presents the more honest view that news is the
information its reporters know, however complicated or tentative.

After the initial flurry of rumors about nerve gas, all the networks have
qualified reports they are not sure of, warned of what has been censored, helped
viewers to guess at how much isn't known. When a press briefing by Gen. H.
Norman Schwarzkopf, the commander of the allied forces, seemed to play down the
news about the first American deaths in ground fighting, both ABC's "Nightline"
and CNN later questioned his emphasis, drawing attention to how little attention
the American military chose to give those deaths. When television offers this
sort of window on the newsgathering process, it is not navel-gazing; it is an
important way of allowing viewers to assume responsible, active roles.

And not a second too soon. Every government involved is trying to control
information about this war. The more we can see their efforts to take control,
the less control they have. The volume of war news has been decreasing, and
perhaps television news will find a way to recapture its old authority.

But for viewers there can be no turning back to childlike complacency.
Television has finally treated us like intelligent adults, and we know the
difference.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Videotape broadcast by NBC of Baghdad after a bombing--a passive
medium calling for an active response (NBC/Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New Owners Rescue Bantam Cinema

BYLINE: By CHARLOTTE LIBOV

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 13; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 584 words


MOVIEGOERS will sip free champagne next weekend at the Bantam Cinema, as they
celebrate the news that this tiny theater will remain open. The theater, which
is believed to be the oldest continuously operating movie house in Connecticut,
was to close in December if a new owner had not been found. But a new owner was
found. She is Lisa Abelow Hedley of Litchfield, and she has been busily planning
for the reopening on Friday.

"I get calls every day from people who say, 'Thank you, thank you, thank you for
saving the theater,' " Mrs. Hedley said.

The single-screen theater in this rural Northwestern Connecticut town opened in
1929. In recent years, it became an art theater, primarily showing foreign
films. Despite its small loyal following, it had been a money loser for years,
prompting its owner, James Bohnen, to put it on the market. He initially asked
$330,000, but Mrs. Hedley, and her parents, Robert and Adrian Mnuchin, bought it
in December for $180,000.

The new owners decided to shut the theater for the first two weeks in February
for renovations. Returning moviegoers will find the lobby freshly painted and
the screen moved back, to make room for stage shows, Mrs. Hedley said. The
old-fashioned projectors are also being renovated. Still, many things will be
familiar, she said, including the staff.

Old Name Restored

The raspberry-chocolate brownies, which have become a favorite at the concession
stand, will be joined by gourmet candy, Mrs. Hedley said. And for the first time
in years, "we'll be selling popcorn," she said.

Mrs. Hedley has restored the name Bantam Cinema, believed to be the theater's
original designation. Several years ago, an owner dubbed it Cinema IV, a play on
the numbered names of the newer muli-screen complexes that was meant to denote
"Cinema for Bantam." The name was not only whimsical, she said, it was
confusing.

The theater will sell movie posters and black-and-white Bantam Cinema T-shirts,
but Mrs. Hedley said she does not expect the theater to be a moneymaker. "We'll
be happy if we break even," she said.

When Mrs. Hedley took over the theater, she asked patrons what kind of films
they wanted. "Most people said they'd like to see less subtitled films, but not
commercial films," she said. "They wanted us to stay the way we were but have
the films be less obscure."

Future schedules will include foreign films, but the selections through the end
of next month are all American, she said, because, "sometimes Hollywood does
quality films." Upcoming features include "Mermaids," "Awakenings," "Dances With
Wolves," "The Grifters," "Vincent and Theo," "Alice" and "Hamlet."

Childhood Memories

Mrs. Hedley said she also wants to schedule special programs, like a four-part
series on old movies and a group of war films from World War II through the
Vietnam War, which will be follwed by discussions.

Mrs. Hedley, an entertainment lawyer who recently returned to the area after
living in California, grew up in the nearby town of Washington. She said she has
fond memories of attending the Bantam theater as a child.  "When we heard it was
going to close, my parents and I felt it would be a shame to see that happen,"
she said.

The Bantam Cinema is not the family's only major project. The Mnuchins, who
maintain homes in Manhattan and Washington, are modern-art collectors who are
restoring the century-old Mayflower Inn in Washington. They expect the inn to
reopen in early 1992, Mrs. Hedley said.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Veterans Say They Hope Lessons Were Learned

BYLINE: By ROBERTA HERSHENSON

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 1; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1142 words


AFTER several weeks of relentless war coverage from the Persian Gulf, Roger
Paulmeno said he expected some stepped-up activity at the Vietnam Veterans
Outreach Center in White Plains, where he is the acting director. "We're
surprised ourselves that no one is calling us," Mr. Paulmeno said. "Vietnam vets
like to stay underground."

The outreach center, a Federal program, offers free individual, group and family
counseling sessions to the more than 58,000 Westchester veterans who served in
the military during the "Vietnam era" of 1964 to 1973.

Meanwhile, in Elmsford, at Westchester's Chapter 49 of the Vietnam Veterans of
America, a nonprofit organization, Frank Lauria, the chapter president, was busy
planning rallies and organizing an emergency fund for the families of local
combat troops who were stationed in the Persian Gulf. He is determined, he said,
that the veterans of the war with Iraq will not "have to wait 10 years to be
recognized for their sacrifice and suffering."

The Warrior and the War

The many American flags and yellow ribbons displayed around the county seem to
make good the nation's vow that this time, it will not confuse the warrior with
war policy. While many Vietnam veterans regard this new attitude with
satisfaction, some mental-health professionals predict that the new war will
inevitably stir up many painful feelings, including envy, in former soldiers who
say they have never really been welcomed home.

Perhaps nowhere in the county are these feelings more concentrated than on a
quiet floor of the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Veterans Administration Hospital in
Montrose. Here, 13 patients in the Vietnam Veteran Evaluation and Treatment
Program are engaged in an intensive four-month period of therapy intended to
straighten out lives that were twisted early by war.

Eighty percent of the men who have been treated since the unit opened five years
ago have had a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder, a condition that was
poorly understood until recently. The disorder is a delayed reaction to the
traumas of war.

Most of the patients accepted into the program, whose waiting list is nearly a
year long, have suffered for up to 20 years from such symptoms as depression,
rage, a sense of isolation, anxiety and guilt. Anxiety is being stirred up
again, said Dr. Andrew E. Eichmann, the hospital's chief of psychology, as the
veterans follow news of the current war.

"They talk a lot about these 'young kids' " going off to fight, Dr. Eichmann
noted, observing that the veterans were the same age as their Persian Gulf
counterparts or younger when they served in Vietnam. "They most identify with
the ground troops. They are worried about a ground war," the psychologist said.

Images and Flashbacks

Dr. James J. Caulfield, a psychologist who conducts both group and individual
therapy sessions in the program, said the veterans felt "some resentment that
things are being prepared for people in the Persian Gulf that weren't available
for them." The Vietnam veterans, he observed, "feel that when they came home
they were just dropped" back into civilian life without help in readjusting.

Like many veterans, those on the unit experience flashbacks to their war
experiences. While flashbacks can be triggered by anything, even the sight of
people getting onto a bus, said the psychologists, the new war images bring
memories rushing back.

Dr. David Funari, another psychologist in the program, suggested ways in which
the stresses of the Persian Gulf war would be different from the Vietnam War.
Since people began and ended their service in Vietnam at different times,
bonding was difficult, he noted. The sense of isolation may be less in this war,
he said, because of the likelihood that people "will come back as a unit."

In addition, in Vietnam "there was never a sense that victory was at hand; there
were only body counts to judge success," Dr. Funari noted. Now, he added, "There
is a sense of possible victory and goals to be set. The purpose of the goal is
clearer to them -- Communism was more fuzzy."

'A Sense of Completeness'

Some of his patients wanted to volunteer for this war, Dr. Funari added, to get
"a sense of completeness." Several people told him, "I wish I had the chance to
go and come back victorious."

Osvaldo Cruz received a Bronze Star for dragging two wounded men to safety while
under fire in Vietnam. He said he had rarely been able to talk about the
experience -- of which he is very proud -- until now, in group-therapy sessions
on the Vietnam veterans unit, because no one wanted to hear.

Mr. Cruz said he feared that the war in the Persian Gulf would be "even more
devastating" than Vietnam, with "large units of kills." Yet like many veterans,
he is upset at the sight of antiwar demonstrations.  When he saw a boy burning
an American flag recently on the news, he said, "I wanted to put my foot through
the TV."

Richard Morales, who is also a patient on the unit, has two daughters stationed
in the Persian Gulf. He said he feared the war would bring "mass destruction."

In Vietnam, Mr. Morales helped transport wounded and dead soldiers by
helicopter. "The first wounded man I saw, I got very sick," he said. Adding that
he still had bad dreams about mutilated bodies, he said he thought "a lot of the
young kids aren't ready" for what they would see.

'New Wounds' for Veterans

In another hospital, another Vietnam veteran pondered the meaning of the
President's promise that this war "won't be another Vietnam."

To Matthew Palazola, the administrative manager of the respiratory-therapy
department at White Plains Hospital Center, the phrase "casts a negative light
on the Vietnam-era people and may open new wounds for them."

"It suggests that their service was in vain," he said.

Mr. Palazola, who served as a combat engineer in Vietnam, said he had some good
memories of his year there, including the "spirit of camaraderie" and the chance
"to see people with a different way of life." In addition, Mr. Palazola said,
his eventual career choice had been inspired by observing a medical battalion at
work on the battlefield.

Any Time, Anywhere

Yet he said some memories haunted him, like one of being nearly killed by
rockets and constantly feeling that death could come in any place at any moment.

Several factors had helped his relatively easy adjustment to home life, Mr.
Palazola suggested: not having killed anyone in Vietnam -- as far as he knew --
and keeping away from drugs. He said he had been too frightened to use drugs,
since he had wanted to stay alert to danger.

Mr. Palazola expressed a strong desire to support the troops in the Persian Gulf
"in whatever way I can."

"You identify," the veteran said. "The camouflage is different, but it's the
same young faces."

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Osvaldo Cruz, who received a Bronze Star in Vietnam, is in the
Vietnam Veteran Evaluation and Treatment Program at the Veterans Administration
Hospital in Montrose (pg. 1); Richard Morales, at the V.A. Hospital in Montrose
(pg. 6) (Roberta Hershenson)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Battleship Is Decommissioned

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 77 words

DATELINE: LONG BEACH, Calif., Feb. 9


The battleship New Jersey, which saw service in three wars, was decommissioned
Friday for the fourth time. The ship, first commissioned in 1943 for duty in
World War II, was recommissioned for service in the Korean War and again for the
Vietnam War. She was last recommissioned in 1982 and served in support of a
multinational peacekeeping force in Lebanon. In April she will be mothballed at
the Navy's Inactive Ship Maintenance Facility at Bremerton, Wash.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Lesson From Vietnam: Escaping the B-52's

SECTION: Section 3; Page 13; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 297 words


To the Editor:

The assessment of American weapons and strategy in "U.S Technology Won't Win the
War" (Business Forum, Jan. 20) is well crafted. But with respect to bombing
operations, let me fine-tune several issues Steven L. Canby raises.

In two respects, bombing accuracy is a critical factor. With each improvement in
accuracy, the number of aircraft and systems needed is reduced proportionately.
Also, with accurate bombing in or near population centers, civilian casualties
and damage to residential areas are lessened. However, an Iraqi civilian
population whose neighborhoods are relatively untouched, but who are denied the
services of utilities, goods distribution, transportation and communications may
be the most decisive force the alliance could recruit in achieving Saddam
Hussein's overthrow.

The spectacle of B-52 carpet bombing makes good copy for television news
programs. Its effectiveness is another matter. In Vietnam, the B-52 was
effective against closely massed troops around our marines at Khe Sanh. In 11
days of bombing North Vietnam in December 1972, B-52's virtually destroyed that
nation's infrastructure without extensive collateral civilian injury.

However, except for one strike against the munitions storage area at the
juncture of Mu Ghia Pass and the trails south to the main battle areas, the
North Vietnamese troops were relatively unscathed by B-52 operations. Their
generally dispersed forces plus an effective low-tech early warning system
rendered most of our strikes pure theater.

If the Iraqis have access to military history, surely their Republican Guard
forces must be dispersed more widely than news reports would have us believe. We
may even be bombing "paper tigers."

THEODORE R. SNYDER JR.
Ogunuit, Me., Jan. 22

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Congress;
Legislators See Limited Value in Their Private War Briefings

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 19; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 674 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 9


They gather two or three times a week in guarded rooms to hear the latest
Pentagon account of how the war against Iraq is going. But members of Congress
generally think they do not know much more about the war than careful newspaper
readers or television viewers do.

At those closed-door briefings they get more details than reporters do at news
briefings. They get a chance to ask their own questions. But as Senator Nancy
Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas, put it, "I don't know that we've learned
a lot more than we would have by watching the Pentagon briefings on the news."

Still, she is not dissatisfied, saying that the briefings gave her insights into
the "general thrust" of the war that she might have missed without them.
Representative Ray Thornton, Democrat of Arkansas, said the value of briefings
to him was that from the start, their tone "kept us from being swept up in the
euphoria."

But Senator Tom Daschle, Democrat of South Dakota, who called the briefings of
only "marginal use," said their tone had changed. "There was this clear euphoria
the first couple of days, the exotic picture of missiles that would do
everything but stop at a red light," he said. "Now, a much more somber, serious
tone."

For some lawmakers, the value of the briefings may not lie only in a greater
understanding of the war, but in the material that they can use in a press
release. Representative David R. Obey, Democrat of Wisconsin, complained, "An
awful lot of the questions seemed to be asked to get an answer like, 'Yessirree,
that weapons system produced in your district is doing fine.' "

CNN's Influence

For other lawmakers, the value seems so limited that they have stopped going.
Representative Louise M. Slaughter, Democrat of New York, said, "At the last one
I went to, they told us to keep everything to ourselves, and that night I saw
the same thing on CNN."

The Cable News Network's immediacy hangs heavily over the afternoon meetings, in
the House Armed Services Committee room in the Rayburn building and in a
fourth-floor room on the Senate side of the Capitol.

Mr. Obey said that last week, when one Representative asked about a downed
transport plane and was told the information was classified, several members
shouted that they had just seen the news reported on CNN.

Representative William M. Thomas, Republican of California, said the differences
between what was provided to the press and that given to Congress were not of
critical importance, even though lawmakers get to see more photographs than
reporters do. "It doesn't help you make decisions," he said. "It's just more."

Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, acknowledged that he
sometimes did not get all the information he sought from the briefings. But, he
said, "Understand, sometimes they just don't have it."

Senator Kassebaum praised the briefers for their conservative approach, avoiding
the risky body counts that had characterized official statements on the war in
Vietnam. Senator Richard G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana, said too many of his
colleagues were frustrated when they asked questions that had no clear answer,
like "When is this going to end?" or "How much is it going to cost."

Like reporters, the lawmakers find they get different levels of information from
different briefers and think they get the best from Defense Secretary Dick
Cheney and Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Representative Jan Meyers, Republican of Kansas, said the two men appeared more
at ease than lesser officers because they did not have to worry that higher-ups
might think they told too much.

Some Outspoken Critics

The briefings have some outspoken critics, like Representative Barney Frank,
Democrat of Massachusetts, who calls them "a waste of time."

Still, attendence at the briefings remains heavy. There appears to be a
widespread sense of satisfaction that the Bush Administration is showing
Congress some welcome respect by holding the frequent briefings.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Strategy;
U.S. Battle Plan Is Said to Stress Iraqis' Reserves

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE with ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1452 words


As allied forces arrayed against Iraq prepare to shift the war from the air to
the ground, an American tactic called "AirLand Battle" is expected to undergo
its first trial in real combat. If the tactic succeeds, victory may be swift and
allied casualties minimal. If it fails, battlefield confusion could greatly
complicate fighting and prolong the war.

AirLand warfare -- a tactical doctrine the Army eccentrically persists in
spelling as one word -- was developed in the 1970's as a defense against a
hypothetical Soviet invasion of Western Europe, in which Soviet armored forces
would greatly outnumber those of the defenders. In essence, a force using the
tactic would concentrate its heaviest fire on the enemy's rear lines, long-range
artillery, reserves and supply routes, crippling reserve tanks and armored
vehicles before they could be brought to the front.

Political Factors Involved

The object is to so weaken the underpinnings of a large army that its cutting
edge can be shattered relatively painlessly. In an assault against the large and
well-equipped Iraqi force in Kuwait, believed to number about 400,000, this
could be achieved by planes, helicopters, battlefield missiles and large shells,
like those fired from the Persian Gulf by the 16-inch guns of the battleships
Missouri and Wisconsin.

By eliminating the need to wage a protracted land war along a static front line,
the allies could greatly reduce their casualties -- one of the main objects of a
strategy that must take political as well as military factors into
consideration.

Punishing air strikes against Iraq's dug-in tanks and armored personnel carriers
have already been in progress for the last two weeks, and will intensify as the
ground war approaches, military officials say.

President Bush has not said whether he will order the start of a land war and is
to hear the recommendations this week from Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and
Gen. Colin L. Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The two officials
met over the weekend with senior American field commanders, who recommended that
no land war start for at least three weeks, a senior American military official
in Saudi Arabia said.

Although allied leaders have not announced details of their timetable for
launching a land offensive, most military experts believe that it would come in
late February, after heavy equipment arriving from Europe is in place, and
before the Muslim holy season of Ramadan beginning March 17. After that, the
weather in the Arabian Peninsula will grow steadily hotter, making it harder for
infantrymen to fight.

The Key Weapons

Senior military officials say key weapons in the allied assault on Iraq's 5,000
tanks would be A-10 "Warthog" ground-support planes armed with infrared-guided
Maverick missiles, and Apache helicopters armed with Hellfire missiles. The hope
is that the allies' main battle tanks -- American-built M-60 and M1 tanks, and
British Chieftains -- would only have to mop up the remains of the Iraqi armor.
If Iraqi tanks cannot be destroyed by air strikes, allied armored forces, which
cannot be transported by air in substantial numbers, would have to punch through
the main Iraqi defenses, a potentially costly operation.

With air attacks on concrete and sand-bagged revetments in which Iraq has
sheltered many of its tanks, allied leaders have sought to force the tanks to
change position and thereby abandon their protective cover. An American
spokesman said yesterday that 750 Iraqi tanks had so far been destroyed, many by
this tactic.

Some military experts caution that artillery and bombing preparations for ground
assaults on an entrenched enemy do not always insure that infantry casualties
will be light. The United States Marine landing on the South Pacific island of
Tarawa in November 1943 was preceded by one of the most intense naval
bombardments in history, and yet Japanese defenses remained almost intact.
During the Vietnam War, carpet bombing of enemy units dug into shallow foxholes
by B-52's often failed to suppress enemy resistance more than marginally.

Planners of AirLand warfare, including Gen. John W. Foss, commander of the
Army's Training and Doctrine Command, describe the AirLand battlefield as
"nonlinear," meaning that the front line is likely to be ill-defined and pierced
by large gaps. The object is not to fight the enemy along a continuous front
line but to so batter the rear and intermediate ranks as to make the enemy front
untenable.

Allied commanders, informed by intelligence from satellites and aircraft from
hour to hour, remain deeply concerned by the defenses Iraq has built across the
sands of Kuwait since the August invasion.

The Iraqi defense consists of at least three layers, each one containing deep
trench works protected in many areas by reinforced concrete bunkers, earth
berms, antitank ditches, barbed-wire thickets and minefields, supported by
heavily fortified, triangular strongpoints. Strong infantry and tank units
defend the triangular strongpoints, in whose apexes Iraqi artillery pieces
command good fields of fire across "killing zones" through which any allied
frontal attack would have to pass.

The Chemical Threat

Iraqi artillery includes large numbers of howitzers and Astros battlefield
missiles, as well as long-range 155-millimeter guns. If Iraq were to use
chemical agents against allied forces, they would probably be fired by
155-millimeter shells, of which the Iraqis have stockpiled tens of thousands in
protected battlefield ammunition dumps. Depending on wind direction, a chemical
artillery barrage could create a serious obstacle for an allied force attacking
across a long front. Although allied troops are protected by gas-proof suits,
boots and masks, movement through an area under chemical attack would be slow
and hazardous.

Kuwait, moreover, is a relatively small country, roughly 80 by 110 miles, where
the defenders can move swiftly to reinforce points under the heaviest allied
attack.

The military officials say that because Iraqi "linear" defenses are so solid,
allied commanders will probably choose to leapfrog or bypass them with some
variation of the AirLand warfare concept, possibly including amphibious landings
along Kuwait's coast, or even with landings in the vicinity of Basra, Iraq.
Ideally, allied interdiction of supply lines might starve the defenders into
submission before much blood was shed.

To jump over Iraqi fortifications that extend to a depth of some 60 miles behind
Kuwait's border with Saudi Arabia requires allied air supremacy, which has
already been achieved. Intense bombing and shelling of enemy rear positions,
with particular attention to the destruction of supply lines, would be a
preliminary to an air invasion certain to include troop movements by Chinook
helicopters. This preliminary bombardment appears to have been in progress in
the past several days, and may foreshadow an imminent invasion.

Hazards of the 'Fog of War'

Mass parachute drops deep in the Iraqi rear by troops of the 101st Airborne
Division and other airborne units are also a possibility, the military officials
say. As airstrips are seized or laid across the sand, large transport aircraft
would add to the flow of men and supplies to the enemy's rear, the officials
said.

But in abandoning the frontal assaults that characterized trench warfare in
World War I, the allies would face enormous problems coordinating their
sometimes widely separated forces. Even though allied troops have communications
systems far superior to those of previous wars, as well as pocket devices that
use satellites to tell soldiers exactly where they are at all times, the "fog of
war" could create particularly dangerous confusion in the midst of a widely
spread AirLand battle.

Details of allied plans for the invasion of Kuwait are secret, and perhaps the
biggest secret of all is whether the allies intend to land troops in Iraq as
well as Kuwait. Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the allied commander, has always
evaded questions about this possibility, saying that such a move would be up to
the White House.

Nevertheless, the AirLand warfare concept depends largely on attacking the
enemy's rear, which in this case certainly includes Iraq's border regions,
expecially in the vicinity of the port of Basra. Allied commanders would prefer
not to be hampered by any limitations of their field of operations. If an
amphibious landing were planned, for example, allied forces would want to avoid
the most heavily mined and defended beaches -- those along the Kuwaiti coast --
possibly finding easier beachheads along Iraq's Fao Peninsula.


LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of the 101st Airborne Division exiting from the back of
a Chinook CH-47 helicopter in the desert last Friday after being airlifted into
front-line positions along the Saudi border with Kuwait. (Associated Press) (pg.
16)

Map: Persian Gulf area, indicating the Pentagon's "AirLand Battle" strategy
against approximate area of Iraqi fortifications. (pg. 1)

Chart: "Leapfrog Tatic: Striking Behind Iraqi Fortifications"

AirLand Batttle was developed for a situation in which enemy armored forces
greatly outnumber those of the defenders.

The object is to so weaken the underpinnings of a large army so that its cutting
edge.

Heaviest fire would be concentrated on the enemy's rear lines, long-range
artillery, reserves and supply routes. This could be achieved by airplanes,
helicopters, battlefield missiles and large shells from 16-inch battleships.

Allied commanders could choose amphibious landings along Kuwait's coast, or near
Basra. They could want avoid the most heavily mined and defended beaches along
the Kuwaiti coast by attempting a landing along Iraq's Fao Peninsula.

Map: Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Iraqi, with detail indicating Fao Penninsula.

Drawings: A-10A Thunderbolt and Apache Helicopter; and examples of typical Iraqi
fortifications (pg. 16)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Deep Doubts About Ground War

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 735 words


The war spiral turns. Since at least Nov. 8, President Bush has been
relentlessly pushing the pace of war in the Persian Gulf. First, he was sure
that the international embargo could not force Iraq out of Kuwait. Now, he's
convinced himself that the thunderous air war won't do it either. He has sent
his top brass to Saudi Arabia this weekend almost certainly to ratify the
judgment that a ground war is needed to achieve victory.

To him, that means liberating Kuwait, disabling Iraq's aggressive army,
eliminating Iraq's capacity to produce nuclear, chemical and biological weapons
and getting rid of Saddam Hussein.

The President may be right to think these aims can be achieved at tolerable
cost. There are well-informed and prudent authorities who find optimistic ground
war scenarios to be wholly plausible. But there are also well-informed and
prudent people, military and civilian, who do not shrink from battle and yet
express the most sober reservations about shifting to ground war. They are
dubious that, for instance, Iraqi armor can be easily lured out of its bunkers.

There's no easy way to reconcile these views, but one fundamental question
underlies both: What's the rush?

Whether ground war will be necessary at some later date can be better appraised
at some later date. Its wisdom in the near future is open to challenge for at
least three reasons.

Premature Timing. One need not believe that air power is invincible to recognize
that the sustained bombardment is slowly, surely weakening Iraqi forces.
Low-flying allied planes have only begun the arduous task of attacking dug-in
tanks, artillery and ammunition dumps. The longer this sort of bombing
continues, the more Iraqi forces it will destroy without heavy U.S. casualties.

Fighting From Strength. Allied strength in the air is uncontested. But that
advantage disappears on the ground. The Iraqi Army fought an eight-year war with
Iran, absorbed grievous casualties and still held on. Why adopt a strategy that
plays to Saddam Hussein's strength?

Mr. Bush seems readier to escalate than many in the military. To him, avoiding
gradualism is the lesson of Vietnam. But military historians also recall what
can happen when tank armies hurl themselves at one another. The Battle of the
Bulge in World War II claimed 81,000 U.S. casualties, including 19,000 killed.
Is the President so eager to avoid another Vietnam that he's ready to risk
another Battle of the Bulge?

Stopping Points. War plans have ways of going awry. Listen to Gen. Norman
Schwarzkopf, the allied commander, on that subject:

"The analysts write about war as if it's a ballet. Yes, it's choreographed, and
what happens is the orchestra starts playing and some son of a bitch climbs out
of the orchestra pit with a bayonet and starts chasing you around the stage. And
the choreography goes right out the window."

By moving from the skies to the less predictable terrain of ground combat, Mr.
Bush raises the risk that the war could get out of hand. Mounting casualties
could make angry Americans more eager to escalate and less willing to
compromise.

Proponents of a ground attack argue it will so shatter Iraq's Army that its
commanders could topple Saddam Hussein and sue for peace. But so complete a
victory might well require pushing deep into Iraq, at an even higher cost in
casualties -- and in postwar relations with the Arab world.

Even in defeat, Iraq's sacrifices would show the Muslim masses that Saddam
Hussein stood up to the invading infidels, their wealthy Arab backers and even
Arab governments allied against him. In trying to humble him, Mr. Bush may end
up jeopardizing friendly governments in the region.

The President's confidence is contagious, and the public seems to have caught
it. Optimism is always appealing, but these are sober reasons to wonder about
the long-term wisdom of his course.

Dean Acheson, the former Secretary of State, saw many initiatives frustrated
when Presidents, subjected to conflicting advice, hesitated. He once confronted
the Presidential scholar, Richard Neustadt. "I know your theory," he grumbled.
"You think Presidents should be warned. You're wrong. Presidents should be given
confidence."

Mr. Neustadt, who had seen optimistic Presidents get carried away, knew better.
For Americans less optimistic than this President, the doubts about ground war
reverberate.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Is Victory Over Iraq Really a Sure Thing?;
High-Tech Advantage

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 333 words


To the Editor:

Gary Hart's Jan. 30 Op-Ed article, "The Military's New Myths," reminds me of the
saying that the only thing more difficult than getting an old idea out of the
military mind is putting a new one into it.

As one of the leaders of the military reform movement of the early 1980's, Mr.
Hart championed the notions that better tactics and simpler but more numerous
weapons were the keys to winning future conflicts. He was right about better
tactics, and the lesson was taken to heart by many military leaders in the
aftermath of our bitter experience in Vietnam. As chairman of the House Armed
Services Committee's panel on military education, I saw evidence of this in our
review of the intermediate command and staff colleges and the senior war
colleges.

But had the military and Congress adopted simpler but more numerous weapons, the
casualty figures from the air campaign against Iraq would be far higher. The
uses of such high-technology weapons as the F-117 stealth fighter, cruise
missiles, laser-guided munitions and Patriot air defense missile have taken a
toll on the enemy and saved lives on the allied side, military and civilian. Mr.
Hart's prescription is for technology with high casualties rather than high
technology with low casualties.

Mr. Hart notes that the land campaign has not yet begun. But the Iraqi Army's
possession of 28,000 Milan antitank weapons, 2,000 Hot airborne anti-tank
weapons and 700 Exocet air-to-surface missiles shows its faith in high
technology.

To be truly effective, high-technology weapons must be combined with first-rate
military personnel, extensive training and superior planning and tactics. The
Department of Defense, supported by Congress, invested heavily in each of these
areas in the early 1980's. When the ground campaign begins, the investment by
the Army and Marine Corps in high-technology weapons will be shown to have been
wise.

IKE SKELTON
Member of Congress, 4th Dist., Mo.
Washington, Jan. 30, 1991

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

WAR IN THE GULF: Strategy;
U.S. Battle Plan Is Said to Stress Iraqis' Reserves

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE with ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1452 words


As allied forces arrayed against Iraq prepare to shift the war from the air to
the ground, an American tactic called "AirLand Battle" is expected to undergo
its first trial in real combat. If the tactic succeeds, victory may be swift and
allied casualties minimal. If it fails, battlefield confusion could greatly
complicate fighting and prolong the war.

AirLand warfare -- a tactical doctrine the Army eccentrically persists in
spelling as one word -- was developed in the 1970's as a defense against a
hypothetical Soviet invasion of Western Europe, in which Soviet armored forces
would greatly outnumber those of the defenders. In essence, a force using the
tactic would concentrate its heaviest fire on the enemy's rear lines, long-range
artillery, reserves and supply routes, crippling reserve tanks and armored
vehicles before they could be brought to the front.

Political Factors Involved

The object is to so weaken the underpinnings of a large army that its cutting
edge can be shattered relatively painlessly. In an assault against the large and
well-equipped Iraqi force in Kuwait, believed to number about 400,000, this
could be achieved by planes, helicopters, battlefield missiles and large shells,
like those fired from the Persian Gulf by the 16-inch guns of the battleships
Missouri and Wisconsin.

By eliminating the need to wage a protracted land war along a static front line,
the allies could greatly reduce their casualties -- one of the main objects of a
strategy that must take political as well as military factors into
consideration.

Punishing air strikes against Iraq's dug-in tanks and armored personnel carriers
have already been in progress for the last two weeks, and will intensify as the
ground war approaches, military officials say.

President Bush has not said whether he will order the start of a land war and is
to hear the recommendations this week from Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and
Gen. Colin L. Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The two officials
met over the weekend with senior American field commanders, who recommended that
no land war start for at least three weeks, a senior American military official
in Saudi Arabia said.

Although allied leaders have not announced details of their timetable for
launching a land offensive, most military experts believe that it would come in
late February, after heavy equipment arriving from Europe is in place, and
before the Muslim holy season of Ramadan beginning March 17. After that, the
weather in the Arabian Peninsula will grow steadily hotter, making it harder for
infantrymen to fight.

The Key Weapons

Senior military officials say key weapons in the allied assault on Iraq's 5,000
tanks would be A-10 "Warthog" ground-support planes armed with infrared-guided
Maverick missiles, and Apache helicopters armed with Hellfire missiles. The hope
is that the allies' main battle tanks -- American-built M-60 and M1 tanks, and
British Chieftains -- would only have to mop up the remains of the Iraqi armor.
If Iraqi tanks cannot be destroyed by air strikes, allied armored forces, which
cannot be transported by air in substantial numbers, would have to punch through
the main Iraqi defenses, a potentially costly operation.

With air attacks on concrete and sand-bagged revetments in which Iraq has
sheltered many of its tanks, allied leaders have sought to force the tanks to
change position and thereby abandon their protective cover. An American
spokesman said yesterday that 750 Iraqi tanks had so far been destroyed, many by
this tactic.

Some military experts caution that artillery and bombing preparations for ground
assaults on an entrenched enemy do not always insure that infantry casualties
will be light. The United States Marine landing on the South Pacific island of
Tarawa in November 1943 was preceded by one of the most intense naval
bombardments in history, and yet Japanese defenses remained almost intact.
During the Vietnam War, carpet bombing of enemy units dug into shallow foxholes
by B-52's often failed to suppress enemy resistance more than marginally.

Planners of AirLand warfare, including Gen. John W. Foss, commander of the
Army's Training and Doctrine Command, describe the AirLand battlefield as
"nonlinear," meaning that the front line is likely to be ill-defined and pierced
by large gaps. The object is not to fight the enemy along a continuous front
line but to so batter the rear and intermediate ranks as to make the enemy front
untenable.

Allied commanders, informed by intelligence from satellites and aircraft from
hour to hour, remain deeply concerned by the defenses Iraq has built across the
sands of Kuwait since the August invasion.

The Iraqi defense consists of at least three layers, each one containing deep
trench works protected in many areas by reinforced concrete bunkers, earth
berms, antitank ditches, barbed-wire thickets and minefields, supported by
heavily fortified, triangular strongpoints. Strong infantry and tank units
defend the triangular strongpoints, in whose apexes Iraqi artillery pieces
command good fields of fire across "killing zones" through which any allied
frontal attack would have to pass.

The Chemical Threat

Iraqi artillery includes large numbers of howitzers and Astros battlefield
missiles, as well as long-range 155-millimeter guns. If Iraq were to use
chemical agents against allied forces, they would probably be fired by
155-millimeter shells, of which the Iraqis have stockpiled tens of thousands in
protected battlefield ammunition dumps. Depending on wind direction, a chemical
artillery barrage could create a serious obstacle for an allied force attacking
across a long front. Although allied troops are protected by gas-proof suits,
boots and masks, movement through an area under chemical attack would be slow
and hazardous.

Kuwait, moreover, is a relatively small country, roughly 80 by 110 miles, where
the defenders can move swiftly to reinforce points under the heaviest allied
attack.

The military officials say that because Iraqi "linear" defenses are so solid,
allied commanders will probably choose to leapfrog or bypass them with some
variation of the AirLand warfare concept, possibly including amphibious landings
along Kuwait's coast, or even with landings in the vicinity of Basra, Iraq.
Ideally, allied interdiction of supply lines might starve the defenders into
submission before much blood was shed.

To jump over Iraqi fortifications that extend to a depth of some 60 miles behind
Kuwait's border with Saudi Arabia requires allied air supremacy, which has
already been achieved. Intense bombing and shelling of enemy rear positions,
with particular attention to the destruction of supply lines, would be a
preliminary to an air invasion certain to include troop movements by Chinook
helicopters. This preliminary bombardment appears to have been in progress in
the past several days, and may foreshadow an imminent invasion.

Hazards of the 'Fog of War'

Mass parachute drops deep in the Iraqi rear by troops of the 101st Airborne
Division and other airborne units are also a possibility, the military officials
say. As airstrips are seized or laid across the sand, large transport aircraft
would add to the flow of men and supplies to the enemy's rear, the officials
said.

But in abandoning the frontal assaults that characterized trench warfare in
World War I, the allies would face enormous problems coordinating their
sometimes widely separated forces. Even though allied troops have communications
systems far superior to those of previous wars, as well as pocket devices that
use satellites to tell soldiers exactly where they are at all times, the "fog of
war" could create particularly dangerous confusion in the midst of a widely
spread AirLand battle.

Details of allied plans for the invasion of Kuwait are secret, and perhaps the
biggest secret of all is whether the allies intend to land troops in Iraq as
well as Kuwait. Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the allied commander, has always
evaded questions about this possibility, saying that such a move would be up to
the White House.

Nevertheless, the AirLand warfare concept depends largely on attacking the
enemy's rear, which in this case certainly includes Iraq's border regions,
expecially in the vicinity of the port of Basra. Allied commanders would prefer
not to be hampered by any limitations of their field of operations. If an
amphibious landing were planned, for example, allied forces would want to avoid
the most heavily mined and defended beaches -- those along the Kuwaiti coast --
possibly finding easier beachheads along Iraq's Fao Peninsula.


LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 13, 1991, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

A chart on Sunday about military strategy in the Persian Gulf and another on
Jan. 31, about American and Iraqi weapons, misstated the maximum speed of the
A-10A. The Jan. 31 chart also misstated the aircraft's length and range. Jane's
All the World's Aircraft says that the A-10A's maximum speed is 518 miles an
hour, its length is 53 feet 4 inches and its range is 288 miles.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of the 101st Airborne Division exiting from the back of
a Chinook CH-47 helicopter in the desert last Friday after being airlifted into
front-line positions along the Saudi border with Kuwait. (Associated Press) (pg.
16)

Map: Persian Gulf area, indicating the Pentagon's "AirLand Battle" strategy
against approximate area of Iraqi fortifications. (pg. 1)

Chart: "Leapfrog Tatic: Striking Behind Iraqi Fortifications"

AirLand Batttle was developed for a situation in which enemy armored forces
greatly outnumber those of the defenders.

The object is to so weaken the underpinnings of a large army so that its cutting
edge.

Heaviest fire would be concentrated on the enemy's rear lines, long-range
artillery, reserves and supply routes. This could be achieved by airplanes,
helicopters, battlefield missiles and large shells from 16-inch battleships.

Allied commanders could choose amphibious landings along Kuwait's coast, or near
Basra. They could want avoid the most heavily mined and defended beaches along
the Kuwaiti coast by attempting a landing along Iraq's Fao Peninsula.

Map: Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Iraqi, with detail indicating Fao Penninsula.

Drawings: A-10A Thunderbolt and Apache Helicopter; and examples of typical Iraqi
fortifications (pg. 16)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Danny Aiello Journeys Along The Blue-Collar Road to Stardom

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2119 words


Danny Aiello is threefourths of his way through roasted chicken and mashed
potatoes -- real mashed potatoes -- and the phone rings. Again. Usually it's
guys with names like Tony and Paulie. This time it's Paulie. He says Danny is on
TV.

The phone rings everywhere: in his gray Lincoln, at his house in New Jersey, at
his favorite restaurant, at his not-so-favorite restaurants, at bars, at
hangouts, downtown, uptown. This time it rings in a reasonably crowded,
reasonably chic midtown Manhattan restaurant. So Mr. Aiello bounds from the
table, grabs the receiver, listens to Paulie and then calls out to the
bartender, the manager -- anyone who will listen (everyone does):

"Hey! You got VHS-1? Eh! My show's on!"

For any patrons who may thus far have missed Danny Aiello (the large man in the
Duke sweatshirt talking up a storm at the front table), this is the wake-up
call.

The channel is switched, the volume turned up and Mr. Aiello strides past the
bar crowd to a stool right below the set. After he is interviewed on a
cable-network movie talk show, the program's dyed-blonde hostess smiles a huge,
plaintive smile and asks for a song. On the screen, Mr. Aiello is embarrassed;
it takes him a moment. In the bar, he seems to be loving it.

The spot ends, the basketball game returns and Mr. Aiello rises from the stool,
beaming. A patter of applause rises from the bar crowd. Still beaming, he
strides back to the table. The bar crowd applauds for real. Mr. Aiello beams
harder.

It is hard to miss Danny Aiello these days.

At the moment, he is starring with Richard Dreyfuss, Holly Hunter and Gena
Rowlands as the sentimental patriarch of an Italian-American family bedeviled by
its new son-in-law in the film "Once Around." As 1990 ended, he was featured as
an avuncular chiropractor in the psychological thriller "Jacob's Ladder,"
directed by Adrian Lyne.

When "The Closer" opens in March, Mr. Aiello will be playing his first lead film
role, as the Los Angeles real estate mogul referred to in the title. Around
Memorial Day, he will be seen as Bruce Willis's art-thieving sidekick in a
comedy-adventure film, "Hudson Hawk." Then, after a summer's absence, Mr. Aiello
is to return to theaters in October with the lead role in "29th Street," a film
about a New York gambler's relationship with his son.

"I've been blessed," Mr. Aiello said the other day, happily repeating himself
for about the third year in a row. (That is most of what he said, anyway,
sanitized only of a favorite expletive that would otherwise punctuate most of
what follows.)

Actually, Mr. Aiello confesses to being terrifically bored right now. He has not
worked since Christmas. By February, that adds up to about a week longer than he
went without acting during the previous 12 months.

And these, for Mr. Aiello, are the cruelest months: no warm walks around town,
no softball in the Broadway show league. "Just sitting around doing nothing;
can't stand it," he says. "I've got to find a way to -- some sort of avocation.
Is that the proper terminology? Or a hobby."

While Mr. Aiello is known to watch a little television at home with his family,
he is not quite a couch potato. While "sitting around," he manages to schmooze
long-distance with Hollywood producers, fiddle with half a dozen pet film
projects in the early stages of development and talk with directors about new
roles.

Mr. Aiello is reluctant to give his age, although he admits to being in his
mid-50's. "Tell 'em I look 35," he says. "We're in a business where people want
to drive you out before you get started." He does not want to be rushed; someday
he plans to produce some films and hopes to eventually direct some. He isn't
sure what he will do next, but the phone keeps ringing.

"It's so exciting," he says, revving himself with the thought. "I turned down a
lot already. Lousy pictures. I'd make a lot, but I'd be embarrassed if it was up
there. But I must admit, 95 percent of the stuff that's being offered to me now
-- is great. I mean, people say, 'Ah, there are no good scripts around.' But I
mean I'm reading scripts! It's wonderful. I mean, I haven't had these choices
but in the last two years. Before I was a segmented actor. I was lucky to be
able to get good pieces in good pictures, but that wasn't because I was given a
lot of choices."

All of the attendant power lunching and points divvying suggests a man somewhat
removed from his hardscrabble roots in the South Bronx, his first career as a
bus-route announcer or his second, as a nightclub bouncer. The work ethic,
however, has not changed.

Suddenly as fame has embraced Mr. Aiello -- it was only five years ago that film
audiences saw him (or didn't) as Jackie Chan's partner in the kung-fu cop movie
"The Protector" and in the horror-movie spoof "The Stuff" -- the Danny Aiello
story is already a familiar Hollywood fable.

Stripped of some good embellishment, it generally goes like this: He was born
into a tenement life on Manhattan's West Side, the sixth child of a single
mother who had seven. Before he was 8 years old, he was shining shoes and
hawking newspapers in Grand Central Station. At 13, he joined the National
Guard, and he dropped out of James Monroe High School one day into the ninth
grade. Married at 16, he forged a baptismal certificate and joined the Army.
After a three-year hitch, he went to work loading buses at Manhattan's old
Greyhound terminal, and a few years later was elected the youngest president of
Local 1202 of the Amalgamated Transit Union.

Good times, Mr. Aiello says, were when he worked all of the time. In tougher
times -- before he got his union job and after he lost it in a strike dispute --
he broke into local stores and bowling alleys to rip off the cash registers,
worked as a nightclub bouncer and managed after-hours joints.

"My object in my life was to make sure I could take care of my family," he says,
"however I could."

In 1972, with little to lose, Mr. Aiello, already in his mid-30's, declared
himself an actor. His experience consisted of stints as a substitute emcee at
the Improvisation, the comedy club on West 44th Street in Manhattan where he
worked as the bouncer, and some late-night monologues read to the dregs of its
audience. He spent the better part of the next decade in theater, starting with
$10-a-night jobs, working his way onto Broadway and auditioning for small parts
in films and trying to do television commercials on the side.

By all accounts, he was a natural. But with a genuine Bronx accent, a 6 foot 3
inch, 220-pound frame and a nose that at times seems to pull his eyes closed of
its own weight, he was also a natural choice for two-dimensional,
tough-and-ethnic character roles: a violent cop in "Fort Apache, the Bronx," a
Mafia thug in "The Godfather Part II," a brutish husband in Woody Allen's
"Purple Rose of Cairo."

Not quite four years ago, his characters began to grow more complex. As Cher's
soppy-sweet boyfriend in "Moonstruck," he had his first substantial role in a
hit film. Two years later, after winning acclaim for his performance in David
Rabe's play, "Hurlyburly," he won an Academy Award nomination for his role as
Sal the pizza man in Spike Lee's "Do the Right Thing."

If there are recognizable flashes of the real Danny Aiello in both of those
portrayals and most of the ones that follow, neither he nor his partisans think
he should apologize. "I think Danny has a big range," Mr. Lee said. "If he's not
offered the parts that people offer to William Hurt or Harrison Ford, what can
he do?"

Lasse Hallstrom, the Swedish director who chose Mr. Aiello for "Once Around,"
suggested that his attraction had to do precisely with having shown himself to
be comfortable on screen with his own personality.

"In 'Do the Right Thing,' I felt for the first time that he was very much
trusting his persona, a charisma that's his own," Mr. Hallstrom said by
telephone from his home in Sweden. "For this movie, we needed a real Italian
family father. We wanted to stay real."

It is with a measure of pride that Mr. Aiello says of "Once Around's" Joe Bella,
the Boston contractor trying to steady his family against the storm of a
boyfriend brought home by his elder daughter, "There's not a scene in there that
I haven't experienced in my life."

And he means no irony when he says of his performance as Louis, the back doctor
who watches over a tormented Vietnam veteran in "Jacob's Ladder," "Sure it's
Danny, but it's Danny as a chiropractor." What he means is that if he stamps
each of his roles with aspects of a familiar persona, he will have no problem
with that.

"So does De Niro and so does Pacino," he said. "Humphrey Bogart did. Spencer
Tracy did. They project to me Everyman. And I never wanted to project more than
that."

The image that Mr. Aiello cultivates off-screen is not without similarities.

In a world of studied hipsters, he revels at being "a conservative
traditionalist with old values." When his 21-year-old daughter, Stacie, calls
into his car phone late on a weeknight, he worries immediately; when she says
she just wanted to inform him that her boyfriend will be sleeping downstairs in
a guest room because the tail light of his car is out, Mr. Aiello seems
delighted at the seeming anachronism.

Though friends say he is cashing paychecks of close to $1 million, Mr. Aiello
and his wife, Sandy, live in the same split-level house in Ramsey, N.J., that
they bought a decade ago for $125,000. A family splurge, he says, consists of
Sandy redecorating the bathroom; a family vacation is Sandy coming along while
her husband acts on location. Besides buying gifts for his wife, four adult
children and two grandchildren, Mr. Aiello said his big expenditures were
picking up checks for his friends.

Mrs. Aiello does have a hobby: she knits. When she goes out, her husband says,
it is to play canasta or mah-jongg. As ever, his nights are spent hanging out
with 8 or 10 buddies, usually at the Upper West Side restaurant Columbus. They
say that his stardom has brought only one indulgence.

"The basic thing he loves to do is be recognized as a great actor," said his old
friend and self-described right-hand-man Anthony Conforti. "That just knocks him
out. That's his biggest kick -- to have people love him."

Indeed, in an age of fame-bashing, fan-loathing celebrities, Mr. Aiello could
write a book. It might be titled, "How to Be Rich and Famous and Still Have a
Good Time." No doubt it would include the story of his visit the other Saturday
night to the Route 4 Tenplex in Paramus, N.J., to see "Once Around." He would
not have gone, but Sandy Aiello had been ill and missed the film's premiere.
Untrue to form, Mr. Aiello wore sunglasses and found a friendly manager to usher
them in a side door. But as the theater filled, whispers spread the news of his
presence.

"So I'm sitting there with the glasses on, knowing that people are going to
notice me. But I just had them on hoping that not too many people did. I almost
decided to leave, but I couldn't leave because Sandy hadn't seen it, so I
stayed.

"My name goes up on the screen, the place breaks out into an ovation. Everything
I did that was slightly funny, there were roars in the theater, people
screaming.

"Now the lights go on -- after the credits -- no one leaves the theater.
Sold-out, packed house from the front to the back. And I got to leave. Sandy and
I get up -- it was like Moses parting the Red Sea. They open, and they start a
standing ovation in the theater. The movie is very sad, so I got tears in my
eyes flowing. They think I'm crying because they're applauding. So as I got out
I say, 'Stop it, for God's sake, I'm crying here!' "

Mr. Aiello sounds half-mortified as he recounts all of this. But had it just
happened to, say, Robert De Niro, would Mr. De Niro have stopped to use the
bathroom?

"Now when I come out of the men's room, there's about a hundred people standing
outside of the men's room, give or take a few," he says. "I'm waiting for Sandy
to come out, she takes 20 minutes. I was there for an hour and a half after the
movie. They thought it was a promotion. Tenplex theater, Route 4."

It was not that he wasn't a bit embarrassed, or a bit disappointed to settle for
an audience reaction that was perhaps somewhat distorted by his presence. But if
that's the way it goes, Mr. Aiello will not anguish over it.

"I struggled my whole life. Now I'm playing cowboys and Indians and getting paid
lots of money for it," he says. "I'm a guy who never wants to be taken for
granted. I don't have to be patted on the back every two minutes, but a
compliment don't hurt."


NAME: Danny Aiello

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Danny Aiello at home--"I struggled my whole life," he says.
"Now I'm playing cowboys and Indians and getting paid for it." (Fred R.
Conrad/The New York Times) (pg. 13); Danny Aiello as the sentimental patriarch
of an Italian-American family in the current "Once Around," directed by Lasse
Hallstrom. (Universal Pictures) (pg. 19)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Rep. Silvio O. Conte Is Dead at 69; Longtime Battler for the Underdog

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 42; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 696 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 9


Representative Silvio O. Conte, a combative Republican who battled, sometimes
against his own party, for the poor, for students, for the environment and for
medical research, died Friday night at the National Institutes of Health in
Bethesda, Md. He was 69 years old.

Doctors at the institutes said he died of extensive bleeding in the brain,
brought on by progression of prostate cancer. He had undergone two brain
operations after entering the hospital on Feb. 1.

Mr. Conte, the senior Republican on the House Appropriations Committee and the
only member of his party in the Massachusetts delegation, was beginning his 17th
term in the House.

Last month, he was one of only three House Republicans to vote against a
resolution authorizing President Bush to begin a war against Iraq. When he did
so, he recalled unhappily his 1964 vote in favor of the Gulf of Tonkin
resolution that was cited as authority for widening the war in Vietnam. That
vote, Mr. Conte said, led to "tragedy and needless loss of lives, and I pray
this one will not."

Uniting Behind President

He said he had believed that economic sanctions against Iraq should be given
more time to work. But after Congress decided otherwise, he said: "It is time
for our nation to unite. I am behind the President 100 percent from this day
on."

In more than three decades in the House, he was known both for his public, vocal
outbursts against excesses of "pork" -- Federal aid to beekeepers was a
particular target -- and for his expertise in getting things done through taking
advantage of the rules of the House and through close friendships with other
powerful Massachusetts lawmakers like Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the former Speaker
of the House, a Democrat.

Mr. Conte looked after his district, from the longtime friends he invited to an
annual spring fishing tournament at a lakeside cottage near Pittsfield to the
major colleges and universities like Amherst, Hampshire, Mount Holyoke, Smith,
Williams and the University of Massachusetts.

With Mr. O'Neill, he wrote legislation providing the poor with help to pay
heating bills. He wrote the 1970 law creating Amtrak to preserve passenger rail
travel. In 1983 he co-sponsored the first $5 million for research into AIDS, a
program now at a $5 billion level.

Election to State Senate



Born in Pittsfield, he worked as a machinist and then served in the Seabees in
the Southwest Pacific in World War II. Afterward he attended Boston College
under the G.I. Bill of Rights, injuring a knee as a football player. He
graduated from Boston College Law School in 1949 and was elected to the State
Senate the next year.

For friends and colleagues who wondered why he was a Republican, with a voting
record that sometimes won 90 percent approval from the liberal Americans for
Democratic Action, he said he had become a Republican as a young man when he
could not get a job as a census worker. Democrats controlled those jobs, he
said, and when he could not get one, he changed parties.

Another blunt, characteristic decision was recalled by Fred Wertheimer,
president of Common Cause, the public affairs group, who for many years was an
aide to Mr. Conte on Capitol Hill. When Mr. Conte began to turn against the
Vietnam War in the late 1960's and decided to call for a halt in the bombing,
Mr. Wertheimer recalled, the lawmaker went to a veterans group in his district
to make his first announcement.

"We were talking about it the other day," Mr. Wertheimer said, and "he recalled
they didn't like the speech very much." But the American Legion, the Veterans of
Foreign Wars and the Disabled American Veterans all honored the lawmaker in
recent years.

Mr. Conte is survived by his wife, Corinne; four children, Michelle Webb of
Hardwick, Mass., Sylvia Certo of Arlington, Va., John Conte of San Jose, Calif.,
and Gayle Fowler of Westminster, Md., and six grandchildren.

Funeral services will be held at 2 P.M. Wednesday at St. Joseph's Church, 414
North Street, in Pittsfield. Burial will follow at St. Joseph's Cemetery.

A memorial service will be held in the Capital Rotunda in Washington, on a date
to be announced.


NAME: Silvio O. Conte

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Silvio O. Conte (Paul Conklin, 1983)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

John Steinbeck 4th, Freelance Writer, 44

SECTION: Section D; Page 10; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 257 words


John Steinbeck 4th, a writer and son of the Nobel Prize-winning author John
Steinbeck, died Thursday at Scripps Memorial Hospital in Encinitas, Calif.,
where he was undergoing surgery for a herniated disc. He was 44 years old and
lived in Encinitas.

A nursing supervisor, Marlys Weberg, said Saturday that Mr. Steinbeck had been
admitted to the hospital on Thursday, gone into surgery, and then suffered
cardiac arrest. The San Diego County Coroner's office performed an autopsy, but
the results were not available yesterday.

Mr. Steinbeck, a freelance writer who had contributed to many magazines,
including The New Yorker. He was the author of a book, "In Touch," (Alfred A.
Knopf, 1969), about his experiences in Vietnam with the Army and his return
home, which he described as a transition from "hawk" to "dove."

In a New York Times book review of "In Touch," Jonathan Segal wrote that Mr.
Steinbeck "is extremely honest in a time when honesty is badly needed."

The younger Mr. Steinbeck came to public attention when he wrote in the magazine
"The Washingtonian" in 1967 that three-fourths of the American soldiers in
Vietnam smoked marijuana.

At the time of his death, Mr. Steinbeck, who had been a recovering alcoholic for
three years, was working on his autobiography, "Legacy," in which he said he
intended to examine the heredity in addiction and try to link what he believed
to be his father's alcoholism to his own.

Suriving are his wife, Nancy, three children, Megan, Blake and Michael, and a
brother, Thomas.


LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Political Memo;
Stars of War Room Are Auditioning For the Presidential Battles to Come

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1428 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 10


It just may be the most extraordinary collection of Presidential ambition ever
gathered together in one room, with the possible exception of when Harold
Stassen dined alone.

Four members of George Bush's war council -- Vice President Dan Quayle, James A.
Baker 3d, the Secretary of State, Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, and Dick Cheney, the Defense Secretary -- are viewed by
Republicans as Presidential prospects for 1996. And some in the Administration
suggest that John H. Sununu, the White House chief of staff, sees himself in
this category as well.

It still may not add up to the star power and talent that existed, as John F.
Kennedy once joked, when Thomas Jefferson dined alone in the White House. But
many political analysts think that the Persian Gulf war will determine the
outcome of the 1992 election and possibly the lineup for the 1996 Republican
primary.

Should Mr. Bush decide to change Vice Presidents for his second term, the main
contenders to replace Mr. Quayle are right there in the war meetings.

Quayle Seizes the Moment

So it is not only Mr. Bush's fate that hangs in the balance in the gulf, but
that of the Republican Party and some of those deemed -- by the party
cognoscenti or merely by their mothers -- as most likely to succeed the
President.

It is unseemly to show political aspirations in a time of war, of course. And
the President and his advisers like nothing more than to talk about how much
they like each other. But inevitably, a crisis casts a spotlight that reveals
the characters of leading players, creates stars and offers the ambitious a
chance to maneuver into more advantageous positions.

So far, the man who has moved most energetically to take advantage of the
situation is the Vice President. By adopting a high-profile role touring
military bases and talking to families of battle victims, Mr. Quayle hopes to
use the lectern-pounding promise that "this will not be another Vietnam" to
erase the campaign controversy about his service in the National Guard during
the Vietnam War.

Credibility by Being There

Quayle aides are delighted to answer inquiries about Mr. Quayle's work as a
Senator on winning financing for anti-missile defenses, hoping to gather
reflected glory from the success of the Patriot missile, the star of the gulf
arsenal.

Mr. Quayle's supporters gave him a highly publicized party for his 44th birthday
last week, clearly seeking to remind everyone that the Vice President with the
seamless face is not as young as he used to be.

Democrats and even many Republicans suggest that Mr. Quayle's quest to remove
himself as the favorite butt of jokes is hopeless. ("Dan Quayle wanted to go. He
thought they said golf crisis.") But other Republicans believe that while Mr.
Quayle may not be driving the policy he gained stature simply by being pictured
at critical war meetings.

"Just as Bush became less goofy simply by being there in the Reagan years, the
same thing is happening here," asserted a Republican close to the White House.

Sununu Gains by Fading

But Mr. Quayle is not considered the most talented member of the Bush team at
the art of getting close to the President in pictures. That honor goes to the
chief of staff. "There should be a special grand prize for the White House
photographer who can get a shot of Bush without Sununu in it," said Robert
Squier, a Democratic consultant.

Mr. Sununu, 51, whose supporters waved "Bush-Sununu" placards at the 1988
Republican National Convention, has also benefited from the war, which has
shifted attention away from a management style so raw that it touched off a
rebellion in the Republican Party during the budget negotiations last fall.

The humorist Dave Barry captured the feeling in the capital when he observed at
a recent Congressional press dinner: "I think we all agree we're confronting an
evil man in Saddam Hussein. The best measure of just how evil he's perceived to
be is this: When was the last time you heard anyone say the name John Sununu?"

Mr. Cheney, the 50-year-old Defense Secretary, has finally shed his anonymity
outside the Beltway and his former Congressional district in Wyoming. On talk
shows, at military briefings and in diplomatic forays, he has come across as
cool and capable; in the field in Saudi Arabia, he is a photogenic urban cowboy,
wearing boots, a blue work shirt and jeans.

Cheney: Strong But Cool

But the limelight also exposes potential flaws: Mr. Cheney has a Dukakis-like
emotional reserve and an acerbic side with a metallic edge. Like his friend Mr.
Baker, Mr. Cheney does not find the art of backslapping easy.

Of all the members of the war council, James Baker has been the most nervous
about the effects of a war from the very beginning, fearing that his political
future and Mr. Bush's could easily be buried in the sand halfway around the
world. The Secretary urged the President to rely more on sanctions and less on
making the military buildup the main thrust of the policy.

A half year and a war later, Mr. Baker still seems edgy. He offers his usual
controlled demeanor to the world, but there is tightness to his jaw, and he
never displays the "Top Gun" swagger of General Powell and Mr. Cheney. "He finds
this war distasteful," said a Baker friend. "He doesn't like situations he
cannot control."

While lauded for his diplomatic efforts, Mr. Baker has lost his status as the
Administration's only other celebrity besides the President. Now General Powell
and Mr. Cheney are hailed on Capitol Hill, as one Republican lawmaker put it, as
"the most effective combination we've seen in this country since Babe Ruth and
Lou Gehrig."

Baker: Puppeteer No Longer

As the country has watched Mr. Bush make his own decisions about going to war,
Mr. Baker has also lost his reputation as the President's puppeteer, an
exaggerated impression left over from the campaign.

Mr. Baker continues to be touted as a possible second-term substitute for Mr.
Quayle, should Mr. Bush feel he needs to make such a change. Political analysts
are watching closely to see if he switches his official residence to Wyoming by
next summer, which would allow him to be on the 1992 ticket with a fellow Texan.

Republicans who support Mr. Quayle are quick to point out that while Mr. Baker,
Mr. Cheney and General Powell may look good now, they have not gone through the
microscopic rigors of a national candidacy.

"Where does Colin Powell stand on abortion or affirmative action?" said a one
Republican who backs the Vice President. "Dan Quayle's great advantage is that
he's been through everything. There are no shots left to come."

Powell Already a Winner

It is easy to tell by the darts tossed at him by Quayle supporters that the big
winner in the public relations game is the four-star general, who has shown a
rare blend of silk and brass.

The President sounded tinny and blustering when he warned that Mr. Hussein was
"going to get his ass kicked." But General Powell sounded as menacing and
matter-of-fact as Dirty Harry when he said of the Iraqi Army, "First we're going
to cut it off and then we're going to kill it."

Republicans are not even sure if the 53-year-old soldier-statesman is a
Republican, and he won't tell, swatting away questions about his thoughts on the
Presidency. But Republicans speak his name reverently and offer odd bits of
Powell trivia that might come in handy during a campaign, like the fact that he
learned a bit of Yiddish when he worked as a youth for a Jewish furniture store
owner in the Bronx.

With a President and Vice President who are less than articulate, General Powell
offers a reminder of how valuable properly timed one-liners are.

Wistful Democrats

Asked at a Congressional hearing last week about the disproportionate number of
blacks serving in the military, General Powell said the armed forces were a way
of moving up in society. "I ain't done too bad," he said drily.

Besides being mentioned as a possible replacement for Mr. Quayle on the 1992
ticket, the tall, handsome general is the most coveted dinner party guest in the
capital. Gossip columns now put the name of his wife, Alma, in the bold print
reserved for celebrities.

Democrats are a bit envious of the new Administration star. As Representative
Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, said after watching Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf give a deft performance on one of the Sunday television talk shows:
"O.K., the Republicans can have Powell. We'll take Schwarzkopf."

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1198 words


War in the Gulf A12-14

Saddam Hussein called for patience and steadfastness as he assured his
compatriots that Iraq would win the war. Faced with major damage from allied
bombing, he displayed little readiness for peace.  Page A1

Few tanker drivers in Jordan want to take the risk A14

Some Palestinians are permitted to return to jobs A14

Defense Secretary Cheney returned to Washington after a weekend of listening to
advice from U.S. field commanders in Saudi Arabia. He said air attacks on Iraq
should continue before starting a ground war. A1

Iraqi communications are disrupted so badly that it takes 24 hours for President
Saddam Hussein to get amessage to the front by reasonably secure means, American
intelligence officers said. A12

War notebook: To Saddam Hussein. With ill wishes A12

G.I.'s boil but pay up as Saudi stores double prices A13

Complaints from the Soviet Union that the U.S. was on the verge of exceeding the
U.N. resolutions were brushed aside by Secretary of State Baker. But a
Republican Senator said the Soviets may be right. A13

The U.S. is accepting financial aid from other countries to pay for a war for
the first time since the American Revolution. So far the U.S. has received
pledges of more than $50 billion to cover military costs. A13

International A2-10, A15

The problems that plagued Panama for years remain 13 months after the U.S
invaded the country and arrested Gen. Noriega. It is a nation searching for its
identity and seems more linked than ever to Washington. A1

Salvadoran paper damaged by fire A3

Colombians revising charter get two sharp hints A8

Brazilians are skeptical about plans by President Fernando Collor de Mello to
fight rampant inflation. He once said he had "one bullet" to kill inflation.
Some feel his assault is no stronger than a pop gun. A7

Another trade dispute with Japan is heating up as members of Congress complain
that Tokyo is dragging itsfeet on its defenses. A key issue is whether Japan
needs a surveillance plane built by a U.S. company. D1

Japan nuclear accident may impede push for plants A3

Beijing Journal: Winter of one Chinese campus's discontent A4

Census likely to renew strife in Indian state A9

Lithuanians voted for independence by a margin of 9 to 1 in a referrendum. "This
will give strength and patience to our nation, qualities we will need in the
future," the republic's President said. A2

South Africa assailed in the weekend arrests of 11,000 A6

Fighting reported between Somalia's rebel groups A10

National A16-20, B7-9

A major air fare war erupted when British Airways cut its main trans-Atlantic
fare by a third. The move sharply increases financial pressure on its ailing
American rivals and reflects the steep fall in airline traffic caused by the
war.  A1

Nervous jokes about hidden cameras are a theme running through 500 hours of
police video tape -- evidence in an operation in Arizona that resulted in the
indictments of seven state legislators and 11 others. A1

At the frontier of gay life in the U.S. are the children of gay men and
lesbians. The oldest of this new wave of children is a few years from
adolescence, when they will probably face the harshest barbs from peers. A1

Rural areas are attracting retirees as the population of other rural areas has
been declining. Small towns that would once look for industry now want to be
retirement centers.  A16

A legacy of chronic budget deficits, insolvent banks and dependence on foreign
capital has undermined Washington's ability to keep economic growth on track,
many analysts fear.  A17

McLean Journal: The gulf war, between school bells A16

Report criticizes cleanup at atomic arms plants A20

Political memo: stars of war council look to new battle B7

Auto dealers are failing in droves as sales of new cars and trucks plummet.
Those who remain in business are adopting survival tactics intended to lure
customers, slash costs and improve overall service. D1

Fourteen living Vietnam veterans can find their names carved in the granite of
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial along with those killed in the war. "It's like
seeing your name on a gravestone," one said. A16

More poor children eligible for disability benefits B8

Regional B1-6

A crisis is growing at public colleges and universities in the region as a
result of state budget cutbacks: one of confidence in the ability of public
institutions to maintain their hard-won standards. A1

Problems at the Manhattan Bridge were caused not only by years of deferred
maintenance, the bane of the Williamsburg Bridge, but also by a design flaw
engineers say makes repairs more difficult and costly.  B1

Graffiti "hits" on subway trains have doubled from 1989 to 1990 in spite of a
vigorous and largely successful campaign to rid the New York City system of the
painted scrawls.  B1

A tie clip signed by Richard Nixon and an envelope with Millard Fillmore's
signature were just two items at the New York Autograph Show, where one Marilyn
Monroe was worth 10 George Bushes. B1 A small tax haven in New Jersey was
tranquil until the Borough Manager proposed disbanding the eight-member police
force. Much as small businesses in Teterboro love low taxes, they love police
protection more. B1

Labor unhappy with Weicker and new cuts B2

Three gunmen opened fire at a party in Brooklyn after they had been denied
admission. About 100 people were at the birthday party, 8 of whom, including a
12-year-old girl, were wounded. B3

L.I. girl, 16, slain on walk home from friend's house B2

Queens grocery owner plans for meeting to end boycott B4

Hearing today to consider case of the whistling skyscraper B3

Gaelic sports season may die in dispute over Bronx park B6

Business Digest D1

SportsMonday

Baseball: New analysis: What motivates Steinbrenner?  C2

Basketball: U.N.L.V. overruns Arkansas C1

Syracuse booster is told to resign C1

East edges West in sloppy game C4

Boxing: Leonard planning to move on C3

Column: Berkow on Leonard C3

Vecsey on the Lakers streak C4

Dog Show: It's a dog's life on circuit C1

Features: On Your Own C10

Football: N.F.L. hopefuls evaluated C4

Golf: Pavin wins Bob Hope Chrysler Classic C3

Hockey: Devils blank Canucks C6

Obituaries D10

John Sloan Dickey, Dartmouth president for 25 years

Rev. James Cleveland, gospel musician and a pastor

Sampson R. Field, ex-Philharmonic president

Arts/Entertainment

Orion Pictures looks to successes C11

Waiting is over for Mercedes Ruehl C13

Theater: "La Bete" C11

Dance: Role debuts at City Ballet C15

Word and Image: A tour of Los Angeles C11

David Halberstam on 20th century C14

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A18

Plan now for peace

The Keating curve of blame

Polish debt: Don't even ask

James L. Greenfield: Pan Am

Letters A18

William Safire: Mr. Bush hires a writer A19

Anthony Lewis: Is it our leaders, or is it us?  A19

Christopher Gacek: No peace talks after ground war starts A19

A. S. Byatt: The hue and cry of love A19

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

On Memorial To the Dead, 14 Who Live

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 623 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 10


Fourteen Americans can visit the Vietnam Veterans Memorial and find their names
carved in black granite among the names of those killed in the war.

"It was kind of scary," said Eugene J. Toni, who lost part of both legs in
Vietnam. "It's like seeing your name on a gravestone."

Mr. Toni's name is there because he was mistakenly listed as dead when a
Government clerk typed a wrong number into a computer. All 14 computer records
have been corrected, but the names in the continual chronological list on the
memorial cannot easily be erased from the polished granite.

14 Among 58,175 Names

There are 58,175 names of dead and missing carved on the wall. That 14 living
Army veterans were listed as dead was in the recesses of computerized Defense
Department records at the National Archives. While errors that resulted in the
omission of names have been acknowledged and names added to the memorial, only
three of the errors involving living veterans had been publicly acknowledged.
That occurred four years ago in response to direct questions that resulted from
readers' letters to an advice columnist.

Four of the 14 have been located by The Associated Press. Efforts to find the
other 10 have not succeeded, in part because military records do not include a
person's hometown at the time of enlistment.

Mr. Toni's journey to the wall began on an October morning in 1970 as a sergeant
with the 101st Airborne Division when he tripped a land mine on a reconnaissance
patrol in the mountainous jungle west of Hue.

Twenty years later, Mr. Toni, 41 years old, said: "I woke up one day and decided
I didn't want to be a double amputee any more. I felt like a prisoner who wasn't
getting any time off for good behavior."

He sought treatment for post-traumatic stress syndrome and "part of the
treatment was that I went down to the wall," which is not far from his home in
Virginia.

Standing under a nearly full moon on a mild night last March, he flipped through
the paperback directory of names on the wall, looking for friends. He turned to
the T's in a long-shot search for an uncle he had never met.

Instead, he found his own name.

Three years earlier in Cambridge, Minn., Andrew J. Hilden, 44, and his wife,
Shirley, visited one of the half-size touring replicas of the wall and found his
name.

Willard D. Craig, a 44-year-old former private first class who lives in
Walkersville, W.Va., was called by an aunt in 1985 when his niece found his
name.

And Darrall E. Lausch, 44, heard in 1987 when a relative told his wife that his
name was published by The Detroit News in a list of those from Michigan killed
in the war.

Mr. Toni, a purchasing manager for the Navy, later demanded an explanation.
"Somebody made a keypunch error transcribing the Army data," he said.

Sherry Lawrence of the Army Personnel Command agreed that many of the errors
appeared to be such mistakes. Other Government records do not duplicate the
errors.

The only way a name could be removed from the wall is if a panel cracked and was
replaced. The National Park Service supervisor, Arnold Goldstein, said the fund
had bought blank granite and errors could be removed if a panel was replaced.

Here is a list of the 10 living veterans whose names are on the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial and who have not been located. Birth dates are given when the records
contain them.

BEDKER, Pfc. Robert Lee, born Sept. 13, 1946.
BOOTZ, Specialist 5 Clark T.
COX, Sgt. Carl.
GILREATH, Specialist 4 James R.
HUCKABAY, Pfc. Dennis C.
MIRACLIA, Sgt. Christopher G.
MONROE, Sgt. Rockney D.
MORALES, Specialist 4 Alexander Manzanares; born July 15, 1947.
NORTHERN, Specialist 4 Frankie.
OUELLETTE, Staff Sgt. Daniel P.

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Eugene J. Toni, who lost part of both legs in the Vietnam War,
points to his name on Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington among those of the
dead. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Waking Up a Complacent America

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 14; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 984 words



The Next Century
By David Halberstam
126 pages. William Morrow & Company. $16.95.

The title of David Halberstam's engaging new book, "The Next Century," is a
shade on the coy side. One expects him to have drawn on the broad knowledge of
various worlds he has stored up while writing such books as "The Best and the
Brightest," about America in Vietnam, "The Powers That Be," about the rise of
certain media giants in this country, and "The Reckoning," about the eclipse of
Detroit's automotive industry by Japan's.

Photo: One expects that from this knowledge he will have projected what the next
century will be like, or at the very least which societies will be dominant in
the world.

But not at all. Instead, Mr. Halberstam takes a tour of this past century. He
begins his book with a governors' conference early in 1989 where he was one of
two speakers, and he describes how he disagreed with the other speaker, Henry A.
Kissinger, who spoke of the Gorbachev revolution in Eastern Europe
condescendingly and was "even more condescending about those poor Americans who
were taking it all so seriously."


Mr. Halberstam then travels to Eastern Europe and examines the economic
prospects of the newly liberated countries. He concludes that prosperity may
well come to them sooner or later, but that whatever opportunities finally
arise, it will be Germany, not the United States, that will be in a position to
exploit them.

Because we have been bemused by the cold war. We have been locked in combat with
the Soviet Union like "two scorpions in a jar," as Mr. Halberstam paraphrases J.
Robert Oppenheimer, "each able to give a nuclear sting to the other, but only at
the price of its own death." Yet despite the "marvelous opportunities
squandered" and the "unseemly national arrogance manifested by both sides" in
this struggle, "future historians will sum up the 40-year struggle with the
Soviets not harshly but in fact quite gently," Mr. Halberstam writes.

They "will concentrate on something altogether different in this period: the
rise of nonwhite nations first to political independence and then somewhat more
slowly and erratically to genuine economic independence." Which takes him to the
other side of the world and into an analysis of the rise of Japan economically
and the comparative decline of the United States.

In short, Mr. Halberstam's essay is a variation on the theme whose most pointed
expression he credits to Chalmers Johnson, the Japanologist: "The Cold War is
over; the Japanese won." But it remains to be seen to whom the next century of
Mr. Halberstam's title belongs. Judging from his tantalizing conclusion, it
could be Japan or Germany, the Eastern European countries or the "Little Tigers"
of Asia. It probably won't be the United States, unless it can finally get its
act together, which Mr. Halberstam seems rather to doubt.


But the question remains, if the ground Mr. Halberstam covers is so familiar,
why should one bother to read "The Next Century"? The answer is simply that by
the time you discover he's not going to describe the 21st century, one is too
engaged by his discussion of the 20th to stop.

As readers of his previous books well know, he has a way with seductive
generalizations, even if they are not always his own. So he writes of the
Vietnam War: "America was, in the words of the German writer Gunter Grass, twice
punished by Vietnam -- first, because we had done it and, second, because we
never came to terms with what we had done." And on World War II: "Japan's
military strike throughout East Asia was the beginning of the end for the
mystique of the white man's power, and it accelerated the demand for
independence."

Whether or not such observations are true, they serve wonderfully to focus the
mind on Mr. Halberstam's perspective, which of course is the significance for
America of Japan's triumph in this century. Not the success of Japan's economy,
by the way, but the triumph instead of Japan's educational system, and the
relative decline of the United States's.

And just as you begin to worry about his swooping from one overview to the next,
he plummets to the ground and tells a firsthand anecdote about how the
Solidarity movement in Poland learned how to make use of Western reporters. Or
he details the remarkable career of a businessman named Kazuo Inamori, who is
the head of a spectacularly successful ceramics manufacturer called Kyocera
(Kyoto Ceramics) that the Japanese believe will be the Sony of the 21st century,
and who worked so hard during his company's rise that he was known as Mr. A.M.
because he never left work until the small hours of the morning.


The example of Mr. Inamori, who on his visits to New York City used to eat at
Tad's Steaks off Times Square to stay within his budget, brings Mr. Halberstam
to the heart of his concern for America's future, the loss of a sense of urgency
to compete with the rising economies of the world.

"I still do not think we as a nation get it," he writes. "Again and again we
look for excuses why the Japanese do things better than we do. If we are being
beaten, then the rules must be wrong; someone must be cheating." But: "Their
success, I think, is of a whole; it has no one secret."

As one prominent Japanese he talked to sees it, what America needs is some sort
of shock to jar it "out of its complacency, an event on the order of Sputnik."
"The Next Century" is far from shock therapy. But by addressing readers
intelligently instead of bludgeoning them with dire statistics, it catches the
ear.

Mr. Halberstam quotes a colleague of Kazuo Inamori's on the industrialist's
capacity to dream: "But he does not dream up long-term visions. He dreams in
tiny increments." Maybe it is possible to be shocked in tiny increments. If it
is, then Mr. Halberstam, with "The Next Century," will have done his share to
bring us to our senses.

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: David Halberstam (Bruce Plotkin/Morrow)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Dark Side of the Human Condition

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 767 words



Hardware River
By Alyson Hagy
190 pages. Poseidon Press. $18.95.

"You're just afraid that you've failed him," says a character in one of Alyson
Hagy's carefully assembled new stories. "You're afraid to feel at fault." He is
talking to the mother of a young man, whom he has just seduced and emotionally
violated. "Well, it is your fault," he goes on, "you raised him solo and free.
And now he'll live no better than the two of us. He'll get broken again. And
again. Harder and worse. I'm sorry to say that to a mother, but it's true."


This dark view of the human condition permeates all the tales in this slim,
finely polished volume. Something frightening has happened to all its
characters, be it disillusion, death, rejection, illness or the simple loss of
innocence that comes with age and experience. A woman's husband dies in Vietnam.
A man is prevented from seeing his child. A couple recognize the impossibility
of their love. A mother learns of her daughter's death. In some cases, the
characters flee from the past, unable or unwilling to face up to what has
happened to them. In other cases, they withdraw from the world, eschewing
further human contact for the safety of solipsistic routine.

In one of the book's longer and most powerful stories, "The Grief Is Always
Fresh," Ms. Hagy -- a teacher of creative writing at the University of Michigan
and the author of one previous collection of fiction -- creates a kaleidoscopic
portrait of a small town over New Year's week, revealing how each of the people
who live there are coping with private griefs.


Although it pivots on the brutal murder of a pregnant teen-age girl, the tale
spins open in many directions, revealing how her death triggers disturbing
memories in family, friends and strangers alike. The reader meets the girl's
distraught mother and her two callous boyfriends, and also gets to know
neighbors who live beyond this immediate circle. Among them are a woman named
Sarah, who is reminded by the murder of the child she lost to miscarriage so
many years ago; Sarah's husband, Parker, a newspaper reporter, who is currently
traveling in Central America, and her lover, Jack, who offers her a temporary
refuge from her fears.

Ms. Hagy's method in this story is delicately elliptical: she does not force
these people or their experiences into a preconceived shape; rather she lets
their feelings assume a gentle musical pattern, full of emotional harmonies and
echoes. The resulting story is affecting because it creates the illusion of
reality, that sense that life is both random and eerily patterned, shocking yet
inevitable in its shape. It leaves the reader with the sense, in Flaubert's
words, that the author is "present everywhere, yet visible nowhere."

In the volume's other tales, Ms. Hagy's manipulative hand is considerably more
evident. The title story, "Hardware River," sets forth the gothic tale of a
lonely young man named Lute and a scheming woman named Marlet. Symbols and
portentous omens proliferate throughout its narrative; only in the last two
pages does the reader learn the bloody and violent outcome of this incongruous
couple's meeting.


Information is similarly withheld to build suspense in "Ballad and Sadness," a
short, unsatisfying tale about a woman trying to escape memories of her brother,
who was sent to jail for sexually molesting young boys. And in "Kettle of Hawks"
-- a lengthy tale about the doomed friendship between a fatherless boy and a
taciturn older man -- heavy foreshadowing is again used to propel the story
forward. Unfortunately, the reader knows early on what is going to happen, and
comes to resent the author's constant reminders that these expectations will be
fulfilled.

An additional problem with this story, and some of the others, is Ms. Hagy's
language, which repeatedly coagulates into awkward metaphors and willfully
poetic phrases. "He was growing," she writes of her hero "Abraham -- fruit of
his mother's grief -- was now the weed in a lonely man's heart." Or: "Throughout
their childhood they were well cared for, cupped in a world of rich grace and
intelligence until the shell of their fine skins could hardly be separated from
the polish of their fine lives."

When Ms. Hagy abandons such self-conscious prose for more straightforward
writing, her stories take on a new immediacy. While this is a decidedly uneven
and often vexing collection, two tales -- "The Grief Is Always Fresh" and "The
Field of Lost Shoes" -- prove that Ms. Hagy, at her best, can be both a
compelling storyteller and a lucid writer.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alyson Hagy (Mike Mouradian/Poseidon Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Malaysia Trading Plan Seeks a Unified Voice

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 6; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1199 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia


East Asia may be the site of some of the world's fastest-growing economic
powers, but historically it has always been so fractious and competitive that it
could never be organized into anything resembling a trading bloc.

Now, with the the unification of the European market approaching and feelings of
alienation from the United States rising, Malaysia is trying a debated effort to
organize the region into what it delicately calls an "economic grouping" of
Asian nations.

Little Discussed in West

The plan, laid out two months ago by Mahathir Mohamad, Malaysia's Prime Minister
and the steward of one of Asia's biggest economic success stories, has been
little discussed in the West, but it has become one of the hottest topics in
East Asia.

It is still far from clear that Mr. Mahathir's East Asian economic grouping will
ever come to pass, especially in a region that has never been able to translate
its political alliances into economic ones. While his idea has attracted some
support, its success hinges on the willingness of one participant: Japan, whose
economy is the linchpin of the rest of Asia.

So far, Japanese politicians are skittish about any economic alliance that would
seem to pit it against Europe and the United States, which has developed a
free-trade agreement with Canada and is working toward one with Mexico.

The next few months will be crucial, as Malaysia completes its first round of
explanations and seeks to create a formal trading body. It could pick up more
support, especially if the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade talks fails,
paving the way for fiercer direct competition.

Trade Barriers Common

Many Asian countries are known for erecting huge trade barriers to protect their
infant industries. Malaysia produces manufactured goods that it cannot sell to
its closest neighbors, and it slaps huge taxes on imported cars and other goods.

But Mr. Mahathir, who in 10 years as Malaysia's Prime Minister has become a
powerful and sometimes feared figure in Southeast Asian politics, has clearly
struck a chord with his idea for a more organized and aggressive Asian economic
alliance.

"Singly, we will have no hope of arguing our case," he said. "Only together will
we have more bargaining power and be in a better position when negotiating for
free trade."

No one, not even some of Mr. Mahathir's Cabinet members, can define precisely
what kind of economic bloc he is trying to form. Everyone seems to agree that it
would include the six members of the Association of South East Asian Nations, or
Asean: Thailand, Singapore, the Philippines, Indonesia, Brunei and Malaysia. Mr.
Mahathir has said that the group will also include Vietnam, Myanmar (formerly
Burma), Taiwan, Hong Kong and South Korea.

But the list excludes countries populated chiefly by non-Asian races, including
Australia and New Zealand. For weeks, Malaysia's Minister for International
Trade and Industry, Rafidah Aziz, has been traveling through Asia seeking
members.

"What we are talking about is enhancing regional trade among countries with
commonalities here in Asia," said Mrs. Rafidah, who supports Mr. Mahathir.

The Prime Minister's plan has not been welcomed by everyone, and Malaysia has
been amending parts of it. Indonesia has expressed no enthusiasm, and Taiwan and
Hong Kong, among others, have been silent.

The reasons for the objections are not clear, but some Asian officials say they
fear that a poisoning of relations with the United States or Japan could hurt
their best chances for export. Last week, Mr. Mahathir said he thought the
United States was trying to influence some nations not to join the trade group,
which American officials in Kuala Lumpur deny.

In the last two months, since Mr. Mahathir took his Cabinet and neighboring
nations by surprise with the proposal, the description of the trade grouping has
begun to shift. He originally spoke of a trading bloc, immediately prompting
fears that he was looking for a way to create trade barriers against countries
outside Asia.

The word "bloc" was then deemed offensive because it could scare away Japan and
could raise the ire of American officials, who have not supported the plan.
Malaysia now is speaking of a "grouping" that would work within multilateral
trading groups, like the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.

Officials in Kuala Lumpur also insist it would "complement" other organizations,
like Asean, a 24-year old political alliance that has never been effective as an
economic entity.

The Plan's Objective

The object, Malaysia says, is to turn Southeast Asia into a leading exporting
force and an investment haven, to give it power to match Europe and America. So
far, exporting is dominated by Japan and, to a lesser degree, the nations known
as the "four tigers": South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore. Only Japan
enjoys such political influence.

"The whole line is that this will not exclude anybody, as long as they look
Asian," one Western diplomat here said. "But no one can say what 'complement'
means. And this is hardly a group of like-minded countries they are getting
together."

Indeed, it is a collection of nations at different stages of development.

At one end of the spectrum are the "tigers." They have grown so quickly in the
last decade that they are looking for cheap labor and investment opportunities
abroad. Then comes nations like Thailand, perhaps Asia's greatest success story
in the late 1980's, though it has begun to show signs of choking on its
overexpansion. Malaysia follows, a country that has quickly moved beyond the
days of tin and rubber plantations to become a manufacturing center.

But also in the group are countries mired in problems of economic reform, like
China, Myanmar, North Korea and Vietnam, all of which have discussed various
degrees of economic reform, but have actively resisted political liberalization.
Each has considerable poverty and lack a skilled work force.

Capitalists and Communists

If they joined, it would be the first time that some of the world's most fervent
capitalists, like the Singaporeans, joined some of its most unreconstructed
Communists, like the Vietnamese, in a trading group.

But the critical element to the grouping is Japan, which still has no formal
relations with North Korea and is on strained terms with Myanmar and Vietnam.
Some Japanese officials have suggested that Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu may be
unenthusiastic about the proposal.

So, at first, were most other countries. But Singapore changed its mind last
month, and its new Prime Minister, Goh Chok Tong, said the grouping would give
small Asian countries a voice they now lack. The Philippines has also been
mildly supportive, and China termed the idea interesting. Indonesia and
Thailand, Malaysia's biggest competitors, have all but dismissed the concept.

The United States has said little, but American diplomats in Asia seem
unenthused, particularly because the United States would be excluded.

"It will take some time to fully develop a view," said one American diplomat
here, "because no one can quite figure out what the idea is yet."

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Our Towns;
As Bombs Fall And Flags Fly, Business Booms

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 770 words

DATELINE: BLOOMFIELD, N.J.


Dan Connors thought he'd never see anything quite so bizarre at work. Squads of
silent men in nice suits pulled open every drawer, every door, every closet,
every box in the Annin Company factory here. They took nothing, these smile-free
fellows, just poked through everything.

At every entrance they stationed guards in equally nice suits with
government-issue sunglasses. They wouldn't admit Mr. Connors until the company
president identified him.

That was the September week in 1988 when George Bush came to New Jersey to wrap
his campaign for President in the American flag at one of the nation's biggest
flag factories. Now, of course, George Bush is President Bush. He's leading one
of modern history's largest military operations. And it's got all wrapped up in
flags.

It's a funny thing about the American flag. Its viewers seem to see in it the
color of the moment, like the same ocean shining deep blue on a sunny day and
lurking dark gray beneath clouds. The flag has always been red, white and blue.
Its design hasn't changed in three decades. But now the flag business sure has
changed on Llewellyn Street, where Helga Hart is banging so many machine staples
into little wooden flagpoles every day that her right foot is numb even before
overtime.

If many families get flags freshly folded from caskets, feelings could change.
But for now, the Persian Gulf operation has been great for the flag. Even on
wintry days, flags appear in front of houses all over the suburbs. On businesses
and restaurants. Car and truck radio antennas.

In Hartford, flags are so scarce that radio stations broadcast listener tips on
which stores still have some. WOR gave them away and reported its phone lines
were never so jammed. Professional and collegiate athletes wear flags, while
Connecticut high school wrestlers seek flag stickers for the backs of mat shoes.
Even New Jersey's criminals want flags; someone stole the flag from the South
Orange Rescue Squad the other night.

There have been many peaks of flag fascination since 1820, when Alexander Annin
began making them as a sideline at his New York hardware business. Since 1847,
that's all the family company has done -- make flags, through good times and bad
times, slow times and fast times.

Congress gave Medals of Honor for capturing Civil War flags. But the best flag
times are not just about causes; usually they also in volve an easily identified
bad guy to fly the flag against. World War II was a good flag time. Although the
48-star flag hadn't changed since 1912, everyone wanted a new one to support the
war effort, and there were obvious bad guys.

The Korean War was a little fuzzy; who'd ever heard of Kim Il Sung? But 1959
brought in two new states, which made obsolete every flag in existence. Then
came Vietnam, which so divided this country that many of the flags not being
burned went into hiding. The Bicentennial ignited great flag passion, although
interest, uh, waned sharply on July 5, 1976.

There have been brief bubbles of flag fervency since -- the return of hostages
from Iran, for instance, the 1984 Olympics. And the Reagan Presidency seemed to
elevate flag exposure generally. Always, the South was the strongest market; the
Midwest was good too, if the economy was strong.

The nation's half-dozen major flag manufacturers were aware of the United
Nations January deadline to Iraq. Orders were stronger than usual all autumn.

But nothing prepared them for the morning after the first allied air attacks.
"It was an explosion of orders," said Mr. Connors, "from everywhere." The cause
was generally acceptable, the bad guy easily identifiable and the number of
families and friends touched by military involvement many.

Within hours of Baghdad's bombing, the Memorial Day inventory was gone. Because
Americans couldn't get flags, they wanted them even more, especially the
3-by-5-foot homeowner size.

With overtime and a second shift, the factory here ships over 10,000 flags a
week, plus 40,000 on Mrs. Hart's little wooden sticks. If no more orders came
in, the three-story brick factory on a quiet suburban street might catch up in
seven weeks. Alfreda Kruk stiches white stripes to red stripes 200 yards at a
time. Evangeline Archondes bangs grommets one after another. Rouba Khalia snips
loose threads. Even Guilford Kempadoo, a supervisor, labels.

They're not famous like Betsy Ross. They're more like Mary Pickersgill. She's
the little-known seamstress who responded to a rush order during a previous flag
peak. It was her handiwork that Francis Scott Key saw through the rockets' red
glare.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: WASHINGTON TALK;
The Senator, the Press And Crossed Swords

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 722 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 11


The lan guage of modern politics has be come as bland and as standardized as
fast food, the tiniest variations on a very limited set of themes. In that
setting, Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican of Wyoming, stands out, railing
against "boobs" and "bug-eyed zealots" and Democrats with "burning bosoms" for
the Presidency.

Some of his political opponents said there was more arrogance than charm to his
broadsides, but Mr. Simpson acquired a reputation in Washington as a quotable,
witty man. Still, Mr. Simpson's most recent attack, against the CNN reporter
Peter Arnett, has prompted a flurry of columns, editorials and angry statements
that this time the Wyoming Republican went too far.

Mr. Arnett, who won the Pulitzer Prize for his reporting in Vietnam, was in
Baghdad when the war began and was the only correspondent for a major American
news organization allowed to stay. As his broadcasts note, he has been operating
under strict Iraqi censorship, and the White House has urged viewers to regard
his reports -- like the one where the Iraqis asserted that a baby milk factory
was bombed -- with skepticism. Reporters noted that their reports from the
Persian Gulf went through Government censorship as well.

It had become one of the more delicate issues in the increasingly strained
relationship between the press and the Government over war coverage, part of a
constant struggle over the line between journalistic and military needs.


In such a climate, Mr. Simpson touched a very raw nerve in a lunch with
reporters last Thursday when he said that Mr. Arnett "is what we used to call in
my day a sympathizer." According to The Washington Post, he added, "He was
active in the Vietnam War and he won a Pulitzer Prize largely because of his
anti-Government material, and he was married to a Vietnamese whose brother was
active in the Vietcong. I called that sympathizers in my early days in the
Second World War." Mr. Simpson was born in 1931.

Friends and colleagues of Mr. Arnett rushed to his defense. David Halberstam, a
longtime friend who also won a Pulitzer for his coverage of Vietnam, described
the Simpson allegations as "an incredibly cheap shot" that were "just dead
wrong" and "extremely painful" to Mr. Arnett's family. Mr. Halberstam also
suggested that Mr. Simpson was carrying the water for the Bush Administration,
pushing forward an almost "subliminal" campaign to build anti-press sentiment
among the public.

Mr. Simpson, a longtime friend of President Bush and the No. 2 Republican in the
Senate, dismissed that charge. "I said it all by myself," he said in a telephone
interview today. "I never had a signal from anyone."

The allegations about Mr. Arnett's background, Mr. Simpson said, came from a
source whose identity "I would protect as jealously as any journalist would
protect theirs." But, Mr Simpson added, "Arnett's personal background isn't the
issue."

The issue, he said, is why Mr. Arnett would stay in Iraq under these tightly
controlled conditions. It would be different, the Republican asserted, if the
reporter were hiding out in the Iraqi countryside, sending out untrammelled
news.


Mr. Simpson intends to keep pushing, he said, confident that many Americans "are
appalled to see that kind of coverage coming out of an enemy country."

This is not Mr. Simpson's first foray into press criticism. It did not take
commentators very long to recall that the Wyoming Republican had engaged in some
of his most spirited press-bashing last April in a meeting between President
Saddam Hussein of Iraq and a delegation of senators. According to a transcript
made public by Iraq, Mr. Simpson said, "I believe that your problems lie with
the Western media, and not with the U.S. Government."

He went on to describe the press as "haughty and pampered" and "very cynical"
and suggested, "What I advise is that you invite them to come here and see for
themselves." Mr. Simpson said that transcript was a very partial rendering of a
lengthy meeting, which included questioning and criticism of the Iraqi
President.

The moral of the Simpson-Arnett episode may be that in times of war the
interests of the press and politicians inevitably collide, a President's allies
are quick to discipline troublesome reporters, and the art of press-bashing
loses much of its charm.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Alan K. Simpson (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Smear from the Whip

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 228 words


Senator Alan Simpson of Wyoming let fly last week with words too snide even for
Bart Simpson. At a Washington press luncheon, the Republican whip said that
Peter Arnett, CNN's correspondent in Baghdad, is "what we used to call in my day
a sympathizer. . . . He was active in the Vietnam War and he won a Pulitzer
Prize largely because of his anti-Government material." Those sentiments awaken
thoughts of Senator Joe McCarthy.

Asked for evidence, Senator Simpson says that a journalist he trusts told him so
in a private conversation. And who was that? Well, rejoins the Senator,
reporters refuse to name their sources, so why can't he? By depending so limply
on anonymous gossip, the Senator risks turning a reputation for strong opinions
into a reputation for shooting from the hip.

What makes Mr. Simpson's distemper particularly perverse is that last April, on
a visit to Iraq, he commiserated with Saddam Hussein over the arrogance of the
Western press. He recalls citing a Newsweek cover headline, "Butcher of
Baghdad," as an example of negative reporting. This was the same trip in which
Senator Robert Dole apologized to Mr. Hussein for a Voice of America commentary
criticizing Iraq's human rights record.

People who know him assert that Alan Simpson is no clumsy right-wing caricature.
People who don't may understandably have their doubts.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Pause for Peace

BYLINE: By Paul D. Wellstone; Paul D. Wellstone, a Democrat, is Senator from
Minnesota.

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 786 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Before America hurries into an incalculably costly ground war, the Bush
Administration should order a temporary halt in allied bombing that would give
third parties such as Jordan and Iran a chance to mediate an Iraqi withdrawal
from Kuwait. No one can guarantee that Saddam Hussein would accept a peace
proposal. But given the fearsome consequences of continued fighting, we must
make the effort.

America sits transfixed by images of war and recoils at the consequences of
Saddam Hussein's brutality. Yet, along with anger and revulsion at his disregard
for human values, each day we feel more sharply the costs of warfare and wonder
where Desert Storm will lead us, the region and the world.

By looking at how quickly the number of Americans killed in action doubled with
just the first minor ground skirmish, at Khafji, the nation has begun to
recognize the severe human cost of attacking well-entrenched Iraqi forces. The
White House chief of staff, John Sununu, has acknowledged that Desert Storm will
cost at least $50 billion in 1991.

But have Americans focused squarely on the geopolitical implications of a major
ground war? Have we asked whether we are prepared to have such a war be the
first -- and effectively the only -- priority in American domestic and foreign
policy for the immediate future? Can we afford to ignore Soviet actions in the
Baltic states? At what cost do we look the other way as Syria tightens its grip
on Lebanon? And are we asking whether a victory over Mr. Hussein might prove
Pyrrhic?

Grant that after a protracted land battle and thousands of allied and Iraqi
casualties we drive him from Kuwait, what value will the victory hold if we have
permanently embittered a generation in the Arab world? What good will victory be
if we destabilize regimes in Egypt, Jordan and the North African states? How
will victory over Iraq contribute to solving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict?

Since the war's start, serious unrest has been growing throughout the Muslim
world, from North Africa to Pakistan. Despite the Scud terror attacks Israel has
stayed out of the fighting, but has taken increasingly stern measures against
Palestinians in the West Bank.

The Administration adamantly opposes negotiations now. Rejecting Iranian talk of
mediation, the President and State Department have said no negotiations until
Iraq withdraws from Kuwait. But a strong majority of Americans thinks otherwise.

According to an early February poll, conducted by ICR Survey Research for the
Vietnam Veterans of America Foundation, six in 10 Americans want to start
diplomatic efforts before allied forces commit to a ground war. Shouldn't we
listen?

The conventional wisdom is that it is too late to debate. The U.S. is committed;
a ground war is inevitable. I do not accept that view.

First, there is no reason to become embroiled in a ground war. Iraq is
surrounded, isolated and growing weaker economically and militarily. The
international sanctions are strangling its economy. Our bombing has demolished
Iraq's nuclear weapons program and its chemical and biological weapons-making
facilities.

We have greatly diminished Iraq's ability to threaten its neighbors; continued
sanctions would insure that that remains the case. By placing Patriot missiles
in Israel, we have dramatized Israel's security concerns while holding together
the coalition and preventing wider war.

Second, we must keep our war aims limited and make clear our postwar intentions.
Recent Administration rhetoric gives the impression that our goals have
escalated well beyond those of the U.N. resolutions and now include overthrow of
the Iraqi Government, and, possibly, occupation of Iraq.

Third, and most important, we should announce a pause in the bombing and tell
Saddam Hussein that now is the time to talk. Such a pause would be conditional,
and would allow immediate allied retaliation against any Iraqi attack, forbid
resupply of troops in Kuwait and, of course, keep effective economic sanctions
in place.

In short, a pause would give us a chance to explore a regional solution short of
total war. We could then encourage third parties who already have indicated an
interest, such as Jordan and Iran, to mediate an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait.

In politics, all too often perception is reality. Many in the Arab and Moslem
world view the Administration's "new world order" as the unwelcome imposition of
a Pax Americana on problems that are the Arab world's. Before we commit
ourselves to a costly ground war on Mr. Saddam's terms against Muslims,
President Bush and the nation should stand back and ask if there is not a more
promising way to establish enduring peace in the Middle East.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: COMMANDERS;
Top Brass in Gulf: Profiles in Uniformed Authority

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1740 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, Feb. 11


Until last August, the United States Central Command was something of an odd
creature in military circles.

The command was originally designed as a rapid-response force to insure access
to oil in the Middle East and to take care of other American interests in the
region. It had responsibility for a broad area from Kenya to Pakistan, but was
based in Florida because of political sensitivities in its region. Led by a
four-star Army general, the Central Command had very few troops of its own -- in
comparison with other commands, which had forces numbering of thousands.

Yet now, with 505,000 troops, more than 1,200 planes and 120 ships, the Central
Command and its leader, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, now preside over the largest
American military operation since Vietnam.

Four service commanders and their troops are assigned to General Schwarzkopf,
but the units have their own bases -- the Central Command Marines in California,
for example, and the Air Force in South Carolina.

Thus, the four commanders coordinate with each other only during an occasional
war game -- unlike other commands in which operations are more integrated -- and
the Persian Gulf operation has thus been more of a challenge to the Central
Command and its top generals than it might have been for another command.
Following are sketches of the senior commanders in the Persian Gulf.

Maj. Gen. Robert B. Johnston

Central Command Chief of Staff

For television viewers around the world, the square-jawed countenance of Maj.
Gen. Robert B. Johnston has become one of the faces most closely identified with
the Persian Gulf war.

For much of the last two weeks, General Johnston, 53 years old, the Central
Command's Chief of Staff, has briefed reporters on the daily progress of the
war.

It is a natural role for the general, whose main responsibility is to coordinate
the activities of the headquarters staff in Riyadh, now numbering 1,000, that
answers to General Schwarzkopf. It supplies him with information, makes plans
and coordinates logistics. General Johnston seeks to make sure that the
individual services' plans mesh.

Only two months after General Johnston left his job as commander of Marine
reserves to take his job as Central Command Chief of Staff, Iraq invaded Kuwait.
He and the command's bureaucracy were on their way to Saudi Arabia.

The staff first worked out of hotel rooms in Riyadh and any other space they
could find.

Security concerns eventually prompted them to take quarters in Saudi Government
buildings and offices.

Born and raised in Edinburgh, Scotland, the son of a jam-actory worker, General
Johnston emigrated to the United States when he was 18. After graduating from
San Diego State College as an English major, he joined the Marines to fulfill
what he felt was a "commitment to serve this country." A veteran of two tours in
Vietnam, and a battalion commander of American forces in Lebanon in the early
1980's, General Johnston spent three years as head of the Marine Officer
Candidate School, putting his stamp on many of the young lieutenants now serving
in the gulf.

Vice Adm Stanley R. Arthur

Central Command Naval Commander

When Vice Adm. Stanley R. Arthur was dispatched to the Persian Gulf last
December to head the allied naval forces, it was a homecoming of sorts. He had
been scheduled to assume the leadership of Central Command naval forces even
before the Persian Gulf crisis began.

The 55-year-old San Diego native had plied gulf waters in 1983 as the first
commander of the very small standing American naval force of the new Central
Command.

"I didn't do it right the first time, so they sent me back to try again,"
Admiral Arthur jokingly tells his aides.

From the high-tech command ship Blue Ridge in the central Persian Gulf, Admiral
Arthur directs 120 American vessels, including 6 aircraft carriers, andmore than
70 ships from 18 other countries, in the gulf, the Red Sea and the northern
Arabian Sea.

He is responsible for the 80,000 men and women the Navy has in the gulf. His
duties include coordinating the naval blockade against Iraq; supervising the
activities of the two battleships, six aircraft carriers and other ships in the
gulf; providing close air support for ground troops and preparing the more than
18,000 marines who are now on ships in the gulf for a possible amphibious
assault.

Trained as a naval aviator, Admiral Arthur flew more than 500 combat missions in
his A-4 Skyhawk in the Vietnam War without being shot down, earning him the call
sign "Magic."

A strapping affable man, Admiral Arthur took over the naval command just six
weeks before allied forces attacked Iraq.

His previous job as the Navy's chief logistics officer prepared him for the
assignment. Admiral Arthur was responsible for the transport ships that
delivered 95 percent of the equipment and materiel to the gulf.

Friends and colleagues say the admiral is something of a practical joker and was
known to race radio-powered toy cars in the halls outside his Pentagon office.
And, at the last two Navy Christmas parties, until last year, he would dress as
a giant tree and anonymously wander the Pentagon halls.

Full-size cars are his real hobby. Friends recall more than once seeing Admiral
Arthur in his dress white uniform tinkering with some poor soul's sputtering
engine in the Pentagon parking lot.

Lieut. Gen. John J. Yeosock

Central Command Army Commander

As commander of more than 280,000 Army troops in Saudi Arabia, Lieut. Gen. John
J. Yeosock leads the bulwark of allied forces in the gulf.

Any land cam paign is likely to entail a lightning dash on a huge scale across
the desert involving hundreds of armored and mechanized units.

Positioning and sustaining that force with food, water, fuel and other supplies
pose stiff challenges to the 53-year-old former tank commander.

A lean, gravelly voiced product of Pennsylvania's coal country, General Yeosock
(pronounced YO-sock) waves away with a sweep of one of his huge cigars any
suggestion that air power alone can dislodge Saddam Hussein's forces from
Kuwait.

Yet colleagues say he is not eager to plunge into a messy ground battle until
the aerial bombardment has significantly weakened and demoralized Iraq's
entrenched troops, particularly the Republican Guard.

General Yeosock followed General Schwarzkopf's footsteps at the Valley Forge
Military Academy, not far from Philadelphia, where both men were valedictorians
three years apart.

Joining the Army proved a tougher task. Blocked from entering West Point because
his eyesight was below academy standards, General Yeosock joined the R.O.T.C. at
Pennsylvania State University. In the Army, he became an armor officer and
served in Vietnam.

General Yeosock has an intimate understanding of the complex geopolitical makeup
of the Middle East. In the early 1980's, he headed an American military team
summoned to help modernize the Saudi Arabian National Guard.

He succeeds on grit and street smarts, aides say. "I operate on caffeine,
nicotine and adrenaline," he recently told U.S. News & World Report.

Lieut. Gen. Walter E. Boomer

Central Command Marine commander

The senior marine in the Persian Gulf war is also in no hurry to wage a costly
ground battle.

The command er, Lieut. Gen. Walter E. Boom er, 52, served two tours of duty in
Vietnam and saw at first hand the consequences of poor planning.

As an adviser to a South Vietnamese battalion, he watched as nearly half the
unit was wiped out in a North Vietnamese offensive in 1972.

When Iraqi forces attacked the Saudi border town of Khafji earlier this month,
possibly seeking to draw American troops into a premature land battle, marines
helped Saudi soldiers drive out the Iraqis.

"We will do it when we're ready, not when he's ready," General Boomer recently
told a group of pool reporters. "I never believed it would be over as quick as
some thought it might be. It never has in the history of warfare -- at least
since we've been using airplanes."

A native of Rich Square, N.C., General Boomer is not a desk pounder, but he gets
his message across, and his point of view is not always popular.

General Boomer, for instance, has taken on some sacred cows, criticizing
military commissaries for taking business away from small-town merchants in the
United States.

In a war where press access to front-line troops has been a contentious issue,
the 90,000 marines he commands in the Persian Gulf have fared well -- thanks
largely to media-savvy General Boomer, a Duke University graduate whose previous
assignments include a stint as chief of Marine Corps public affairs in
Washington.

Lieut. Gen. Charles A. Horner

Central Command Air Force Commander

Lieut. Gen. Charles A. Horner was watching Cable News Network in the Central
Command Operations Center in Riyadh the night allied air forces at tacked Iraq.

When a tele vised report from Baghdad suddenly went blank -- the victim of a
laser-guided bomb's direct hit on an important communications tower -- the war
room "exploded in cheers," General Horner said. "That was the most direct
feedback we ever heard."

As commander of about 50,000 Air Force men and women, more than 1,200 planes and
nearly 500 aircraft from other allied nations, the 54-year-old general has
orchestrated the bombardment that has dismantled much of the Iraqi war machine.

General Horner is a highly decorated fighter pilot whose perceptions of modern
warfare were heavily influenced by his experience in Vietnam.

A war in Iraq, he said in August, "should not be dragged out in an effort to
achieve some political objective."

So far, says the general, who flew 111 combat missions as an F-105 pilot,
Washington has not tried to micromanage the gulf conflict.

The Persian Gulf is familiar territory for him. Since 1987, when he was promoted
to lieutenant general, he has directed the Central Command air forces, hich have
headquarters in South Carolina yet are responsible for the Middle East.

General Horner was named co-commander of American forces on Aug. 9, but held the
post just a few weeks until General Schwarzkopf arrived from Florida.

Since then he has kept a low profile, immersing himself in carrying out the air
campaign that flies more than 1,200 attack missions on Iraqi forces each day.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

A Japanese Symbol of Excess

BYLINE: By JAMES STERNGOLD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1485 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Feb. 11


It was bad when the banks sent their people to monitor his debt-laden operations
and worse when they slammed the brakes on his hectic pace of property
acquisitions. But now the bankers say the three private jets must go.

No, this is not Donald J. Trump, Robert Campeau or some fallen savings and loan
owner. Meet Harunori Takahashi, chairman and owner of the privately held EIE
International Corporation, a big hotel and resort developer struggling under $6
billion in shaky debt.

This brash and chain-smoking businessman is just one of many Japanese
entrepreneurs transformed by the doubling of the yen's value after 1985 into
overnight sensations. Mr. Takahashi charmed lenders and the news media alike,
while assembling an empire stretching from Tahiti to 57th Street in Manhattan,
where he is building the Regent Hotel designed by I. M. Pei. Although little
known in Japan, Mr. Takahashi became one of Australia's biggest and most talked
about property barons.

Administrative Weakness

Today, the 45-year-old Mr. Takahashi's predicament symbolizes the excesses that
swept corporate Japan in the overheated 1980's -- just as they swept Wall
Street. As he attempts to adapt to the 1990's, the only question is how much of
his grab bag of holdings -- ranging from Regent and Hyatt hotels throughout
Asia, a floating hotel in Ho Chi Minh City in Vietnam, a thousand-mile railroad
being built through Australia's outback and a half-share in Australia's Bond
University -- he will be able to salvage.

"Mr. Takahashi is good at proceeding on projects very aggressively, and he has a
very good eye for assets, but he is not so good at financial calculations or
management," said Yoshiharu Suzuki, general manager of the corporate finance
group at the the Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan, EIE's biggest lender, with
almost $1 billion outstanding. "So we've decided to send people to supplement
the area where he has a weakness, namely in administration. That's so we can
have completely harmonious cooperation."

The size of EIE's problems is also a reflection on the euphoria that prevailed
at Japanese banks in the heady 1980's. Banks, after all, are supposed to weigh
prudently the projects to which they will lend. Stuart Matthews, an analyst at
Barclays de Zoette Wedd, observed, "We're discovering that some of the bankers
here were just as adventurous as those anywhere in the world."

During a recent interview at his headquarters in downtown Tokyo, which he is
about to vacate for less expensive space, Mr. Takahashi, a whirl of energy who
habitually juggles numerous deals, bridled at the suggestion he had become
overextended.

"Tightening up would be the way to describe what we're doing," he said. "We
certainly have some properties that don't fit. You'll see us dispose of them. As
I've said all along, there's a time for expanding and a time for cleaning
house."

Same Problem, Different Solution

For those who regarded Japanese businessmen as unstoppable money machines
effortlessly snapping up real estate around the globe, a look at the problems of
Mr. Takahashi and a half-dozen other large real estate owners provides some
sobering insights. But if they share some of the problems of American
developers, the solutions being proposed generally differ.

For the most part, bankers are stepping in and overseeing the process in an
orderly way, keeping the problems far from courtrooms. In EIE's case, the
Long-Term Credit Bank heads a recently formed lenders' committee and has sent
six executives to help manage the business.

Some of Mr. Takahashi's aides grumbled at the imposition of cost controls. "When
you get a lot of bankers around, you start worrying about things like counting
paper clips," commented Bungo Ishizaki, a former professor who is a senior
adviser to EIE. He also suggested that getting rid of the jets might not be such
a good idea.

"You don't project a conservative image when you're flying around in a 727,
that's true," Mr. Ishizaki acknowledged. "But if you're doing a deal with the
King of Tonga or something, it does make a corporate statement."

But in return for its cooperation with the banks, EIE is likely to receive as
much as $500 million to meet interest payments and finish some projects. And
$1.5 billion worth of properties unrelated to the South Pacific resort business
will be put on the market.

Neither Mr. Takahashi nor Mr. Suzuki would be specific, but they hinted the list
would include the Regent Beverly Wilshire Hotel in Los Angeles, BP House in
London, Bond Centre in Hong Kong and assorted office and hotel developments
around Asia and Europe.

Government Actions

As is frequently the case in Japan's tightly regulated economy, the Government
has played a large role in the ascension of developers like Mr. Takahashi and in
their current difficulties. For years, the Finance Ministry permitted the banks
to pump up the real estate market. Then the soaring prices became a political
liability as middle-class Japanese found themselves priced out of the housing
market. As a result, the Bank of Japan more than doubled certain key interest
rates, squeezing indebted developers. And the Finance Ministry began a campaign
to force banks to reduce their lending to speculative developers in Japan or
abroad.

The Long-Term Credit Bank said it was not being forced to have EIE cut back on
its holdings, but acknowledged it was informally reporting all of the measures
taken to the Finance Ministry.

Mr. Takahashi is a member of a prominent family from western Japan, near
Nagasaki, and is descended from a prewar Prime Minister. He joined EIE, then an
importer of computer tapes and other components in 1977 and eventually bought a
majority when its former owner retired.

The company's fortunes soared when the big industrialized nations cut the value
of the dollar in half in September 1985, in an effort to reduce Japan's yawning
trade surplus and America's trade deficit. The resurgent yen slashed the cost of
imports, and EIE's profits jumped.

Those profits were invested first in the Japanese property market, which by then
was soaring. Mr. Takahashi then began to develop golf courses, another booming
business in Japan. He used the cash generated by selling high-priced memberships
to finance his ventures overseas. He and his bankers insisted his domestic
holdings remain sound.

Mr. Takahashi's friendship with Shintaro Abe, long mentioned as a future Prime
Minister, and Toshio Yamaguchi, a former Labor Minister, has increased
speculation that some of his capital comes from political connections. For some,
this answers the mystery of how he accumulated so much real estate, more than $7
billion worth, in so short a period.

Mr. Takahashi acknowledged being close to the senior Liberal Democratic Party
officials but rejected the assertion that he had benefited financially from the
connections. "Politics and business have nothing to do with each other," he
said.

Insider Investigation

It did not help Mr. Takahashi when the first insider trading case investigated
in Japan involved Nisshin Steamship, a company EIE had bought control of several
years ago. Mr. Takahashi renamed it Sea-Com and used it to hold his interest in
the Regent Hotel in Sydney, Australia. The company's stock price soared when it
first announced it would go into the resort business, and the Government has
said that an investor had advance notice of the move and profited from it. No
charges have been filed, and Mr. Takahashi was not implicated.

Even with his problems, Mr. Takahashi may emerge at the head of a substantial
property business. He has generally concentrated on luxury class hotels and
developments. Property experts say EIE may survive if it can complete some
projects and raise cash.

EIE owns three hotels in Tahiti and owns or has begun construction of Regent
Hotels in Fiji, Noumea in New Caledonia, Bangkok in Thailand, Huehue in Hawaii,
New York, London and Milan in Italy, as well as Sydney. There are Hyatt hotels
in Saipan in the Marianas Islands as well as in Perth and Sydney in Australia.

In addition to a scattering of office buildings in the United States, EIE
controls Park Inns, a hotel chain. A deal to acquire 27 hotels from San
Diego-based Hotel Investors fell through last year when financing dried up. EIE
also came in second in the bidding for Ramada Inns.

Mr. Takahashi vowed that the creed that had brought him this far would not let
him down. He is, he acknowledged, an opportunist, and he said more opportunities
were bound to come his way.

"Very few companies can really set specific goals long in advance and achieve
them," Mr. Takahashi said, "In business, so much is coincidence. You stumble on
things. If someone says this is what they set out do and they achieved it, you
should be skeptical."

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Harunori Takahashi, chairman and owner of the financially
troubled EIE International Corporation. EIE has become a symbol of the corporate
excesses that swept Japan as well as Wall Street in the 1980's. (Ellen Rudolph
for The New York Times)

Chart: "One Developer's Holdings"
The five branches of EIE International Corporation. Businesses are wholly owned,
unless otherwise specified.

Travel, Transportation and Hotel Management
Sea-Com (60 percent); Regent International Hotels (30 percent, based in Hong
Kong); Tobu Air Cargo (40 percent); Blue Line Cruises (51 percent, based in
Australia); Indonesia Travel (35 percent); Northern Territories Railroad
(1,000-mile railroad being built in central Australia).

Electronics and Food
Mori Denki (25 percent of the industrial lighting manufacturer); Japan
Optronics; Dataland; EIE Softect; Honda Electron and JRJ Health Food.

Financial Services
Tokyo Security Finance (35 percent); General Lease (51 percent); and Tokyo Kyowa
Savings and Loan (managed by EIE).

Nonprofit Organizations
Bond University in Australia (50 percent); Pacific Basin Sports Foundation;
International Information and Science Foundation and International Youth
Development Foundation.

Property
Regent Hotels, built or under construction in London; Milan, Italy; New York;
Beverly Hills, Calif.; Huehue, Hawaii; Bangkok, Thailand; Noumea, New Caledonia,
and Fiji. Regent Hotel in Sydney, Australia (51 percent). Hyatt Hotels in Salpan
and in Perth, Sanctuary Cove and Sydney, Australia. Izu Century Park. Three
hotels in French Polynesia. Park Inns in the U.S. (51 percent).
Barrier Reef Holdings (51 percent of the Australian company that owns a floating
hotel in the Saigon River, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam).
Office buildings in London, Los Angeles, Australia, New Zealand, Japan and Hong
Kong.
Golf Courses: 14 in Japan, 4 built or under way elsewhere.
(Sources: EIE International Corporation)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
A Fictional Desert War a Lot Like the Real One

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 972 words



Something to Die For
By James Webb
333 pages. William Morrow. $19.95.

James Webb has it right from the start in his prescient Washington-and-war
novel. His story takes place in a fictional future in the sands of a third-world
country. With a mixture of irony and flackery, the military action in his book
is called Operation Justifiable Anger. If that reminds readers of Operation
Desert Storm, well, the whole tone of his informative and cynical novel suggests
that it's supposed to.

"Something to Die For" will not be appreciated by the hasty hawks and surgical
strikers in Washington and elsewhere. To the author, such experts appear as
bigger targets than the old cold war enemies who are encountered on an
accidental battlefield in the Horn of Africa and Red Sea. In the imagination,
it's easy to transfer these places to Iraq and the Persian Gulf.

Mr. Webb's story properly begins in the corridors of the White House, the
Pentagon and Congress. Here, ambitious men and women smile and scheme on the
battlefield of power, where no prisoners are taken. Only scant consideration is
given to the real casualties that may result on some distant war front from
their political and military folly.


The reader is immediately made aware that this isn't going to be just another
us-against-them, high-tech story; that here is a novelist with something
tough-minded to say that goes beyond wild-blue-yonder weaponry. As his ship
heads toward the war zone, Bill Fogarty, the gallant Marine colonel who serves
as the conscience of the novel, smells something rotten about the mission. The
author speaks for his character:

"And times were not good in Washington. Fogarty could sense it from little hints
on the news that he never would have noticed had he not spent three years
learning the doublespeak of government. The more bellicose members of the
Administration seemed especially antsy of late, spoiling for a reason to use
military force."

Because fact and fiction are so well intertwined in "Something to Die For," it's
useful to give the author's credentials and mention what he has been saying
about the Gulf war. He is a highly decorated Marine Corps veteran of the Vietnam
War. Mr. Webb is a Washington insider -- he was an Assistant Secretary of
Defense and Secretary of the Navy until February 1988. In recent weeks, while
expressing confidence in the professionalism of those serving on foreign shores,
he has been publicly doubting the wisdom of the Bush Administration's decision
to go to war in the Persian Gulf.

Against this personal background, Mr. Webb's "Something to Die For" is all the
more compelling as fiction. His previous books, including "Fields of Fire,"
about a Marine combat unit in Vietnam, are small-scale compared to his new
novel. What he says about the compromises, payoffs and hypocrisies of some
members of the executive and legislative branches is as authoritative as
anything written about Washington in recent years. If only half of it is true,
it's truly frightening.


The action in the story is about equally divided between Washington and the war
front. In Washington, there's a sleepy-headed President, "gangly and familiar,
his face baggy and his hair dyed charcoal-gray," whose aides seem to run his
office by popularity ratings. A scene that takes place at a Cabinet meeting is
brilliantly done, where jockeying for position is more important than any
principle of governance.

In the plot, two powerful rivals are involved in a scandal about the illegal
transfer by a Japanese company of military technology to the Soviet Union. One
is an Ivy League Secretary of Defense, who knows how to cut throats and
manipulate the press; the other is a veteran chairman of the House Armed
Services Committee, a womanizer who is out to get the Secretary of Defense's job
as well as his wife, a centerfold with brains. The author invites the reader to
believe that the chairman's affair with the Secretary's wife is more or less
known and acceptable to all three. It's the only part of the book that strains
credulity.

The devious Secretary of Defense (but then nearly all the Washington characters
are devious) and his good friend, an admiral aptly known as Mad Dog Mulcahy, are
looking for a diversion from the scandal involving the Japanese company. What
better than a nice little war, on behalf of so-called freedom fighters, that
would be directed against the Cubans and the Russians on the Horn of Africa,
with the possibility of toppling Fidel Castro?

The Secretary of Defense thinks to himself that what Americans need is a
military crisis: "Something fresh, dangerous, and yet remote. Something to unite
their anger and get their blood going, without causing them any economic or
personal discomfort. Something relatively safe, which would nonetheless
demonstrate that America would not be intimidated by the Soviets or their
allies. Something that would help justify the defense budget . . ."


This isn't Iraq, and the actual situation in the Horn of Africa has changed in
the last year, but in the hands of Mr. Webb, the political motives and military
actions come close enough to reality. The battle scenes in the novel, where too
many marines die needlessly because of the ambitions of high-ranking officers,
are totally believable.

Under heavy fire and wounded, Colonel Fogarty curses the White House: "They toss
us into hell, and then worry about the Russians," he reflects. "Anyway," the
author continues, "there was no time to think about it. They'd played politics
with human lives for longer than he'd been a Marine."

Where the author shines as a true war novelist is in showing both enemy and ally
in a human light. This is one of the major achievements in "Something to Die
For," a headline novel that is breathtaking in its vision.

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: James Webb (Harold Gerwin Jr./William Morrow)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
Lincoln and the Gulf

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 771 words

DATELINE: SPRINGFIELD, Ill.


If the Persian Gulf war ultimately becomes long and bloody, two things can be
predicted with certainty: There'll be more and louder dissent, and there'll be
more and louder reaction against it. The latter will be described all too often
as patriotic, leaving the impression that dissent is unpatriotic.

Abraham Lincoln's hometown, at the time of his birthday, is a good place to
think about the issues of dissent in wartime. Few questions troubled Lincoln
more, or occupied more of his Presidential concern during the Civil War.

Most famously, he caused the writ of habeas corpus to be suspended, at times and
places and in circumstances where he considered that distasteful action
indispensable to survival of the nation. "Rebel sympathizers," he believed, with
much reason, were all around -- "spies, informers, supplyers, and aiders and
abettors of their cause in a thousand ways."

Under that impression, which was understandable if somewhat exaggerated, Lincoln
allowed martial law and military courts outside the war zones, secret police,
paid informers, arbitrary arrest and detention, suppression of newspapers,
seizure of property and mail. As many as 14,000 "copperheads" appear to have
been arrested or detained without the usual constitutional proceedings.

Did Lincoln therefore destroy liberty to save liberty? Hardly. Even granted the
measures cited, there was plenty of dissent -- and indeed some treason. Even
much of the army was shot through with Southern, anti-Lincoln, anti-war
sentiment. Lincoln nevertheless did not suspend Congress or the courts; he only
limited -- he did not attempt to void -- some constitutional rights; most
significantly, he did not try to prevent the Congressional elections of 1862 and
the Presidential election of 1864, in which he was opposed by George B.
McClellan -- one of the generals he had most preferred and who had been most
reluctant to fight the war.

Dissent against the gulf war is not yet a major issue. But it's visible in the
streets, in academic halls, to a cautious degree in the press, even in Congress.
This is to be expected in all wars that have less than the nearly unanimous
approval Americans gave to World War II; even in that "good war" we had our
conscientious objectors and our panicky responses to real or feared subversion
-- for instance, internment of Japanese-Americans.

During the war in Vietnam, President Johnson actively feared that the peace
movement was stimulated and perhaps financed from abroad, and President Nixon
spent much time and effort trying to get the evidence to prove it -- a failing
effort that began the fall from grace of J. Edgar Hoover and pushed Mr. Nixon
down the road toward Watergate.

Since hostilities began in the Middle East, to my knowledge no hard hats have
swarmed down from building projects to crack the heads of anti-war demonstrators
-- though in an airport terminal the other day, I did hear a loudspeaker appeal
"to report all suspicious persons to the nearest agent." I haven't seen anyone
carrying an Iraqi flag, as some protesters unwisely used to carry Vietcong
banners. The cry "No blood for oil" seems to me to be only a faint echo of the
anti-war chants of the 60's -- for instance: "Ho-Ho-Ho Chi Minh; the N.L.F. is
going to win."

Still, respected commentators suggest in supposedly liberal newspapers that it's
the duty of Americans to support the war and support the President. I've seen
the suggestion that it's not possible to oppose the war and support the troops.

It's true that free speech can't be as free in wartime as in peace. It's
obviously not permissible to disclose the hour of the troop ships' sailing.
There are proper military secrets; to some extent, there's even a necessity for
the government to control information, because information too openly disclosed
can cause American deaths and defeats.

But dissent from a President's policy is not necessarily subversion. As was
repeatedly demonstrated during the Vietnam years, some dissenters can have a
better understanding than Presidents, even with all the White House sources of
intelligence. It's perverse moreover to argue that efforts for peace are less
patriotic than support for war; sometimes it's quite the opposite.

"Was it possible," Lincoln asked in defense of his actions, "to lose the nation
and yet preserve the Constitution?" Of course not, but he faced a genuine threat
to national survival. No one suggests that the nation is at risk in the gulf
war; and constitutional liberty need not be sacrificed to it. Democracy can
stand dissent, even in wartime, or it's no democracy.

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Togs of War

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 221 words


The mannequins in the trendy Madison Avenue shop were decked out in tan
camouflage combat fatigues. Over the fatigues they wore red, white and blue
jackets, all leather, with their sleeves boldly emblazoned, "USA."

"Fashions for a new world order" read the sign in the window. No United Nations
powder blue for this new order; the fashion statement is pure Pax Americana.

The fatigue fashion has caught on in Saudi Arabia, too. Gen. Colin Powell and
Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf sported desert fatigues as they conferred last weekend
in their gilded chairs. And the supply sergeants who manage to scrounge extra
desert camouflage uniforms can easily swap them for other equipment, and on very
favorable terms.  "No, the fatigues are not for sale," said the Madison Avenue
salesperson with bored disdain. "Just the jackets. For him and her."

Well, how much are the jackets? "$895 for the man's, $795 for the woman's." The
price of patriotism on the home front.

Later, on the subway, the window shoppers spotted two kids who had caught the
camouflage trend and turned it countercultural. They both wore combat fatigues
under their Oakland Raiders jackets -- not the new tan desert fatigues, but the
old green Vietnam jungle variety. That kind's still available. At Army-Navy
stores. Left over from the old world order.

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

France Imposes a Tighter Political Refugee Policy

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Feb. 13


Convinced that tens of thousands of foreigners are claiming to be political
refugees as a subterfuge for entering and working in this country, France has
decided to clamp down on third-world and Eastern European nationals seeking
asylum here.

The new policy is being applied discreetly to avoid accusations that France is
abandoning its traditional defense of human rights around the world. But it also
reflects rising public hostility to the presence here of a large population of
third-world immigrants.Like other Western European countries struggling with
high unemployment and the problem of third-world ghettos in many cities, France
already restricts new immigration. But more than its neighbors, France
maintained a generous policy toward refugees throughout the 1980's.

But over the last year it has tightened controls on those asserting persecution
at home, not only with a view to deporting those staying on here illegally after
being refused asylum but also in the hope of signaling to prospective travelers
that France is no longer an open door.

Last month, amid fear of an influx ofjob-seekers from Eastern Europe, France
announced it would no longer grant political-refugee status to citizens from
Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary on the grounds that democracy had returned to
those countries.

As evidence of its tougher plicy, the French Office for the Protection of
Refugees and Exiles disclosed that of some 85,500 applications processed in
1990, only about 13,000 people were recognized as genuine political refugees and
were given the right to live and work in France.

The Refugee Office also noted that having jumped from 34,400 in 1988 to 61,500
in 1989, the number of new applicants for asylum here fell slightly, to 56,000
last year.

A larger number of cases were processed in 1990 because of a backlog from
previous years.

But for France, the refugee issue remains highly delicate. As a Government
official put it, "It is now politically impossible to do nothing."

Yet its Constitution and political tradition prevent France from turning away
those escaping tyranny.

As far back as the 18th century, France served as a safe haven for political
exiles. This century, waves of refugees entered France after the Russian
Revolution, after World War II and after the Vietnam War. In the 1960's, many
Latin Americans fleeing rightist dictatorships also came here.

But during the 1980's, the number and profile of asylum-seekers herechanged as
more and more refugees began arriving from third-world countries, notably
Turkey, Haiti, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and, more recently, Mali, Zaire and other
African countries.

The Refugee Office and the Refugees Appeal Commission, a secondary instance used
by 85 percent of those refused asylum, soon became bogged down in paperwork.
Instead of taking four or five months, requests for refugee status began to take
three or four years to be processed.

Further, since potential refugees were allowed to work while awaiting a
decision, they were often well settled in France by the time their futures were
decided. While many were refused permission to stay here, a majority chose to
remain as illegal immigrants rather than report to the police.

That practice and France's greaterwillingness to accept political refugees,
earned this country the reputation of being the best place to seek asylum in
Western Europe. And even refugees from Sri Lanka and Pakistan, which have no
historical links to France, began heading here.

But over the last year, bolstered by a $20 million grant from the Government,
the Refugee Office has increased its staff and introduced computers to speed
applications for asylum. Its mandate is to judge each case individually, but it
is on the lookout for those inventing political persecution.

Since it is now processing applications within a few months, the Government has
also stopped granting asylum-seekers an immediate right to work here, preferring
to channel the most needy to Government welfare offices and charitable
organizations.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: THE COMMANDERS;
COMMANDERS DENY ERROR ON TARGET

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 898 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, Feb. 13


In the four weeks of the Persian Gulf war, almost every day has brought good
news for the generals at the American headquarters here.

Like their civilian bosses in Washington, the generals have warned again and
again, however, that nasty surprises would turn up. Today, they were proved
right. An attack on what the generals described as a command and communications
bunker was paraded by the Iraqis as a wanton attack on a bomb shelter for
civilians in which hundreds of people, mostly women and children, were killed.

Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the American commander, was said by one of his aides
to be "concerned, perplexed and generally damned upset."

No Mistake Is Acknowledged

British, Saudi and American briefing officers stood together like soldiers this
afternoon and this evening, each insisting, often in almost identical words,
that American pilots had hit a known military target. If civilians were there
and were killed, they maintained, it was President Saddam Hussein's fault and no
one else's.

No responsible officer was willing even to entertain the possibility that a
basic mistake had been made. None doubted, or at least none admitted to
doubting, that the building that was hit had a command and control role. One Air
Force officer said a Scandinavian contractor had converted 10 of 25 such bunkers
in Baghdad in 1989, including the one hit today.

Allied intelligence detected a vast increase in military activity at the bunker
beginning on Feb. 5, only a week ago, when trucks began unloading communications
equipment, specialists at headquarters reported. Officers said that three black
circles, apparently intended to resemble bomb holes, were painted on the roof.

Behind the scenes the picture had far less certitude, with intelligence,
operations and public affairs officers scrambling from one office to the next in
a concerted effort at damage control. The nagging fear, acknowledged privately
by a small number of officials, was that the building served two functions and
that the allies had failed to discern it.

No one seemed able to give a convincing answer to one question:

If photographs taken by reconnaissance planes confirmed that people in military
uniforms had been in and out of the building, as allied officers said at the
hastily convened intelligence briefings, why were there no photographs showing
that civilians had been in and out as well?

The question was put to Brig. Gen. Richard I. Neal, the deputy chief of staff at
the American command here, at today's briefing. He replied that "we had no
indications that this was being used by civilians."

Concern About a Setup

A senior officer said he had watched reports on Cable News Network with a
sinking feeling, fearing the pilots had hit the wrong target. He rushed to the
war room, watched the films and emerged convinced that the right target had been
hit but worried that "maybe Saddam has managed to set us up."

Another senior officer said the civilians could have entered the bunker after
dark, not only on Tuesday night but on other occasions, when the allies were not
conducting reconnaissance, whereas Iraqi military people entered it in the
daytime, when the reconnaissance had resumed.

But that, as he conceded, raised the question of why close nighttime observation
was so lacking, especially when the building was known to have been used a bomb
shelter during the Iran-Iraq war.

"I think it's hard to avoid the conclusion that there has been at least a
partial intelligence failure," one middle-level officer said.

Whether or not that turns out to be correct, the bombing represented a
significant public-relations failure, augmented by the presence of Western
television reporters in Baghdad who transmitted graphic pictures of weeping
survivors and mangled bodies. The images were reminiscent of pictures of
American troops burning down villages in Vietnam in their implication that the
United States was merciless in using force to attain its objectives.

The questions, at both the Central Command briefing and the Pentagon briefing,
were far more pointed today than at any point since the war began.

General Neal, a square-jawed, usually impassive marine, blanched visibly when a
reporter asked him, in effect, whether the American military would care if it
had killed hundreds of civilians, as Baghdad charged it had. "Well, you're damn
right, of course the American public and the coalition forces are saddened by
that fact," he said.

"Will you please answer the question?" one reporter snapped at an intelligence
briefing officer.

U.S. at a Disadvantage

As is always the case, the openness of American society, with reporters
permitted and indeed expected to challenge official versions of events, puts the
United States at some disadvantage in the image war with controlled societies
like Iraq. Military officials here accept that and they know they cannot change
it, but it still engenders some bitterness.

"No one asks tough questions in Baghdad," one officer said.

All the same, the command is determined to do its best to avoid the sort of
credibility gap that opened up in Vietnam. General Schwarzkopf vividly remembers
the degree of distrust of the American military that developed there; not only
were controversial events skeptically evaluated, but a pervasive cynicism became
the standard.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Soldier's Last Journey From Desert to Farm Town

BYLINE: By DON TERRY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 18; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1152 words

DATELINE: ST. PAUL, Feb. 13


The pain and sorrow of the war in the Persian Gulf spread this week to a tiny
farm town on the Minnesota prairie and to this capital city on the banks of the
Mississippi.

For two days family, friends and strangers in both places have held funeral
services for Cpl. Stephen E. Bentzlin, a young man they lost to the war's first
ground combat two weeks ago.

Corporal Bentzlin, a marine, was born in St. Paul but spent much of his 23 years
in Wood Lake, a farm town of 420 people in the flat southwestern corner of the
state, about a three-hour drive from here. He traveled back and forth between
the two for most of his life, to visit his father after his parents divorced
when he was 7 years old.

"Our family isn't that well-to-do," his 48-year-old mother, Barbara Anderson,
said in a telephone interview from Wood Lake. "We had two services so family and
friends in St. Paul could attend. I know they couldn't afford to take a whole
day off from work to drive down here."

Blending of Cultures

Corporal Bentzlin's life and death were a melding of cultures. He was half
Sioux, and at both of his funerals, an Indian honor guard of Vietnam veterans
marched slowly behind his casket.

The chairman of the Sisseton-Wahpeton tribe, Russell Hawkins, carried the eagle
staff, which is as significant to the Sioux as the American flag. The Indians
drove two and a half hours from their reservation in South Dakota to attend the
service in Wood Lake. "We have always fought and died for America," Mr. Hawkins
said, "even though we may be living in poverty. And even though we may not own
the land, our gut feeling is this is our country."

Affixed to the eagle staff were six eagle feathers fluttering in the wind. Each
feather represented one of the six men from the Sisseton-Wahpeton tribe who had
died in Vietnam.

"I hate to say it, but I think there'll be more funerals," said Duane Wanna, a
member of the honor guard. "Stephen's just the first."

The tribe, part of the Sioux nation, has 21 men from their reservation in South
Dakota serving in the Persian Gulf, he said.

Virtually all of Wood Lake shut down for the funeral there on Tuesday, held in
the gymnasium where the young man had played high school basketball. It was the
only building in town large enough to accommodate the more than 600 people who
attended.

"In a town this small, it's more like a death in the family," said Alice Munsch,
50, a Wood Lake resident.

The service in St. Paul was held today in the neo-Gothic House of Hope
Presbyterian Church, a few blocks from the Governor's Mansion. About 150 people
attended and then gathered outside on the lawn as a Marine Corps honor guard
fired three volleys into the gray, snow-flecked sky.

Death by 'Friendly Fire'?

Corporal Bentzlin was one of 11 marines killed on Jan. 29 near Khafji, Saudi
Arabia. It is unclear whether he was among the 7 who, according to the military
authorities, were accidentally killed by so-called friendly fire from allied
troops. The answer, his mother said, is unimportant.

"It doesn't matter to me," she said. "Long before this all started, Iraq bought
some stuff from the U.S. or our allies. Isn't it all friendly fire, then?"

But a cousin, Julie Marlow, 24, of Minneapolis, said she was angry about the
possibility that Corporal Bentzlin was killed by friendly fire. "His death has
made my views against the war a lot stronger," she said after his funeral in St.
Paul. "It makes me angry that so many people died because of accidents. I wish
the sanctions would have been given a little longer to work."

The corporal's older sister, Kathleen, recalled a conversation she and her
brother had about death. They asked each other how they hoped to die. She said
she wanted to die an "old grandma, with my grandkids around me."

She said Corporal Bentzlin answered, "I want to die a hero."

At a "career day" in 1985 at the Echo-Wood Lake Cooperative High School,
colleges from around the state set up recruiting booths. So did the military.

"Steve decided to join the Army," his mother said. "He had heard his dad talk
about it and his uncle."

He enlisted in the Army in 1985, his senior year, and soon after graduation was
shipped out to boot camp. He later switched to the Marine Corps.

Mrs. Anderson remembered her son preparing to return to duty after a recent
visit home. "He spent the day laying out his outfit," she said. "His buttons had
to be just right. He took a lot of pride in being a marine."

But he was was still learning to take complete pride in his Sioux heritage, she
said. "I think racism sometimes prevents people from being proud of who they
are," she said.

"When Steve wasn't home, he didn't like to tell many people that he was Indian,"
she said. "Some people won't be your friend if they know."

On Tuesday, scores of old soldiers poured into Wood Lake as American Legion
posts from around the area sent representatives to the service. When the young
soldier's casket passed, the gray-haired men saluted, many of their hands no
longer steady.

"It hurts," said Ken Kussatz, 61. "I worked at the Wood Lake schools for 30
years. I watched the boy grow up." He said he fought in Korea and sadly knew all
about death at an early age.

"When I came back," he said, "I told my friends, 'I know I'm going to heaven,
because I just got back from hell.' "

Corporal Bentzlin moved to Wood Lake after his mother remarried. She moved her
son, his brother and his three sisters to a farm just on the outskirts of town.
As a boy, he pulled and sprayed weeds in the bean fields and picked rocks so
plows could churn up the black rich earth for planting.

He was an average student in school, but loved to read Tom Clancy novels of
adventure and military intrigue.

After graduating from high school, Corporal Bentzlin did what most of the young
people in town did. He left.

"Most of his friends are gone now," said Jerry Tischer, the principal of Wood
Lake High School. "There's no employment after they graduate."

After joining the military in 1985, Corporal Bentzlin was stationed in
California, where he met his future wife, Carol. They were married 13 months
ago; he had three stepchildren.

Townspeople, including Mrs. Anderson, said Corporal Bentzlin's death had
strengthened their support for the war.

Tears and Strangers

"You see flags flying everywhere now, which you didn't see before," said Heidi
Meyer, 25, a cashier at the town's grocery store. "Obviously everyone is much
more patriotic now."

A man and a woman walked into the store, its wooden floors gleaming in the sun.
"We need tissues," they said.

As they left, headed for the church, Mrs. Meyer said: "The first day we heard
the news my first reaction was to cry. That surprised me, because I didn't even
know him. But now the war isn't just half a mile away. It struck right here in
the middle of Minnesota."

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Marine honor guard, followed by an Indian honor guard of
Vietnam veterans, guide the coffin of Marine Cpl. Stephen E. Bentzlin on Tuesday
in Wood Lake, Minn. Corporal Bentzlin died in action in Saudi Arabia. (John
Hasselman for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: PARATROOPERS;
Tough Special Division Awaits War in the Desert

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 788 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Feb. 13


When Cpl. John Bulik woke up this morning, he found a cup of leftover coffee
frozen solid.

As a thin sun began to warm the clumps of tents, trucks and helicopters spread
under camouflage nets in the vast trackless desert near the Saudi border, the
men and women of the 101st Airborne Division began another day of what they have
done for the last six months: preparing for battle.

"Desert living is hard over time," said Maj. Gen. J. H. Binford Peay 3d, a
courtly, gray-haired Virginia Military Institute graduate who commands the
division in a low-key manner.

But six months of living under the tents in the harsh desert, officers,
sergeants and troopers say, has forged this division -- nicknamed the "Screaming
Eagles" -- into a tough, cohesive unit that will likely be one of the leading
elements in an allied attack, if and when land war comes.

"There is a quiet confidence, not a lot of bravado," General Peay said, meeting
with his senior staff officers in the headquarters tent in front of maps. "We
trained very hard."

"Our training," he added with what seems a favorite military phrase, "had
robustness."

Unlike many units on the front lines, soldiers of the 101st Airborne salute.

New Tactics to Be Tested

This is a division that thinks of itself as something special, and the salute is
accompanied by a snappy "Air Assault, Sir!"

If and when the 101st goes into battle, it will be testing a new kind of
military tactic, an assault by helicopters in which troops are dropped far
behind enemy lines, bringing their own artillery in with them, and using attack
helicopters the way a conventional infantry division would use tanks for
support.

The 101st began converting from the kind of parachute operations that are still
the mainstay of the 82d Airborne Division in 1974. In addition to the
helicopters used for transport, its aviation brigade has Blackhawk assault
helicopters and Apache and Cobra attack helicopters.

In effect, the tactic calls for the division to deliberately surround itself
with enemy troops and then fight its way out.

It is an open secret that when the 101st and other quickly deployable units
arrived here in late summer, they were highly vulnerable -- light infantry in
tank country -- if President Saddam Hussein of Iraq had tried to press an attack
into Saudi Arabia. Their deployment was a bluff, commanders say in private, that
worked.

Now the 101st and other advanced units are at the end of a long logistic "tail"
snaking across the desert, which has deposited and supported a martial array of
men and materiel -- tanks, helicopters, trucks and water-purification stations,
supplying everything from heavy ammunition to balm for sun-cracked lips..

In the stony desert here, where "personal survivability holes" are hard to dig,
and the very fine sand gets into everything, making the soldiers constantly work
over their M-16 rifles with paint brushes, life has taken on a routine of tiny
field adjustments -- like cutting the cardboard box the ubiquitous field rations
come in to make a holder for the hot plastic pouch warmed in a canteen cup.

At the headquarters company tent, where the division's battle ribbons fly from a
guidon pole stuck in the sand, First Sgt. Victor Edwards, with 17 years of
service behind him, looks after his "kids," carrying a small pack on his web
belt that can produce anything from a pair of pliers to a piece of string.

In a battalion nearly an hour away by truck, a battalion mess sergeant has
mysteriously been able to produce fresh eggs and meat almost daily for hot meals
to replace the much-loathed rations.

The division chaplain, Lieut. Col. Herb Kitchens, who, it is said, has been
known to take out his guitar after prayers and sing of honky-tonk women and
strong drink, has already composed a hillbilly song the refrain of which goes:

Saddam Hussein would hate the night
He heard that eagle scream.

For General Peay, an artillery officer in Vietnam, and the handful of other
senior officers and noncoms who served in that conflict, the comparison between
that war and this is always in the back of their minds.

"Look at the late 60's, it was a draft army, look at the racial strife, it was
an unsettled time," said Col. Ted Purdom, the commander of the division's Second
Regiment, as the sand swirled around his rough encampment. "All of a sudden our
country has changed. We watched it swing 180 degrees. Look at the support we're
getting now.

"These are absolutely the best soldiers I've seen in my 22 years in the Army,"
Colonel Purdom went on, echoing the praise of other officers and sergeants for
the volunteer Army. "It's an upper just to be around each and every one of
them."

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Iraq highlighting Baghdad

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

College Player Quits, Citing Threats Over Flag

BYLINE: By AL HARVIN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 23; Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 684 words

DATELINE: SOUTH ORANGE, N.J., Feb. 13


A Seton Hall basketball player who became the center of controversy for refusing
to wear an American flag on his uniform in support of troops in the Persian Gulf
withdrew from the university today and prepared to return to his home in Italy
with his wife. He said he and his wife, who is pregnant, had been threatened.

"I have received many threats, directed both toward me and my wife, Lara, so
that our life has become very difficult here," the player, Marco Lokar, said in
a written statement released by the university. "In order to complete her
pregnancy in tranquillity and peace (which is more important than anything else
to us) we have decided to return to our hometown, Trieste. Peace be with you."
Lokar said threatening telephone calls had been made to his home.

Seton Hall players began wearing the flags on their uniforms for the Jan. 15
game at Boston College. Little notice was given to Lokar's not wearing the flag
until the team's game against Providence on Jan. 29, and the issue intensified
during the game against St. John's at Madison Square Garden on Feb. 2.

Lokar, who entered the game as a substitute, was booed every time he touched the
ball. He did not play in any of Seton Hall's subsequent games, including the
victory over Pittsburgh at Byrne Meadowlands Arena on Tuesday night. A reserve
guard, the 6-foot-1-inch sophomore was averaging about 10 minutes and 3 points
per game.

'I Cannot Support Any War'

In his statement, which was released by the athletic department today, Lokar
gave his reasons for not wearing the flag on his uniform.

"From a Christian standpoint I cannot support any war, with no exception for the
Persian Gulf war," he said. "I have heard many people saying that the flag
should be worn in support of the troops and not in support of the war. This is a
foolish argument though. The troops are in the gulf fighting a war."

Both P. J. Carlesimo, the Seton Hall coach, and Larry Keating, the director of
athletics, said they had not placed any pressure on Lokar to wear the flag or to
leave school. They said that if he chose to return in the future they would
welcome him and do everything they could to have his scholarship renewed.

"I never thought it would get to this extreme when I made the decision,"
Carlesimo said today, referring to his decision to have his players wear flags
on their uniforms.

"We have three foreign students on the team and I went to them first to see if
they would have any objections to wearing the flag," he said. "Arturas
Karnishovas is from Lithuania and you know they have somewhat of a different
political situation and Assaf Barnea is from Haifa, Israel, but both of them had
no objections. "

Reasoning Behind Decision

Carlesimo said the team had discussed not wearing the flags, but he said, "We
wanted to make a statement."

"We thought that not wearing the flag was a statement in itself," he added.

"We asked Marco if he would prefer to wear the Italian flag since Italy is a
part of the allied forces in the gulf or if he would like to wear a yellow
ribbon that people had been wearing to show they support the troops and not
necessarily the war," Keating said. "I'm a Vietnam vet but I understand his
position."

Lokar said in his statement that any sign of support for the troops "would
indirectly (or even directly) support the war."

"Nevertheless, I am not questioning the men and women in the Persian Gulf," he
said. "I am accusing both the authorities of the American-led coalition and the
Iraqi officials as those responsible for each innocent life that will be lost in
the conflict. I give my support to all those people that are suffering and will
suffer from this war. I keep them in my prayers."

"I'm very convinced that the deciding factor for Marco was clearly Lara and the
fact that's she's pregnant with her first child," Carlesimo said. The baby is
due in August.

"The most bothersome part about this is that Marco and his wife now have to go
back to Italy and that he wanted to get an education and play college ball in
the U.S.," Carlesimo added.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

PUBLIC & PRIVATE;
Hard News

BYLINE: By Anna Quindlen

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 771 words


Alan Simpson is a lively kind of guy, the sort who talks about "vim and vigor"
and calls people "boobs," who said of opponents of David Souter's nomination to
the Supreme Court "you couldn't change them if you herded them over the cliff in
a buffalo romp."

Reporters have always valued people like the Senator from Wyoming because they
make our work easy: they open their mouths and the quotes fall out. But Senator
Simpson doesn't return the favor. "I believe your problems lie with the Western
media and not with the U.S. Government," he once told another politico. "As long
as you're isolated from the media, the press -- and it is a haughty and pampered
press, they all consider themselves political geniuses, that is, the journalists
do. They are very cynical.

What I advise is that you invite them to come here and see for themselves."

In retrospect, it seems unfortunate that the politico to whom the Senator made
those sympathetic comments was Saddam Hussein.

But we can tell now that Senator Simpson didn't mean everything he said. At the
very least he didn't mean the part about inviting them to see for themselves,
because he has turned his whipsaw tongue on Peter Arnett, the distinguished war
correspondent reporting from Baghdad for CNN. Mr. Simpson called Mr. Arnett a
"sympathizer" who was suspect for staying in Iraq when all he can see is what
the Iraqi Government shows him.

The first problem with the Senator's remarks, other than that there isn't a
shred of evidence to support them, is that they assume the American people are
stupid. Peter Arnett's CNN reports carry more disclaimers than a cigarette box.
Only a person watching the television with the sound off would not know that the
information has been carefully news-managed by the Iraqis.

Nevertheless I think it's better to be there and get part of the story than to
leave a major area of the war uncovered. Otherwise I'd see no point in having
reporters in Saudi Arabia, where it is the Pentagon officials doing the
news-managing, making sure that reporters only see what they want them to see
and go where they want them to go, and detaining them when they try to provide a
less-orchestrated version of events.

Poll figures tell us a good many Americans are comfortable with press curbs.
Some think we should let the military get on with its business without notebooks
and Leicas littering its path. Some prefer to get their information straight
from the military briefings, untouched by editorial judgment and competing
opinion. Maybe others have been happy to be spared the kind of sight television
brought us from Baghdad yesterday, the charred bodies of civilians killed by
American bombs.

But I keep coming at this from a slightly different perspective. Five years ago
I can remember being constantly confronted by readers whose question was this:
Why are you picking on the President just because he takes the occasional nap?

Today one of the questions I hear most often is this: How come you guys let
Reagan off the hook on Iran-contra?

I suppose I could reply that we believed the public didn't care to see him on
the hook, but that's a ridiculous answer. Because what reporters do has nothing
to do with popularity, and maybe not even always with immediacy, which I suppose
is a peculiar thing to say about a business that lives and dies by the word
"today."

Sometimes reporting is most important when it takes us, methodically,
cumulatively, from here to there.  Watergate as low-level political dirty trick;
Watergate as Oval Office conspiracy. My Lai as military action; My Lai as
civilian slaughter. The early Vietnam reporting took on its greatest resonance
afterward, when it could be seen as the beginning of a progression leading to
the widespread conclusion that the war was fatally flawed. Maybe we won't even
notice what we're missing from today's war coverage until it's too late.

It's a quilt, what we're making here, and when it's done we can all see some of
the patterns. That's why Senator Simpson is doing what he's doing; because he
knows what he thinks the pattern should be, and he's not interested in anything
but stars and stripes. That's why the reporters in the Persian Gulf are fighting
press restrictions, because they think they're missing important pieces. I
assume that's why Mr. Arnett remains in Iraq, because a few pieces are better
than none at all. But mainly we're all doing what we're doing because it's our
job. And because the best answer five years hence to the question "Why didn't
you guys tell us what was really going on in the gulf?" is going to be "We did."

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

I'm Ready To Run in '92

BYLINE: By George McGovern; George McGovern was the Democratic nominee for
President in 1972.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 634 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Perhaps because of my long opposition to the Vietnam War, I am constantly asked
what a citizen does who is opposed to the war with Iraq but doesn't want to
appear unpatriotic or ineffectual in protesting the war policy. It's a
complicated question.

If I were still in the Senate, I would have voted with the 47 Senators to
continue the economic sanctions, with war only as a last resort. But with
American forces committed to battle, with low casualties and high television
coverage of the most dramatic aspects of aerial attack, it is not very effective
to stand in front of the White House and shout, "Stop the war!"

The proper course for me is not antiwar rallies, although I respect those who
choose that course. Rather, I'm going to seek out a Presidential candidate who
challenges the policies that set the stage for the present war and other
difficulties gripping the nation. The Presidential campaign arena is the best
place to focus attention on the need for new policies.

The Democratic loyal opposition should be mobilizing now. It needs at least one
strong Presidential contender to make clear that the 1990's call for policies
dramatically different from those applauded in the 1980's.

We need a President who recognizes that the American dream and our role in the
world must be grounded in enduring values, a healthy economy, a just society and
a government of the people. In two years, while turning away from challenges and
opportunities at home, President Bush has given us two wars -- a small one in
Panama to seize Gen. Manuel Noriega and a larger one in the gulf to stop Saddam
Hussein.

George Bush and Ronald Reagan supported Saddam Hussein for years, including
selling him $1.5 billion worth of equipment that he used to build chemical and
nuclear war facilities. Mr. Bush, as Director of Central Intelligence had Mr.
Noriega on his payroll and helped pave the way for his rise to power in Panama.

I would support a Presidential candidate who pledged to take the following
steps:

* Curtail the giving of arms to dictators and carefully re-examine our current
role as global policeman.

* Stop committing young Americans to military campaigns unless the security of
the U. S. clearly requires it and Congress so determines.

* Develop an energy policy based on conservation and increased energy
efficiency, improved public transportation and renewable resources to reduce our
dependence on Persian Gulf oil -- the real cause of the present war.
* With the end of the cold war, utilize much of our obsolete military budget to
reduce the national debt, strengthen the environment, convert to a peacetime
economy and rebuild decaying public facilities.
* At the end of the war in the Persian Gulf, press for a comprehensive Middle
East settlement and for a "new world order" based not on Pax Americana but on
peace through law with a stronger U.N. and World Court.

I would be pleased to support a Democratic candidate with views similar to
these. But if no such candidate gets into the arena soon, I will and I will go
all out to win.

I've told an exploratory group pressing me to announce for the Presidency to
qualify me first for Federal matching funds. If we meet that goal, and first
signs are encouraging, it becomes practical to launch a Presidential campaign.
Both the nation and the Democratic party would profit from a candidate who looks
honestly at the nation's problems, proposes common sense solutions and raises
the pride of the American people in their constitutional democracy.

In my soul, I know my qualifications for the Presidency -- wisdom, wit,
historical perspective, toughness -- are better at 68 than they were at 48.
Perhaps another candidate is even now waiting in the wings to announce. If not,
get ready for McGovern in '92.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Elect McGovern in '72" campaign button

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 15, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Provo Journal;
Policewoman in Denim Is Betty Grable of Gulf

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 733 words

DATELINE: PROVO, Utah, Feb. 13


One might say Jacque line Phillips Guibord has blown her cover.

Until recently Ms. Guibord, her red hair dyed black, was spending her evenings
slinking around Provo's seamier haunts trying to buy drugs and arrest felons as
an undercover narcotics officer with the Provo Police Department.

Then she agreed to pose for a magazine advertisement for Wrangler jeans. Now the
picture has become a favorite pinup of American troops in Saudi Arabia.

A sex object? A woman fully clad in thick denim and leaning against her patrol
car with a shotgun? That is apparently what appeals to the troops in the deserts
of the Middle East, where Muslim sensibilities rule out the more traditional
locker decorations.

This is what two marines wrote: "We are in a country where women are treated
different than in the States, and are not near as beautiful; your picture is a
constant reminder why we are here. If you have any similar pictures, please send
a few to this office for distribution."

It was signed by Staff Sgt. Brett A. McKee and Sgt. Scott E. Orsborn, attached
to the Criminal Investigation Division of the First Marine Division. They said
her picture was posted in every American military police and criminal
investigation office in Saudi Arabia.

And when Lieut. Comdr. John E. Jendro, a spokesman for the Navy, was asked how
popular the advertisement was among servicemen in Saudi Arabia, he said, "Most
every marine seems to be aware of the poster."

"I was shocked, I was flattered -- it was hard to envision that was something
they would hang up," the soft-spoken 30-year-old Ms. Guibord (pronounced
GHEE-bord) said as her husband, Steve, a former marine and also a police
officer, tried to quiet their 18-month son, Ashton. She was decidedly off duty,
recovering from a cold, wearing jeans, a white turtle-neck shirt and no makeup.

They live modestly in half of a rented one-story duplex home in the Provo suburb
of Highland. The living room is cluttered with Ashton's toys and symbols of the
kind of patriotism that is typical here in this deeply Mormon region: a signed
picture of Nancy and Ronald Reagan, just above a bouquet of fake azaleas, and a
portrait of President Bush next to an American flag.

Politically, the troops could not have picked a more appropriate pinup. Ms.
Guibord, or Jackie to friends, is the daughter of a retired Air Force navigator,
Maj. Boyd Phillips, who flew 158 missions on an AC-119 gunship in Vietnam. And
she backs President Bush without hesitation on the war: "I have confidence in
Bush's decisions -- this was the best alternative he had." A ground war, she
added, is "inevitable."

Her improbable road to fame began last spring with an unexpected telephone call
to the Provo Police Department from the Martin Agency in Richmond, Va., an
advertising agency on the prowl for Western-looking models for Wrangler jeans
advertisements. Officer Guibord was recommended, although she had never worked
as a model. Her boss, Chief Swen Nielsen, had no objection.

Her picture appeared under the legend, "A Western original wears a Western
original." She wore a pair of "Snow Canyon Relaxed-Fit" Wranglers and a rose
"Painted Desert Blouse."

The ad began appearing last September in publications like People, Rolling
Stone, Equus and Horse and Rider. That made her something of a celebrity in
Provo.

But it was not until the picture began circulating among the troops in the
Arabian desert that national fame descended. Ms. Guibord has appeared on the
"CBS This Morning" television show and been mentioned in People and Time
magazines. Ms. Guibord said her mother, Donna, who lives nearby in Bountiful,
Nev., was "ecstatic."

Grateful for all this free publicity for Provo, a town with a population of
about 90,000, Mayor Joe Jenkins gave her a Wrangler jean jacket with the city's
logo sewn over the left pocket.

As for her husband, he said of his wife's fame: "I enjoy it, being a former
marine. It's good for my ego.

If she has been gratified by the response from the male troops, Ms. Guibord has
also heard from many women who were pleased that men would admire a picture of a
woman doing what many would consider a man's job and in a setting quite unlike a
nude Playboy centerfold. "I've gotten a lot of positive feedback from females,"
she said, "who were delighted that a fully clothed woman could be considered
beautiful."

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The favorite pinup picture of American soldiers in the Persian
Gulf shows Jacqueline Phillips Guibord, a Provo, Utah, police officer, in an
advertisement for Wrangler jeans. "I was shocked, I was flattered," she said.
(The Martin Agency)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 15, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK;
Fast Forwarding Into TV's Past

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1622 words


FRETTING about the future, network television has evidently decided to rush
headlong into the past. Prime-time seems to be entering the Era of Primal Pop.

Consider. In the middle of the February sweeps, a period during which ratings
determine advertising rates for the next quarter, CBS is devoting much of this
three-day weekend not to a flashy new television movie, not to a glittering new
mini-series, but to what the network chooses to call a Classic Weekend. Tripping
down memory lane are three resourceful, and very entertaining, tributes to
distinguished accomplishments of the past:

*" 'All in the Family' 20th Anniversary Special," with the producer Norman Lear
as host, tomorrow from 8 to 9:30 P.M.

*"The Very Best of 'The Ed Sullivan Show,' " with Carol Burnett as host, Sunday
from 9 to 11 P.M.

*"Mary Tyler Moore: The 20th Anniversary Show," with Ms. Moore as host, Monday,
President's Day, from 9:30 to 11 P.M.

Why does CBS appear to be so preoccupied with the past? Is it just a case of
nostalgia for the glory days when people talked admiringly of the "Tiffany
network"? Today, CBS's image is more associated with K Mart. More to the
bottom-line point, perhaps, these glossy repackagings don't cost the network
nearly as much as an original production. The past can be profitable, as the
same network discovered a season or two back when a "lost" episode of "I Love
Lucy" ended up in the Top 10 for that week.

But there may also be something else, something considerably more troubling. In
a very real sense, the past is safe. There are no surprises, no unsuspected time
bombs.

Indeed, the past has long been a staple of television schedules. A few years
ago, the networks did a spate of "reunion" television movies, bringing back the
casts of old series for a one-shot updating. That gambit has generally fizzled,
although sturdy old-timers like "Columbo" and "Perry Mason" still pop up
sporadically in new series. And, of course, old network shows in syndication are
crucial to the fortunes of independent and cable stations. Now, the networks
seem determined to retain a piece of that pie for themselves.

The current retreat from the present could also signal a growing reluctance to
deal with issues that are anything but safe: a troubling war, economic
recession, poverty, drugs, homelessness, AIDS -- the familiar list goes on. The
past can, in a very real sense, provide escape.

These three CBS specials are only the tip of the recycling iceberg. NBC has
reached back a couple of decades to tap the daytime gothic soap "Dark Shadows"
for an updated transformation into a weekly series, Fridays at 9 P.M. And Sunday
at 9 P.M., ABC has a remake of the Bette Davis-Joan Crawford 1962 chiller "What
Ever Happened to Baby Jane?," this one starring the Redgrave sisters, Vanessa
and Lynn. In May, ABC will have Richard Chamberlain in a new version of the 1955
movie "Night of the Hunter," originally starring Robert Mitchum as an itinerant
preacher. On the series front, NBC has recently whipped up an odd confection
called "Sunday Best," which manages to turn Carl Reiner into an unsettlingly
chirpy weekly host, the kind of character he would have skewered wickedly on the
old "Your Show of Shows." This new hodge-podge, broadcast Sundays at 7 P.M., was
purportedly intended to show clips from the previous week's best moments on NBC
entertainment. With those pickings invariably slim, the show is padded with
assorted segments, some comic and featuring Merrill Markoe (in one instance,
interviewing a composer of cartoon-series theme songs), some loosely historical
and starring Linda Ellerbee, with glimpses of familiar television moments having
an anniversary that very week. Both women look understandably wary as a studio
audience cheers mightily for no compelling reason and a trio of singers does
periodic rap turns inside a glass cage.

Last Sunday's edition devoted so much time to Ted Baxter's marriage on "The Mary
Tyler Moore Show" and the Beatles' first appearance with Ed Sullivan that
"Sunday Best" ended up looking like a commercial for this week's Classic Weekend
on CBS. Clearly, a network show is in trouble when it leaves viewers thinking
fondly of the competition's products.


The separate elements of Classic Weekend, on the other hand, have been
constructed to demonstrate the undisputed superiority of CBS, at least in years
gone by. "All in the Family" and "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" were more than
merely sitcoms. They were superb weekly one-acters, skillfully written and
brilliantly performed by the kind of incredible ensemble casts that television
can find and nurture every great once in a while ("M*A*S*H" and the current
"Murphy Brown," on CBS on Mondays, are other examples). The actors seem to have
been born for these particular roles.

When it first went on the air in early 1971, "All in the Family" was prefaced
with a warning that the show "throws a human spotlight on our frailties,
prejudices and concerns." In other words, Archie Bunker was likely to say things
not heard until then on television entertainment. Learned essays quickly
appeared on whether this "lovable bigot" was good or bad for the future of the
republic.

Nine years and 212 episodes later, "All in the Family" ended its network run
knowing that there wasn't an important social or personal issue -- from racial
prejudice to Vietnam, from breast cancer to menopause -- that it hadn't brought
starkly, and usually uproariously, into the nation's living rooms. Even religion
wasn't off limits. "Faith is something you believe that nobody in his right mind
would believe," Archie angrily explained to his atheist son-in-law.

Mr. Lear keeps tomorrow's retrospective shrewdly uncluttered. Through the
generous use of clips, the show is allowed to speak for itself. Members of the
cast, including Carroll O'Connor, Jean Stapleton, Rob Reiner and Sally
Struthers, are interviewed separately, recalling their favorite moments.
Remembering the avalanche of mail, pro and con, in response to the show, Mr.
Lear has located some of those letter writers and let them express their
feelings about the show today, pro and con. The device adds a richer dimension
to the occasion. One woman, referring to the "truly human characters," observes
that "after a while, they didn't belong to the writers, the writers belonged to
them."


For Monday's "Mary Tyler Moore" salute, Ms. Moore is joined on a studio set by
the other performers from the series: Ed Asner, Valerie Harper, Cloris Leachman,
Gavin MacLeod, Betty White and Georgia Engle. Sitting on somewhat cramped sofas,
they watch scenes from the series and, still very much a family, chatter and
giggle over the great old days when they worked for WJM-TV, Minneapolis. Much
richly deserved time and attention is devoted to the contributions of Ted
Knight, who died in 1986, as the egomaniacal anchor Ted Baxter.

The show, created in 1970 by James L. Brooks and Alan Burns, opened with the
theme song asking, "Who can turn the world on with her smile?" Only Ms. Moore's
Mary Richards, obviously, a career woman in her 30's. She did not have to be
married, most unusual for 1970's prime time, though remarkably her virginity
seemed to be kept intact, despite some occasional doubts. Again, the characters
took on a life of their own, their distinctive quirks revealed in shamelessly
similar situations -- Mary's disastrous dates, Mary's even more disastrous
dinner parties. This reunion ends with the gang watching the very last show with
tears in their eyes. "Seven magnificent years," says Mr. Asner. And you know he
means it.


"The Ed Sullivan Show," which got started in 1948 as "Toast of the Town," is, of
course, completely different territory. It was, quite simply, television's
ultimate variety show, mixing opera stars with circus animals, comics with
scenes from Broadway musicals, rock musicians with an occasional political
figure (Fidel Castro popped up on one broadcast). From the stage of the Ed
Sullivan Theater, Ms. Burnett pinpoints one of Sullivan's strengths: "Ed made
sure there was something for everybody," from Mom and Pop to the kids. Alan King
mentions another: "Everybody at home thought they could do better."

Sunday's salute manages to focus on Sullivan, poking fun at the "stoneface"
image he parlayed into success, and at the same time convey something of the
excitement that appearing live on the show meant to performers. A newspaper
entertainment columnist, Sullivan had a talent for recognizing talent in others
and running with it. In 1964, seeing the Beatles getting a tumultuous airport
welcome to New York, he signed them for an appearance on the spot. That
particular show attracted a record 73 million viewers. Appropriately enough,
this lively retrospective ends with Ethel Merman blasting her way through
"There's No Business Like Show Business."


The bombardment of images from the past evinces little sign of letup. Public
television, more and more a repository of old movies, enjoyed its biggest
success in years with a mini-series about the Civil War. Over on cable, the Arts
& Entertainment network is growing partial to clip compilations along the lines
of "The Golden Age of Rock 'n' Roll," while the Disney Channel schedules old
Frank Sinatra television specials.

At least for the moment, the present threatens to be squeezed more and more out
of the picture. One new ABC series will offer a novel solution to tackling
today's scene. "My Life and Times" takes place in the year 2035 and then lets
the elderly hero reminisce ("I wouldn't say I've seen it all, but I've seen a
lot") about the good old days, meaning just about now. It had to happen: Instant
Nostalgia.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "The Very Best of 'The Ed Sullivan Show,' " Sunday night at 9
on CBS. (CBS) (pg. C1); Carroll O'Connor, as Archie Bunker, in " 'All in the
Family' 20th Anniversary Special," Saturday at 8 P.M. on CBS. (CBS) (pg. C34)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 15, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Poll;
Americans Back Continued Air Strikes

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 957 words


While resigned that ground combat against Iraq will probably be necessary, the
American public overwhelmingly prefers that bombing from the air continue for
the next few weeks. That preference did not appear to change much as a result of
the storm this week over the Iraqi civilians killed in a Baghdad building hit by
allied bombs, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.

But there were strong indications in the poll that a bloody ground war would
significantly reduce public support for the Persian Gulf conflict. While many
Americans remain apprehensive about the eventual cost of the war, especially if
a ground attack begins, at this time they are putting their reservations aside
to rally around the flag, the troops and the Commander in Chief.

While Americans differ in their estimates of how long the war will last and what
its toll will be in American lives, the public still perceives that the war is
going well for the United States.

Although toppling President Saddam Hussein of Iraq is not a war aim authorized
by the United Nations, Americans were evenly divided on whether to stop fighting
should Iraqi troops leave Kuwait or continue fighting until the Iraqi leader is
removed.

The Cost Is a Factor

Enthusiasm for pressing on to remove Mr. Hussein dropped precipitously if the
price would be several thousand additional American lives.

"What worries me is that six months or a year from now, I don't think anything
will really be solved unless we get Saddam Hussein out of there," said Jerry
Hegarty, 40, a plumber from Norwalk, Iowa, who still thinks we should have
"waited awhile before we busted in there," but who wears a flag pin on his coat
in support of the war.

"I think we should have cut the head off the snake a long time ago, sent in the
C.I.A. and given him a pill," he said. "It's unbelievable that one man can cause
all these problems."

Matt Buchold, an 18-year-old high school senior from Easton, Pa., who begins a
stretch with the Marines next July, agrees. "We have to get rid of him because
the guy seems pretty whacked," he said. "Even if he decides to pull his troops
out, what would stop him from just going back in?"

Over a Thousand Surveyed

Mr. Hegarty and Mr. Buchold were among those who engaged in follow-up interviews
after participating in the nationwide poll of 1,060 adults taken by telephone
Feb. 12 and 13. The survey had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three
percentage points.

Many Americans recognize that the Pentagon is censoring information about events
in the Gulf. While few said they feel right now that they are deprived of
information they need to know, a majority made it clear that they think America
must be exposed to the ugly side of war, with 57 percent saying that the public
should be allowed to see ceremonies for the war dead arriving home at Dover Air
Force Base in Delaware.

The Bush Administration decided to end the traditional memorials with
flag-draped caskets at Dover, fully aware of the powerful effect that such
scenes had during the Vietnam war and the invasion of Panama.

But Mr. Hegarty argued that the grim face of war is "something people need to
see."

Bush Approval Unchanged

Public approval of Mr. Bush's overall job performance is at 78 percent,
unchanged in the last two weeks. Some critics of the President suggest that he
has spent too much time on the Persian Gulf war at the expense of other foreign
and domestic problems. Among those polled, 54 percent said they did not think
Mr. Bush was stinting on the domestic agenda, while 38 percent worried that the
war was distracting attention from problems at home.

Patterns that emerged in the initial polls on the Gulf crisis last August
persist, with men, whites and Republicans more supportive of the war and women,
blacks and Democrats less enthusiastic.

About half the respondents were interviewed before Iraqi civilians were killed
and wounded in the bombing of a building on Wednesday, and the other half were
interviewed after gruesome pictures of that incident were broadcast. But the two
groups of respondents were indistinguishable in their overwhelming perception
that only military installations were being attacked by the allies and in their
strong support of a continued air campaign.

'Fortunes of War'

"I hate to be cold about it, but those are the fortunes of war, and I think that
it's basically laid upon the leaders of Iraq when they put military targets
within civilian populations," said Wayne Bretches, 40, a computer maintenance
man who lives in Canoga Park, Calif.

Mr. Bretches, who said his older brother was a special forces officer who was
killed in Vietnam, said that even those Americans who have their doubts about
whether the United States should have gone to war in the first place are
supporting Mr. Bush for the sake of the troops.

"We may not support the whole situation, but we don't want these troops to come
back with the pscyhological problems that the ex-Vietnam vets had," he said.

While 71 percent expected a ground war would eventually be necessary, 79 percent
wanted to continue the air campaign for weeks.

A quarter of those polled said the war would not be worth its cost in human life
and money. That number jumped to 42 percent wo said the war would not be worth
its cost if a bloody ground war with thousands of American deaths ensued.

"I just don't agree with Bush" that the war is a just and moral one, said Donna
Wilson, a 34-year-old from Hickory Flat, Miss., whose husband is a railroad
worker. "A lot of good men over there are going to get killed before it's all
over and that will not end it. People have been fighting over this land since
Biblical times."

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Table: "The New York Times/CBS News Poll: Less Support for a Ground
War"

Percentage of those in each group who . . .


. . . say the war to defeat Iraq is likely

to be worth the loss of life and other costs.

Total                                              60%

Men                                                 70
Women                                               52

White                                               63
Blacks                                              40

Republicans                                         72
Independents                                        56
Democrats                                           52

18-29 year olds                                     65
30-44 year olds                                     60
45-64 year olds                                     64
65 years old and older                              43


. . . say a ground war to defeat Iraq

would be worth the cost of losing thousands of
American lives.

Total                                              45%

Men                                                 56
Women                                               35

White                                               47
Blacks                                              30

Republicans                                         54
Independents                                        46
Democrats                                           36

18-29 year olds                                     50
30-44 year olds                                     44
45-64 year olds                                     51
65 years old and older                              26


Based on interviews with 1,060 adults nationwide by telephone Feb, 12-13.



How the Survey Was Conducted

The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews
conducted on Tuesday and Wednesday with 1,060 adults throughout the United
States, excluding Alaska and Hawaii.

The poll included 471 interviews on Tuesday and 589 interviews on Wednesday, the
day before and the day of television broadcasts of Iraqi civilian casualties
from the American bombing of a building in Baghdad.

The sample of telephone exchanges was selected by a computer from a complete
list of exchanges in the country. The exchanges were chosen so as to assure that
each region of the country was represented in proportion to its population. For
each exchange, the telephone numbers were formed by random digits, permitting
access to both listed and unlisted telephone numbers. The numbers were then
screened so that calls would be limited to residences.

The results have been weighted to take account of household size and the number
of telephone lines into the household, and to adjust for variations in the
sample relating to region, race, sex, age and education.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20 the results based on such samples will differ
by no more than three percentage points in either direction from what would have
been obtained by seeking out all American adults.

The potential sampling error for smaller subgroups is larger. For instance, for
blacks it is plus or minus 10 percentage points.

In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any
survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 15, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Defense Lawyer Is Jailed Over Client Confidentiality

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1162 words

DATELINE: DOYLESTOWN, Pa., Feb. 9


For almost two decades, Linda Backiel has used her law degree to defend people
who disagreed vehemently and sometimes violently with the policies of the
Federal Government.

And she has watched many of her clients, including opponents of the Vietnam War
and advocates of Puerto Rican independence, go to prison for what they
considered matters of principle.

Now it is her turn.

For more than two months, Ms. Backiel has been held in the Bucks County
Correctional Facility here on a civil contempt charge because she refuses to
testify before a Federal grand jury investigating a client who the authorities
say jumped bail.

In an interview at the prison over the weekend, Ms. Backiel, 46 years old, said
she had spurned a subpoena and later an order from a Federal judge because her
testimony would violate a fundamental canon of the relationship between lawyers
and clients: the guarantee of confidentiality.

'That's Not My Job'

"I can't be turned into a witness for the prosecution," said Ms. Backiel, a
criminal defense lawyer who has practiced in New York, Philadelphia and, most
recently, Puerto Rico. "That's not my job."

But Ronald H. Levine, the Assistant United States Attorney in Philadelphia who
is the prosecutor in the bail-jumping case, said Ms. Backiel has information on
a crime that she must provide, regardless of her status as a lawyer.

"I think she's trying to, in effect, hold herself above the law," Mr. Levine
said. "The law has never been that defense lawyers are absolutely immune from
testifying about their clients."

The law is murky about when lawyers should testify about their clients and much
discretion is left to individual judges, said George Kuhlman, the ethics counsel
for the American Bar Association. Although the association, in guidelines, is
adamant that lawyers respect confidentiality in virtually every circumstance,
it, too, is vague about when that trust should be broken.

Subpoenas of Lawyers Rising

It is rare, experts said, for a lawyer to go to jail on a contempt charge. Since
the early 1980's, the Government has been more and more eager to subpoena
defense lawyers, but such cases usually end with the Government backing down,
the lawyer acquiescing or the desired information being obtained by other means.

Gerald B. Lefcourt, a New York lawyer who was the chairman of a New York Bar
Association committee that studied the sharp rise in subpoenas of defense
lawyers, said Ms. Backiel's imprisonment indicates the Justice Department has
fewer and fewer qualms about chipping away at the right to counsel, which is
guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment.

"The attorney-client privilege exists so clients can confide in attorneys and
tell attorneys everything they need to know to provide the best defense," Mr.
Lefcourt said. "It is a relationship of trust."

Why has the Government gone to such great lengths in this case?

Part of the answer may lie in the accusations against Ms. Backiel's client,
Elizabeth Ann Duke, who was arrested in May 1985. The Federal Bureau of
Investigation said Ms. Duke and a companion, Dr. Alan Berkman, were members of a
revolutionary group that was storing a cache of arms and explosives in a shed in
Doylestown, north of Philadelphia; one of Ms. Duke's intended targets had been
the United States Capitol, the authorities have said.

Although she was too busy to take on Ms. Duke's case, Ms. Backiel referred it to
a friend and agreed to assist as co-counsel, said Patricia V. Pierce, Ms.
Backiel's lawyer. One of Ms. Backiel's first projects was to help get Ms. Duke,
who was being held under the Preventive Detention Act, free on bail.

Release and Disappearance

In October 1985, soon after she was released from jail, Ms. Duke disappeared and
has not been seen since.

But before she disappeared, Ms. Duke wrote a statement that was intended for
release to reporters in which she described her reasons for fleeing, said Mr.
Levine, the Assistant United States Attorney. Mr. Levine said he had a copy of
the document but that Ms. Backiel had access to the original. He said he needed
her to produce the original or at least verify the copy.

"We're seeking to authenticate this document because, as it describes the
fugitive's intent and motive to flee, it constitutes the best evidence of the
crime, which we need to establish," Mr. Levine said.

On the recommendation of Mr. Levine, a Federal Grand Jury investigating the
bail-jumping allegation against Ms. Duke subpoened Ms. Backiel in September
1989. Over the next 13 months, Federal District Judge Charles R. Weiner denied
Ms. Backiel's motions to quash the subpoena and twice found her in contempt.

The first contempt citation was overturned by the United States Court of Appeals
for the Third Circuit, which held that the hearing on the contempt charge should
not have been held in private. But on Dec. 10 Judge Weiner found her in contempt
again and ordered her held at the prison here until she agrees to testify before
the grand jury or until the grand jury's term expires in June.

Prison Deepens Resolve

For now, the standoff continues.

Clad in a yellow prison-issued smock, Ms. Backiel told a visitor to the prison
that the experience has only deepened her resolve not to testify.

"I'm stubborn," she said, pulling her chair close so she could be heard over the
rumble of hundreds of other inmates and their visitors in the prison gymnasium.
"The notion that this would somehow change me is absurd."

Born in Wilmington, Del., in 1945, Ms. Backiel earned an undergraduate degree
from Antioch College in Ohio and a law degree from Rutgers. She has since moved
around the country, defending people she felt had legitimate complaints against
the Goverment.

Known as a Principle Defender

"If there's a lawyer I could think of who would go to the extreme, go to jail,
to defend a principle, it would be Linda Backiel," said Ms. Pierce, her lawyer
and a classmate at Rutgers.

Linda Hanna, a professor at Johns Hopkins who is a friend of Ms. Backeil's, said
her presence in a room is like "leaving the door open in a hurricane." Indeed,
during the 45-minute visit, as she punctuated her comments with energetic swoops
of her arms, Ms. Backiel seemed far larger than her 5-foot-2-inch frame, which
carries 102 pounds.

When she is not busy in her private cell preparing a motion for her release,
which she intends to file soon with Judge Weiner, Ms. Backiel said she engages
in a variety of other activities. She runs several miles a day in the prison
yard, writes poetry and provides informal legal advice to other inmates.

Ms. Backiel asserts that her imprisonment has made her a better person, and a
more sympathetic lawyer.

"I really think everyone who goes to law school should spend a week in jail,"
she said. "I think they'd get a sense of the arbitrarines and power of the law.
I think they'd understand the importance of having an advocate."

NAME: Linda Backiel

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Linda Backiel, who is being held on contempt charges for
refusing to testify about a client the authorities say jumped bail. (Jorge
Ramos-Caro)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF:' Pentagon;
U.S. Insists Withdrawal Comes Before Cease-Fire

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 785 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 15


American military officials today suggested that Iraq's army in Kuwait could
escape further attack by declaring an unconditional withdrawal and then
beginning to retreat, but they hesitated to make a firm offer along those lines.

For the time being, the officials said, the military command has no intention of
stopping the bombing to clear the way for a withdrawal.

Even as the United States rejected Iraq's newly proposed terms for leaving
Kuwait, the military faced a barrage of questioning over which should come first
-- a withdrawal or a cease-fire.

The problem is that even if Iraq declared that it wanted to leave Kuwait
unconditionally, it would not be able to do so as long as American commanders
stuck to their devastating bombing campaign.

'First Step: Withdraw'

The Pentagon said it would welcome an unconditional declaration of withdrawal,
and suggested that some kind of safe conduct might be arranged if the offer to
leave seemed bona fide.

"The first step is, he says 'I'm going to withdraw now,' " said Pete Williams,
the Pentagon spokesman. "That's step No. 1, and he hasn't done that yet."

Mr. Williams said that after such a declaration the United States might consider
"safe passage" for any Iraqi forces that are seen leaving.

The allies have said all along that their best chances of inflicting damage on
Iraq's army of occupation would come if the Iraqis left the protection of their
entrenched fortifications, since the armored force would be most vulnerable to
air attack as it moved across the open desert.

Brig. Gen. Richard Neal, the Central Command's deputy director of operations,
was asked at a news briefing in Dhahran today if retreating troops would be
attacked.

"Until our mission has been changed," he answered, "we're going to execute our
plan to the letter." How could Iraqi troops avoid being killed? "The only thing
I can think," General Neal said, "is if they came across in droves surrendering
to us."

Bombing Pause Opposed

Lieut. Gen. Thomas Kelly, director of operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
said in Washington that he "would recommend against a bombing pause because it
could give them an opportunity to regenerate, and could result in dead Americans
in the future."

Mr. Williams, under persistent questioning, insisted that it would be easy for
Iraq to withdraw, even though the bombing would continue until the retreat was
seen.

"You simply take your forces, you take your troops, and you leave," he said.

After being questioned for about half an hour, he finally said, "We are clearly
not going to attack them if they are withdrawing."

Three Ways to End Stalemate

Apart from a retreat under fire, there appear to be only three ways to end the
stalemate: a cease-fire to allow a retreat, a surrender in place by the Iraqis,
or an eventual land battle.

Last month, the American State Department and the Soviet Foreign Ministry
appeared to offer a brief cease-fire after an unconditional pledge of withdrawal
by Iraq. In a joint statement, they said the withdrawal itself would have to
follow immediately on the heels of any such Iraqi declaration. In other words,
the pause in the bombing would be brief, and the retreat would have to be swift.

But the precise terms have always been left vague, and that is how the military
left them today.

"I don't need to spell out a list of instructions here on how Saddam Hussein
should withdraw his forces," Mr. Williams said. "They know how to do that.
Military commanders know how to do that."

Previous Pullouts Cited

The benefits of retreating under protection of a cease-fire are clear. When the
Palestine Liberation Organization left Beirut in 1982, when the Soviets left
Afghanistan in 1989 and when the United States left South Vietnam before its
collapse in 1975, the withdrawals were made under declared or de facto safety
from major attacks.

But retreats can take weeks, months or longer to engineer, and even if there was
a cease-fire it would not be easy for Iraq to withdraw promptly from Kuwait.
Taking care of the wounded, providing food and water during the march,
preventing desertions, crossing the rivers and swamps in southern Iraq, carrying
out as much as possible of the vast stores of arms and provisions that were
brought in, all would pose problems.

Some American officers in Washington have said privately that an Iraqi retreat
is the last thing they want to see, because even after defeat the surviving army
would still pose a threat to Iraq's neighbors.

The allies also have said that by now they have destroyed most of the bridges
across the Euphrates River, so the field army is cut off from its homeland in
any event.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Soldiers of a First Cavalry unit gathered around their platoon
leader for a briefing in the Saudi desert (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: War Notebook;
Saudi Base Is Springboard for B-52's

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 886 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Feb. 15


Half of the American B-52 bombing raids over Kuwait and southern Iraq are being
flown from an airfield in western Saudi Arabia, a senior United States military
official said today.

The mammoth bombers, which have wing spans longer than half the length of a
football field, have been the main weapon for pounding dug-in Iraqi ground and
armored forces with their 1,900-pound bombs. Flying in sets of three planes, the
B-52's have maintained round-the-clock bombings on Iraqi troops.

B-52's are also being flown from air bases in England, Spain and the Indian
Ocean atoll of Diego Garcia, but the aircraft stationed in Saudi Arabia can fly
as many as three times as many missions as the planes based farther away, the
official said.

The basing of the B-52's during the Persian Gulf crisis has been a sensitive
political issue, even after hostilities broke out on Jan. 17.

All the countries the United States approached for basing rights hesitated,
presumably because of the image of the B-52 as a weapon of indiscriminate
bombing based on its use in North Vietnam during the Vietnam War, a reputation
the Air Force considers inaccurate and unfair.

Although the planes being used against Iraq carry only conventional explosives,
the B-52 is also associated by some with nuclear weapons. The bulk of the B-52
force in the United States is armed with nuclear bombs to deter a once-feared
Soviet nuclear attack.


Memories of Edinburgh

 As a boy growing up during World War II, Maj. Gen. Robert B. Johnston spent
what seemed like endless evenings huddled in an austere, corrugated metal
air-raid shelter in his native Edinburgh, cringing at the bombing from German
warplanes.

"I lived for two or three years in an air-raid shelter every night," General
Johnston, the U.S. Central Command chief of staff, said in an interview today.
"It was kind of routine: the air sirens would go off when air raids were
expected. It was when dark started."

In a sense, war has come full circle for the 53-year-old General Johnston. On
Wednesday, American F-117A's from the Central Command dropped two 2,000-pound
bombs on a building the allies said was a command and control center and Iraq
said was an air-raid shelter, killing hundreds of civilians who were inside.

General Johnston, who immigrated to the United States when he was 18 and joined
the Marine Corps shortly afterward, called the civilian deaths "a tragedy."

But he also said, "We cannot change the overall campaign because of this great
fear that one of these incidents could happen again."

Even so, General Johnston was sensitive to criticism that the United States had
failed to detect the civilians inside the building.

The reaction was rooted in the bombing of civilians in Edinburgh. The Scottish
capital, he said, had no military or industrial targets, but it had the
misfortune of being on the Luftwaffe's bombing run to Glasgow, 42 miles to the
west, which did.

"We ended up getting excess sorties, the ones that didn't find their targets or
had extra bombs," said General Johnston.


Copperheads Miss

 The Army wheeled out its latest battlefield weapon this week -- laser-guided
"Copperhead" artillery shells fired from mechanized howitzers.

But all three of the rounds, which cost $30,000 apiece and are designed to
cripple command and control centers and air defenses, failed to destroy their
targets in a field exercise conducted by a battalion of the 3d Armored Division.

The so-called "smart weapons" are the Army's answer to the highly accurate bombs
that allied warplanes have dropped on strategic targets such as bridges and
chemical weapons plants.

The artillery shells, which follow a laser beam directed by spotters onto a
target, still have a few bugs to be worked out. But fire support officers, who
guide the shells to their targets, said they weren't too concerned by the
misses.

Capt. John Middleton, 31, of Corry, Pa., said the desert practice targets, which
were more than 10,000 yards from the point of fire, were smaller than the tanks
and command centers that would be attacked in actual combat, and may not have
reflected the guiding laser beam adequately.


Good Soldiers

 Disciplinary problems among Army troops in Saudi Arabia are only about
one-third the army-wide rate. A main reason, officials say, is that alcohol is
not allowed in this kingdom.

"We were indeed surprised," Col. Tonu Toomepwuu, the Army Staff Judge Advocate
in Riyadh, told a group of reporters. "There are a lot of factors, but once
again, the lack of alcohol is a big one."

Saudi Arabia's strict Muslim laws forbid alcohol, and the American military has
adhered to them closely.

Since the American military buildup began here in August, Colonel Toomepwuu
said, the Army has conducted 19 courts-martial. He did not have figures for the
other services, each of which keeps track of their own proceedings.

The charges in the Army incidents included disorderly conduct, malingering, mail
theft, indecent assault, use of cocaine, larceny and wilfully disobeying a
superior commissioned officer.

Given that the Army has nearly 300,000 soldiers in the Saudi desert,
law-enforcement officials said that the rate was very low.

"There's not much time to sit around and get in trouble," said Colonel
Toomepwuu.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: United States Air Force personnel at an airbase in Britain
continued yesterday to load bombs on B-52s. The B-52s, the weapons of choice for
bombarding dug-in Iraqi forces on the ground, have been flown in from England,
Spain and Diego Garcia, an atoll in the Indian Ocean, as well as Saudi Arabia.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Don't Use Export-Import Bank for Arms Sales

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 770 words


To the Editor:

As a senior staff employee of the United States Export-Import Bank from 1964
until 1987, where my duties included liaison with other Federal agencies, I am
deeply disturbed by reports that the Administration is considering requiring the
bank to revert to financing exports of United States military equipment and
services. My concern stems from the bank's experience in fiscal years 1966
through 1968, when it was made a major participant in the export of weapons, in
part because of budget constraints caused by the Vietnam War, and in part
because of the balance-of-payments problem then.

In fiscal year 1966, the bank authorized loans of $134 million to finance
military sales to Australia, $110 million for such sales to Britain and $237.7
million for weapons sales to "miscellaneous countries," not otherwise specified.
During the following 12 months the comparable figures were $159.7 million, $435
million and $353.1 million. The amounts for fiscal year 1968 were $50 million,
$100 million and nil.

The drop to zero in fiscal year 1968 resulted from a series of articles in The
New York Times derived from interviews with Department of Defense officials who
were elated that they had been able to tap into the bank's resources to finance
these exports, limiting their department's role to a repayment guarantee of the
bank's loans.

The articles provoked extended Congressional hearings, where the technique was
referred to as "backdoor financing" and an evasion of the appropriations
process. The result of these hearings was legislation in March 1968 (Public Law
90-267), which imposed a limit on the amount of weapons sales to developing
countries, followed that October by Public Law 90-269, which imposed an outright
ban on Export-Import Bank financing of military equipment sales to developing
countries.

Much has changed since 1968, including the development of a more serious Federal
budget crisis. In the mid-1960's the bank's authorizations were equal to about
12 percent of United States exports; last year they were equal to less than 2
percent.

With United States exporters of commercial goods desperate for export credit
support, the Administration should conserve its severely limited resources to
support exports that contribute to development of markets abroad for United
States goods and services. If exports of military equipment are deemed to be in
the national interest, clearly the responsibility for such transactions should
rest with the Department of Defense. After all, that agency is supposed to know
about strategy and the legitimate needs for weapons of other countries.

Also, retaining the responsibility for such transactions in the Department of
Defense will make the information on amounts, types of weapons and buyers
available to Congress and the public through the authorization and appropriation
process.

The Export-Import Bank should not now, when commercial goods exports are perhaps
the only bright spot in our bleak economy, be used to assume the risks of
financing nonproductive military exports, with the associated risks of
subsequent political backlash. Debt relating to military procurement is the
easiest kind not to pay, particularly when the buyer is asked to join the
supplier country in military action, for example, Egypt and the United States,
and earlier, Egypt and the Soviet Union.

Since leaving the bank I have been with a consulting organization that analyzes
the export credit agencies of other countries -- counterparts to the
Export-Import Bank. This has enabled me to see how many of these agencies have
gotten into serious political and financial difficulties by supporting exports
of military equipment. For example, the British export credit agency some years
ago was heavily involved in supporting military sales to the Kwame Nkrumah
Government in Ghana. When that Government changed, its successor sought to
repudiate the arms-related debt, with resulting financial losses and claims
payments.

Arms sales, by their nature, are highly political and noncommercial. Military
equipment doesn't generate cash flow for debt service, a serious problem in most
developing countries. The financing of such exports cannot be based on the
commercial considerations that govern export credit agencies, including the
Export-Import Bank.

The Export-Import Bank deserves to be supported in its commercial export finance
functions; financing military exports is an inappropriate, unprofitable and
unpromising role for it.

ALBERT H. HAMILTON
Senior Associate, First Washington Associates Ltd.
Arlington, Va., Jan. 25, 1991

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

John A. McCone, Head of C.I.A. In Cuban Missile Crisis, Dies at 89

BYLINE: By GLENN FOWLER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 15; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1345 words


John A. McCone, a West Coast businessman who became chairman of the Atomic
Energy Commission and later the Director of Central Intelligence, died Thursday
at his home in Pebble Beach, Calif. He was 89 years old.

He died of cardiac arrest, said his secretary, Chris Balog.

Mr. McCone headed the Atomic Energy Commission from 1958 to 1960 and the Central
Intelligence Agency from 1961 to 1965, holding two of the most sensitive high
positions in Washington. He was widely credited with being the first Government
official to foresee that the Soviet Union would place offensive weapons on Cuba,
a move that set off the Cuban missile crisis in 1962. As chairman of the atomic
energy panel a few years earlier, he sought to reach agreement with the Soviet
Union to stop testing of nuclear weapons.

'Sharp, Tough and Demanding'

William H. Webster, the current Director of Central Intelligence, said yesterday
that Mr. McCone had made "an enormous contribution" to United States security.

"He guided the intelligence community during a particularly trying time," Mr.
Webster said. "Mr. McCone was sharp, tough and demanding -- qualities that made
him a highly effective and widely respected leader. His long and distinguished
career in Government was marked by excellence, integrity and selfless devotion
to duty."

John Alex McCone was born in San Francisco on Jan. 4, 1902. He received an
engineering degree from the University of California at Berkeley. He worked as a
riveter and boilermaker and rose to superintendent of a Los Angeles iron company
that merged with the Consolidated Steel Corporation in 1929. By 1933 Mr. McCone
was executive vice president of Consolidated.

In 1937 he left the steel business to form an engineering concern,
Bechtel-McCone, with Stephen Bechtel. The company, which disbanded after World
War II, designed and built refineries, power plants and other projects across
the United States and in South America and the Middle East.  It expanded into
shipbuilding and aircraft production in the war.

After the war ended, he moved into overseas shipping as president of the Joshua
Hendy Corporation.

Millionaire With Wide Interests

He was a millionaire with varied business interests when President Harry S.
Truman appointed him to the Air Policy Commission in 1947. The following year he
was named a special deputy to James V. Forrestal, the Secretary of Defense. In
1950 he was made Under Secretary of the Air Force.

In that post he urged President Truman to start a program of building guided
missiles and put the program under a single director with full authority. That
was not done, and later, critics of the missile program suggested that the
"missile gap" between the United States and the Soviet Union in the late 1950's
and early 1960's might not have developed if Mr. McCone's recommendation had
been followed.

He returned to private business in 1951 but continued to serve Washington on
special missions. In mid-1958 President Dwight D. Eisenhower chose him to
succeed Lewis Strauss as chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission.

Sought a Nuclear Test Ban

In his two years overseeing all the nation's atomic energy programs, the United
States started its "Atoms for Peace" initiative, an effort to direct nuclear
power to peaceful purposes, and he sought to reach agreement with the Soviet
Union on banning nuclear weapons tests. Mr. McCone issued a stern warning
shortly after he took over that the United States would continue nuclear testing
unless the Soviets agreed to a one-year test ban.

Although achieving a test ban proved elusive, Mr. McCone was able to sign an
agreement with the Soviets in 1959 for a cooperative program of nuclear
research. He had earlier reached agreement with Euratom, the six-nation European
atomic-energy community, on a joint nuclear power and research development
program.

Mr. McCone returned again to private life when President Eisenhower left office.
But in the fall of 1961, several months after the ill-fated Bay of Pigs invasion
of Cuba by American-back opponents of Fidel Castro, President John F. Kennedy
called upon Mr. McCone to serve as the sixth Director of Central Intelligence.
He replaced Allen W. Dulles.

Although a Republican, Mr. McCone had unrestricted access to the Democratic
President. Unlike Mr. Dulles, Mr. McCone emphasized the intelligence collecting
and analytical aspects of the C.I.A. rather than its clandestine and covert
activities. As John Ranelagh remarked in his 1987 book on the C.I.A., "Agency:
The Rise and Decline of the C.I.A.," Mr. McCone brought to his new job "the
skills of a manager, a keen intelligence and a strong personal self-confidence.

Restored C.I.A.'s Credibility

These qualities were demonstrated in the Cuban missile crisis of 1962. The
C.I.A. had been in disfavor at the White House since the failed invasion of Cuba
in April 1961. By being first with a warning that the Soviet Union was planning
to put offensive missiles in Cuba, Mr. McCone re-established the C.I.A.'s
credibility, particularly with President Kennedy and his brother, Attorney
General Robert F. Kennedy.

Mr. McCone served through the Kennedy Administration and, after the
assassination of the President in November 1963, he continued under President
Lyndon B. Johnson. But the rapport he had enjoyed under President Eisenhower and
then with President Kennedy was missing with the new President.

In his book, Mr. Ranelagh observed that President Johnson operated differently
from his predecessor. While Mr, Kennedy started his day with a C.I.A.
intelligence summary from Mr. McCone and appreciated when the C.I.A. director
injected bits of humor, Mr. Johnson wanted an intelligence rundown at the end of
the day and did not relish any asides.

By the spring of 1965, Mr. Ranelagh wrote, Mr. McCone had concluded that the
President did not depend heavily on intelligence provided by the agency, relying
instead on his National Security Council advisers. So Mr. McCone again returned
to private life.

People in and out of Government have generally credited Mr. McCone with buliding
an effective, well-managed agency and, in retrospect, have ranked him as one of
the strongest C.I.A. directors.

Views on Vietnam War

On the Vietnam war, as on most other issues facing the country, Mr. McCone held
strong views and expressed them forcefully. His executive assistant at the
C.I.A., Walter Elder, recalled yesterday that when Mr. McCone left the Johnson
Administration in 1965, he wrote the President to warn that heavy bombing would
eventually turn public opinion against the United States. Although he personally
thought that an all-out war would not be a good idea, he argued that because of
the instability of the South Vietnamese government, such an effort might be
necessary.

Back in private life, Mr. McCone resumed his business activities, becoming
chairman of the Hendy International Company and serving as a director of several
companies, including International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation.

In 1973 he was called before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to testify
in an inquiry into whether I.T.T. and other multinational companies had tried to
bring about the downfall of the Marxist Government of Chile under Salvador
Allende Gossens. Testifying about $1 million that was offered by I.T.T. to the
United States for use in Chile, Mr. McCone insisted that the money was to build
housing and to assist agriculture, not to bribe members of the Chilean Congress
who would help bring down Mr. Allende.

In 1987 Mr. McCone was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President
Ronald Reagan.

Mr. McCone's first wife, the former Rosemary Cooper, whom he married in 1938,
died in 1961. He married Theiline Pigott in 1962; she died last April. He is
survived by a sister, Mary Louise Shelby of El Toro, Calif., and by three
stepdaughters, Ann Wyckoff, Theiline Scheumann and Mary Ellen Hughes, and two
stepsons, Charles and James Pigott, all of Seattle.

A private funeral service is planned.

NAME: John A. McCone

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John A. McCone (Associated Press, 1975)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

America, Heal Thyself

BYLINE: By Bill Bradley; Bill Bradley is the senior Senator from New Jersey.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 993 words



THE NEXT CENTURY
By David Halberstam.
126 pp. New York:
William Morrow & Company.
$16.95.

Americans are living at a moment of serious introspection about our purpose as a
nation. The cold war Communism against which many of us defined ourselves for 45
years is dead. Environmental crises lie on the horizon. Economic competition
comes from nations increasingly confident in their abilities and strengths. A
decade of profligate debt has endangered our future. The wall between successful
and struggling Americans has grown higher. Conditions in many families, schools
and cities deny millions of young people the chance to reach their full
potential. This new set of circumstances creates doubt about government's
ability to meet human needs adequately, and it challenges Americans to develop a
positive vision for the nation based on today's reality.

In short, we need a new way of thinking about where the nation can go in the
future. The earnest search for a new national ambition, though, is too easily
diverted by bitter nostalgia for the postwar days when, as David Halberstam puts
it in "The Next Century," "We were rich and confident in a world that was poor
and pessimistic." In a world that we can no longer dominate by size or power,
the fate of the United States is inextricably bound up with the destinies of the
rich nations of Western Europe and the Pacific Rim and with the poor nations of
Africa, Latin America, Eastern Europe and what is still, for the time being,
called the Soviet Union.

Mr. Halberstam would appear to have spent his whole career in preparation for
thinking about this emergent world. Reporting from Eastern Europe in the 1950's,
covering the crisis of American aspirations in Vietnam in the 1960's and
dissecting the Japanese confrontation with the American automobile industry in
the 1980's, he has been on the scene at each stop along the road to the world we
see before us. In "The Next Century," he weaves memories, ideas and insights
from his life's work into a concise warning about the bad habits we have
introduced into American life, and he offers fresh hope for our ability to
overcome them.

Mr. Halberstam's is not the only book published recently to scour the past for
hints about the future, but it is the shortest and the best. It refreshingly
avoids the familiar litany of cold statistics -- trade and budget deficits,
S.A.T. scores, foreign ownership -- that supposedly demonstrate America's
declining competitiveness. Mr. Halberstam's book is instead about people, and he
introduces us to individuals from his various journeys who remind us that the
answers to our questions will come not only through conversation with one
another but also through exchanges with those in other nations who face similar
questions.

In Poland, for example, the journalist Andrzej Wroblewski describes to Mr.
Halberstam the new world confronting his country: "The question is how well, how
democratically, we will use that time in which we try to catch up. Do we use it
to scapegoat others -- do we feel sorry for ourselves and blame our conditions
on the Communists and the Jews -- or do we accept responsibility for it
ourselves . . . and accept the fact that it will take a great deal of very hard
work to catch up?"

In Japan, Mr. Halberstam finds, the successful pursuit of prosperity brings
problems similar to the ones the cold war victory has posed for Americans. As a
retired Japanese Government official explains: "For forty years we were
single-minded in our purpose. We were the greyhound chasing the hare. Now the
hare that we chased has disappeared. So who are we and what are we next after
the hunt? . . . We put aside almost all our political and social issues because
we were dealing with things that seemed much more pressing. Now that we have
attained economic success we need these other values, and we lack them, and we
are not sure how to find them."

Poland, Japan and the United States traveled very different paths from the end
of World War II to the present moment, but those paths now converge. Poland
shook off the last great military empire. Japan sublimated its misguided
imperial dreams into economic ambition. As for the United States, Mr. Halberstam
traces its evolution from the 1954 decision by President Dwight D. Eisenhower
and Gen. Matthew Ridgway not to risk hundreds of thousands of troops by
intervening in Vietnam at Dien Bien Phu. "This was a nation still in touch with
its limits, a democracy, not yet an empire," Mr. Halberstam writes. But a decade
later, he continues, as our involvement in Vietnam deepened and we failed to pay
for it, we appeared to lose some of the "shared truths" on which a democracy
functions. Now we face our successes and our limits all at once, and along with
Poland, Japan and other nations we search for a positive purpose in the world, a
way to make the most of our potential on our own terms, without defining
ourselves in opposition to enemies at home or abroad.

Mr. Halberstam's is one of the few books to recognize that the challenge facing
the United States is not finding a scapegoat for our economic blunders but
making the most of our physical and mental capabilities, improving our
productivity in an open, democratic structure. He pinpoints our failures in
education, sees we are practicing "the politics of anxiety and uncertainty
rather than the politics of confidence" and urges us to judge ourselves by our
own norms of what "a harmonious and decent society" should be.

He seems to be saying that we have a choice. We can follow the path set in the
1980's and continue to fight over the diminishing supply of money and power,
dividing ourselves, in the larger world, along national borders and, at home,
along lines of class and race. Or, if we take Mr. Halberstam's insights to
heart, we can recognize that there is no substitute for quality and no
replacement for unity at home and cooperation abroad.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

When the Script Is a Grim Fairy Tale

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 3; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1916 words


After he gives her incense that conjures the ghost of an old boyfriend, even
before he hands over the herb tea that beckons forth a wisecracking muse, the
mysterious Dr. Yang offers something more valuable to the mixed-up heroine of
Woody Allen's "Alice." He explains the fantasy that has invaded this ordinary
woman's life. "In times of very great stress," the wise man says, "ghosts
appear."

Not only ghosts, but a girl who turns into a tree, suburbanites with love
potions, a time-traveling scientist, a streetwalking Cinderella and a
scissor-handed creature in an enchanted garden. The most recent films to rely on
fantasy and fairy tales are "Alice" and "Edward Scissorhands" -- with its
fabulous hero and a narrative frame in which a granny tells a bedtime story that
starts, "Once there was even a man who had scissors for hands." But magic has
been steadily gaining power in films, plays and television shows for the past
year. And Dr. Yang is right; this magic is a sign of stress.

These are fairy tales with a social conscience, fables for the nervous 90's that
tackle subjects like class, consumerism and injustice. They rely on wit and
fancy, but also convey a fearful undertone about what comes next.

Alice is magically inspired to walk away from her chauffeured, moneyed, empty
life. Like her namesake from Wonderland, this Alice finds herself in a cockeyed
world that fantastically parallels her own. The misunderstood Edward
Scissorhands, part Frankenstein monster and part frog-prince in love with a
cheerleader-princess, exposes the inhumanity of the middle-class neighbors who
drive him back to his eerie castle on the hill. The peasant girl who loves and
is rejected by an aristocrat in the Broadway musical "Once on This Island" is
made cruelly aware of the gulf that class creates. And the time-traveling hero
of the NBC series "Quantum Leap," the wryly named Sam Beckett, jumps through
time and inhabits a different person's body each week to right some historical
wrongs.

While these works use fantasy effectively to define society's problems, they
offer no real-life solutions. Edward Scissorhands retreats from a world that has
learned little from him. Sam Beckett's endless quest, as he leaps from being a
soldier in Vietnam to a black man in Alabama in 1955, is to leap back into his
own time and body.

In "Prelude to a Kiss," still running on Broadway, Craig Lucas creates a young
woman and a dying old man who switch bodies. And in Harry Kondoleon's "Love
Diatribe," which had a limited run Off Broadway in December and January, a whole
family sips a love potion along with their tea. But the heroine of "Prelude"
worries about having children in the age of apocalypse, and a major theme of
"Love Diatribe" is the unkindness shown to a neighbor who had AIDS. The
playwrights suggest that love conquers all, but love is shadowed by the fear of
death and disease. Contemporary fairy tales embody a wish for magic solutions, a
desperate paucity of answers.

Some, of course, are merely escapist romances. The prostitute of "Pretty Woman"
calls herself a princess who dreams of being rescued and she ends by promising
her strait-laced prince that she'll "save him right back." "Ghost" offers its
heroine a last dance with her dead lover. The huge popularity of these films
demonstrates the easy allure of fairy tales, the widespread wish to escape the
real world. They present ideas that ricochet off social issues -- the upwardly
mobile streetwalker in "Pretty Woman" or the embezzling Wall Street villain in
"Ghost" -- but these films don't pretend to be any weightier than the pea hidden
under the delicate princess's mattress.

"Alice" and "Edward Scissorhands" are more direct in their attention to social
injustice, more attuned to the traditional link between fairy tales and popular
culture. In the past 15 years, heavily influenced by Bruno Bettelheim's
psychological interpretation in "The Uses of Enchantment," we have come to see
fairy tales as coded messages to the unconscious about sex and survival. Or they
have become happily-ever-after Disney confections, a pattern unbroken from "Snow
White and the Seven Dwarfs" in 1937 to "The Little Mermaid" in 1989.

Using folk tales, myths and fables to reflect society is an ancient art, though.
Socially oriented scholars have long noted that folk tales are rooted in the
oral tradition of primitive cultures, whose gods easily took the form of talking
beasts.

The princesses and storybook castles familiar to us were shaped long before the
Brothers Grimm wrote them down. They reflected the feudal structure of nobles
and peasants, as well as the wishful thinking that bravery mattered more than
rank. Peasants rarely became princes, but it took a heroic prince to chop his
way through a thorny forest and awaken Sleeping Beauty.

Today, film and television tell the stories that reflect our culture. Their most
fanciful inventions offer a vision of a morally bankrupt society, a belief that
self-knowledge is its own reward, at best a desperate hope for spiritual and
emotional salvation in a world ruled by class and commerce. Modern fairy tales
still depict brave, lonely heroes, but now the outcast rarely wins.

The prototype for these fearful fairy tales of the 90's was Stephen Sondheim and
James Lapine's 1987 musical, "Into the Woods," whose first act concludes with
happy endings for familiar heroines such as Cinderella and Little Red Riding
Hood, only to undermine their bliss in Act 2. By the end they are wiser, their
dreams diminished; here is a Cinderella pleased to keep house for a baker.

Such temperate endings may violate the Disney spirit, but they are close to
traditional fairy tales, which depend on transformation. The fact that a frog
becomes a prince is more to the point than what he does afterwards. Magic allows
characters to learn their own strengths.

The magical means of gaining self-knowledge and of saving society become rather
pretentious themes in "Alice." Like her namesake from Wonderland, this heroine
falls into a cockeyed world that sheds a fantastic light on her everyday life.
Yet the concept of this uneven film seems more delicious than it ever becomes on
screen.

In a hilarious scene, the meek Alice, under the influence of herbs, suddenly
comes on to a man as if she were the winner of a Marilyn Monroe impersonators'
contest. Here is transformation at its wittiest, releasing Alice from her normal
constraints and freeing Mia Farrow from the whiny performance that is far less
sympathetic than she and Mr. Allen seem to realize.

But more often, magic leads to predictable jokes; Alice becomes invisible and
learns that her husband cheats on her. Still, she comes to know herself better
(or so Dr. Yang says; we only have his word for it). She becomes so self-reliant
that she pours a very effective love potion down the kitchen drain. What a
waste.

For what comes next demonstrates that fantasy is a weak guide to life. Alice
goes to India to work with Mother Teresa, an act that raises all sorts of
questions: Did her husband pay for the plane ticket? Who babysat the two kids?
Joining Mother Teresa fulfills one of Alice's lifelong dreams and should have
been her ultimate fantasy -- one last fling before she settles down to her new
life of doing good works on the Lower East Side, a life presented in improbably
blissful terms. Yet Mr. Allen suggests that her jaunt to India is a noble but
practical gesture, something Alice does instead of writing a check to the United
Way. The appearances of her ghostly boyfriend and her muse can help Alice reject
her vapid life of Madison Avenue shopping, but fantasy cannot point her or Mr.
Allen's disappointing film toward the realistic future they seem to want.

While Alice walks out on her charge cards and boutiques, Edward Scissorhands is
rejected by a world that is a cartoonish parody of consumer culture. In their
cookie-cutter pastel houses, people talk about 1980's acquisitions like CD's,
microwaves and videotape. Yet Dianne Weist, as the Avon lady who brings Edward
down from his castle, looks perfectly at home on her 1960's-style suit and
pillbox hat. She has a rotary-dial telephone next to an answering machine. The
skewed, detailed mix of past and present takes "Edward Scissorhands" slightly
out of time and drops its hero into a generic middle-class world. No wonder he
cannot survive here; he can't even get a bank loan to open a hairdressing salon
at the local mall.

Instead, he accidentally wounds those he loves, including Kim (Winona Ryder),
who looks like a Disney princess with her long blond hair and simple white gown.
Forced back to his enchanted castle and garden, Edward seems to be the Beast
waiting for the Beauty who will never come.

But the film ends in a redemptive, true fairy-tale manner. When he creates giant
ice sculptures, snow miraculously falls on the neighborhood, where it has never
snowed before; Kim, now the old granny, remembers him with love. The bittersweet
conclusion of "Edward Scissorhands" is more coherent, and on its own terms more
believable, than the forced redemption of "Alice." The film resists the lure of
the happy ending.

So does the most beautifully made recent fairy tale, "Once on This Island." It
is joyful yet socially astute in its portrayal of the love between the Caribbean
peasant and the aristocrat. Lynn Ahrens and Stephen Flaherty's play is based on
Rosa Guy's novella, called "My Love, My Love, or the Peasant Girl: A Fable,"
which in turn was inspired by Hans Christian Andersen's "Little Mermaid." Both
are oceans away from the insistently happy Disney version, yet close to the
spirit of the original tale.

Like "Edward Scissorhands," "Once on This Island" has a storytelling frame.
Singers gather in a circle and tell of Ti Moune, the peasant girl watched over
by the gods and godesses of Earth, Water, Love and Death. Like fairy tales, the
spare staging of the musical calls for an active imagination. Here, silver
streamers cascade from umbrellas to depict a rain storm and a man carries two
flashlights to suggest the headlights of a car. Instead of suggesting a small
budget for props, these devices create an aura of enchantment and fantasy. Yet
Ti Moune's story is true to the realities of social class. The aristocratic
Daniel makes her his mistress and refuses to marry her.

Ms. Guy's novella ends with Ti Moune's rejection and death -- the fable as a
harsh lesson in life. But "Once on This Island" goes back to Andersen's
redemptive end. It is not, as Disney would have it, "they lived happily ever
after," but "she lived forever."

Andersen's Little Mermaid is granted an immortal soul after the prince marries a
mortal woman. And in "Once on This Island," after her death Ti Moune is
transformed into a beautiful tree that lives forever. As a bright green tree
spangled with colorful flowers rises on the stage, the storytellers sing that
Daniel's son will find a peasant girl sitting in that very tree's branches, and
Ti Moune's spirit will set them free to love.

Like most contemporary fairy tales, "Once on This Island" addresses a social
problem and responds with hope for the future rather than a happy ending. "Our
lives become the stories that we weave," the storytellers sing at the end,
passing on Ti Moune's legend. Her magical tale is both classic and totally in
tune with today's nervous fantasies. It puts its faith in stories, not society.


LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Johnny Depp as Edward Scissorhands--a hero rejected by the
world (20th Century Fox) (pg. 1); Mia Farrow disappears in a scene with Keye
Luke in "Alice" (Orion Pictures) (pg. 18); "Once on This Island," rooted in Hans
Christian Andersen's "Little Mermaid"--from left, Andrea Frierson, Eric Riley,
Milton Craig Nealy, La Chanze (on floor) and Kecia Lewis-Evans (Martha
Swope/Playwrights Horizons) (pg. 19)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IMAGES OF WAR;
Pictures Need A Context

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4; Column 3; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 330 words


To the Editor:

Ken Burns's article "In Search of the Painful, Essential Images of War" [Jan.
27] correctly points up the power of the pictorial image in helping to
understand historical events. He does not, though, explore the fact that the
image, whether captured on glass, celluloid or videotape, freezes only the
moment (or moments), often with little or no contextual reference, and that this
can be inimical to our understanding of what is really going on.

In summoning up three examples of "images for all times," Mr. Burns has included
the indeed famous image of the South Vietnam police chief Nguyen Ngoc Loan in
the act of executing a Vietcong suspect. With no guiding context, one is chilled
by the mindless savagery of the coldblooded bureaucrat coolly operating his
pistol and sickened by the summary dispatch of the pitiful lad with the angelic
face of a television preacher.

Eddie Adams, the Associated Press photographer who won a Pulitzer Prize for this
picture, later discovered that the victim had just murdered one of Loan's best
friends and knifed to death his entire family. That information attached to the
image transforms it from a simplistic political cartoon of a South Vietnamese
functionary caught in a wanton act of murder, which was its essential message
during its currency. And it assigns it the proper role as a complex and
challenging statement on the potential for vicious conduct by the human animal
on any side of mortal conflict.

As the Persian Gulf war develops, the flood of images will become overwhelming.
Let's trust they aren't left to stand on their own merits as "our new visual
history." Any visual image should be an adjunct, admittedly an important one, to
dispassionate, accurate and objective verbal reportage. It follows that the
validity of the visual image is directly proportional to the quality and
veracity of the accompanying text.

EDWARD J. MEGARR
Major General, U.S. Marine Corps (Ret.)
Napa, Calif.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Its Gains Dissipated, Vietnam Tries to Salvage Its Economy

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section 3; Page 12; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1934 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


Last year, the lunar new year, Tet, featured the most lavish parties in Vietnam
in a decade, with new private wealth lavished on friends and firecrackers. The
nation had a lot to celebrate: the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from
Cambodia, economic and agricultural reforms and a halt to years of wild
inflation.

This year Tet, which fell on Feb. 15, was somber, with little spent on imported
explosives, and for good reason. "Dear comrades, 1991 is the year we will face
unprecedented challenges," Prime Minister Do Muoi, recently told the National
Assembly. A Western banker here puts it more bluntly: "1991 looks like a
disaster for Vietnam."

Many of the economic gains so evident last year have been undermined by
political indecision, infighting and corruption. The collapse of socialism in
Eastern Europe, the Chinese confrontation in Tiananmen Square and the chaos in
the Soviet Union have frightened Vietnam's aging leaders. The Politburo has
stalled economic reforms begun in late 1987. Vietnam still seeks foreign
investment, but foreigners now see increased risks.

Vietnam's prospects for foreign assistance are dim. It is still isolated by an
American-led embargo on investment and aid. The Soviet Union, preoccupied with
its own chaotic transformation, has set Hanoi adrift economically.

During the last five-year plan, through 1990, the Soviet Union provided
cumulative aid, trade credits and investment of at least 9 billion rubles (about
$16 billion at official rates). This year, Moscow will reduce aid by at least
half, with further cuts coming.

The Soviet Union has historically provided Vietnam with 90 percent of its fuel
and steel and 80 percent of its fertilizer and cotton at friendly prices and
credit terms -- no hard currency required. But last year, Soviet supplies fell
as much as 50 percent short of Moscow's promises. As of Jan. 1 this year, the
whole strange system of convertible rubles and Comecon trade credits was
discarded.

The Soviets will still accept barter goods from cash-poor Vietnam, but all trade
is now denominated in hard currency at world prices. Oil alone, a Western banker
says, will cost Vietnam an extra $250 million this year, even at prices
prevailing before Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.

The Soviet Union will continue to supply Vietnam with oil products, steel,
fertilizer, trucks and cotton, in return for rice, rubber, tin, tea and cheap
manufactured goods like shirts made with Soviet cotton. But the Soviets are no
longer willing to subsidize Vietnam by accepting products and commodities of
poor quality. They have cut contracts by up to 60 percent, forcing the
Vietnamese to try selling in a much more particular world market.


AT the same time, nearly everything Vietnam imports is going up in price, while
nearly everything it exports is going down. In 1989, a ton of Vietnamese rice
bought a ton of fertilizer. In 1990, it took two tons of rice. A ton of
medium-quality rice sold for $240 in 1989, the first year Vietnam had surplus
rice to sell; it is now down to $165, as competitors have responded to Vietnam's
exports. The price of coffee is down 30 percent in the last 18 months; prawns
and other seafood glut world markets; rubber and vegetable oil prices are also
down.

Vietnam, a small oil producer in a joint venture with Moscow, has granted
licenses to 10 foreign oil companies to explore for more. Oil represents the
vast majority of actual foreign investment in Vietnam and nearly 40 percent of
intended investment. But without a refinery, Vietnam must still pay more to
import oil products than it will make from the 24 million barrels of crude it
expects to produce this year.

Hoping for a huge oil strike, Hanoi has granted offshore leases to several
companies, including British Petroleum, Shell and Total of France. Mobil, among
the first to discover offshore oil here before 1975, wants the embargo lifted so
it can return. The Vietnamese say they are holding Mobil's original exploration
areas in reserve.


LIKE most countries, Vietnam shows its best face to attract foreign investment.
"In return," said Vo Dong Giang, vice chairman of the State Committee for
Cooperation and Investment, "we offer cheap minerals and cheap labor." Asked
about potential drawbacks, Mr. Giang smiled wanly. "Of course, some exploitation
by capitalist companies is inevitable," he said. "But we have to take the risk
and pay the cost." His figures for foreign investment show some $1.28 billion
for 194 projects through Oct. 3 last year. [See chart.]

Bankers say the figures are misleading, since they include incidental expenses
like travel, and they represent investments announced and approved by the
Government, not necessarily money spent. "Other than oil exploration,
investments tend to be very small and not amount to very much," said a Western
banker. Like others critical of the Government, he insisted his name not be
used.

With major public works projects hobbled by the Western ban on aid and loans,
investment is mostly in small manufacturing or fish-farming enterprises. OTC
Ltd., a telecommunications company owned by the Australian Government, has
installed satellites in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City using French equipment made
by Alcatel. The French are renovating Thong Nhat Hotel in Hanoi, the old
Metropole, but only after many months of financing delays.

Eugene A. Matthews, an American business consultant based in Hanoi, said that
conditions remain difficult. "The physical and human infrastructure just isn't
there yet," he said.

Vietnam's shortage of hard currency has been worsened by the sharp reduction of
money from workers abroad. Many have come home, either from formerly socialist
nations or from the Middle East.

Their return is exacerbating Vietnam's severe unemployment. Vietnam says it has
reduced its huge army by 600,000 troops, with most of the reductions coming
since its formal withdrawal from Cambodia in September 1989. State-owned
enterprises, now expected to break even if possible, have shed more than 350,000
workers.

Western diplomats estimate that at least 6 million people are unemployed, in a
country of 65 million where nearly everyone with a salaried job must moonlight
to make ends meet. Population growth remains high, at 2.2 percent a year,
meaning that more than 1.1 million young people enter the job market annually.
The annual economic growth rate, 4.8 percent from 1986 through 1988, fell to 2.7
percent in 1989 and 2.4 percent in 1990, with slower growth to come, according
to Phan Van Khai, head of the State Planning Commission. Inflation meanwhile has
rebounded to 50 percent after a year of stability, eroding one of the
Government's most significant accomplishments.

Vietnamese officials blame many of their problems on the American embargo. The
American stance blocks not only corporate investment, but also loans from the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank.

The Bush Administration says it will normalize relations with Vietnam only after
a Cambodian settlement is signed and a new, elected Government takes office,
which could take 18 months. But Administration officials say as long as Vietnam
continues to help find Americans still missing from the war, the embargo might
be lifted before Cambodia votes.

French bankers and Western diplomats in Hanoi think the Vietnamese deserve
better, since they are no longer in arrears to the I.M.F. and would otherwise
qualify for new loans. Like United States oil companies and the American
Chambers of Commerce in Bangkok and Hong Kong, they suggest that the United
States is still punishing Vietnam for winning the war.

But the bankers also point out that Vietnam's drawbacks are manifold. Able
business managers are scarce in a socialist state. National savings, at only
about $1 per capita, or $65 million, are inadequate to finance investment. The
tax system is both inefficient and corrupt. Smuggling is rife. Unlike China,
Vietnam has no central bank that can be trusted to pay its debts. Western banks
in Vietnam, five of them French, make much of their income by buying at a
discount the letters of credit foreign companies receive for payment from the
central bank, then trying to collect. If they fail to collect, they regard the
losses as investments in the future.


JAPANESE trading firms alone are owed more than $400 million for goods
delivered. "The Japanese know they're going to lose money," said Mr. Matthews.
"But they're the big firms, and they're learning a lot. If you're a big company,
you want to be there for later, to tap that market of 65 million."

Many of those judging investments compare Vietnam with the China of 15 years
ago, the bankers say. Mr. Matthews says Vietnam will do better, because it has
learned the lessons of China's problems. Western bankers here are not so sure.
"The Bank of China was always very reputable and always paid its debts," one
said.

The Vietnamese have begun altering their banking system this year, setting up a
Western-style central bank, with broad economic responsibilities. They are
establishing five competitive commercial banks -- four state-owned, one
privately owned -- with initial capital of about $30 million each.

Officials say they will allow some foreign banks to lend and take deposits, too,
though the bankers are skeptical. The first, an Indonesian-Vietnamese bank,
Indovina, is not yet allowed to accept deposits.

An Asian diplomat said the Vietnamese are slow to recognize why foreigners are
so reluctant to invest. "There are a lot of reasons for that, and not just the
American embargo, which the Vietnamese themselves will eventually discover," he
said.


An American in Hanoi

Eugene A. Matthews, 32 years old, stands at the cusp of what he sees as a great
Vietnamese market. He is the only American businessman living in Hanoi.

Like a sensible gambler, Mr. Matthews has positioned himself to deal with either
the Americans or the Japanese. A Harvard-educated lawyer fluent in Japanese, he
worked for a Japanese company before founding his own investment holding
company, Ashta International Inc.

He convinced the Vietnamese to let him live in Hanoi, nominally as a student at
Hanoi University. There, he studies Vietnamese along with business
opportunities, while being careful not to spend more than the $200 a day allowed
by the United States Treasury Department.

Mr. Matthews said the American embargo is allowing the Japanese to steal a march
on American companies. They are opening offices, exploring trade and joint
ventures and winning the trust of the suspicious Vietnamese. "The Vietnamese
know that investors want to make prudent investments," he said. "But there is a
paranoia about being exploited by Western capitalism, which can lead them to
mess up a bit in negotiations and be too tough."

The big Japanese trading firms are willing to lose money now for the sake of a
large market later.  All the large Japanese corporate groups, or "zaibatsu," are
already in Vietnam or about to come.

Japan is already Vietnam's second-largest trading partner after the Soviet
Union, with exports and imports expected to reach $700 million this year.
Western bankers say Japanese companies have been trading with Vietnam through
middlemen since 1978. Once the companies open their own offices, these bankers
say, Japanese bankers will be close behind. "There's nothing magic about what
they're doing," a Western banker here said. "The Taiwanese and South Koreans are
doing the same thing in a smaller way."


LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A T-shirt vendor in the streets of Ho Chi Minh City. (Steven
Erlanger/The New York Times)

Table: "Investing in Vietnam," showing leading investors in Vietnam from Jan. 1
to Oct. 3, 1990 (Source: Vietnam State Committee for Cooperation and Investment)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Civilian Soldiers;
Limbo of Mojave Tests Mettle for Hell of War

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1398 words

DATELINE: FORT IRWIN, Calif., Feb. 14


The ground war starts here on Sunday for the National Guardsmen of Alpha Company
in a 12-day mock battle intended to show that thispatchwork group of civilian
soldiers has transformed itself into an efficient fighting unit ready to join
the front lines in Saudi Arabia.

After weeks of training in the fine white sand of the Mojave Desert, the
teachers, insurance agents, gardeners and police officers who make up this unit
of the Georgia National Guard are facing the test with a mixture of bravado and
self-doubt that echoes the feelings expressed by the troops awaiting ground
combat in the Persian Gulf.

"Sure, we look like misfits," said Sgt. James A. Burris, a 45-year-old vending
machine attendant from Atlanta who served in the infantry in Vietnam in 1968.
"We have some guys with long hair. Some of us are old men. But we are one
family. We care about each other. We have our act together."

It is an assessment that is not shared by military planners in Washington, who
this week reassigned the unit's commanding general, and who are now saying more
time will be needed before the men are ready to be sent to war.

The soldiers of Alpha Company, or Company A, of the First Battalion of the 108th
Armor, part of the Georgia National Guard, are members of the first guard
brigade to be placed on active duty, and potentially the first to be sent into
combat. So far in the gulf war, Guard members and reservists have served only in
support roles behind the lines.

Clustered around the sand-colored M-1 tanks they call their homes, adjusting
treads, cleaning machine guns, playing chess, and writing letters, the men
talked of the painful limbo in which they live, suspended between their civilian
and military lives.

They talked of wives and children who still turn to them at long distance for
help with leaking faucets or crises at school, and of the questions they ask
themselves about their own mettle in battles to come.

There are questions being asked intensively now at the Pentagon, during the
first mobilization of America's part-time warriors since the Vietnam era, as
planners assess a policy integrating reserve units into regular active-duty
detachments.

Under an experiment begun in 1973, after the abandonment of the draft, the 48th
brigade "rounds out" the 24th Infantry Division, a regular Army unit that is
already in Saudi Arabia.

The Pentagon's planners are now saying it appears that Guard and reserve units
like this one cannot be relied on, in future planning, for a quick activation
like the one under way.

The continuing doubts expressed by military commanders about their readiness
anger the guardsmen, who have been on continuous maneuvers here for more than a
month, going weeks between showers and sharing their tanks with families of mice
and lizards.

"I get tired of hearing that the 48th Battalion is no good, that we're not
ready," said First Lieut. Paul Tamburrino, an administrator with J.C. Penney in
Atlanta. "We may not be the best unit in the world, but we're getting better
every day."

Sharing and Differing

But despite a shared pride in their unit, the men are far from unanimous about
their mission here.

"I just happen to be one of the crazy fools that volunteered for this mess,"
Cpl. Franklin Shaun McGinnis said happily as he sat atop his tank surrounded by
packages of food from home.

A young automobile plant worker who joined Alpha Company from his Army Reserve
unit in Kentucky, Corporal McGinnis said: "I feel I was trained to do this job,
trained real well to do this job. I feel I should be over there in Saudi Arabia
helping my fellow teammates."

Content in the sunshine and the gritty dust of the desert, he added, "If you'll
want some cookies, you know who to come to. I've also got some M&M's."

But Staff Sgt. Robert Arnfelt, 43, a flight-line mechanic for Lockheed in
Marietta, took the opposite view, saying, "I think they should let most of us
get back to our regular jobs and regular lives. It gets tiresome after a while.
I think I've seen enough sand to last me a lifetime."

He said his pay now was about half of what he was earning before he was called
up, "but the bills just keep coming in." At home, he said, "The kids are failing
school. I think about them all the time and I wish I was back with them. All the
questions they come up with, grown-up questions that their mother can't answer."

Speaking of his rare chances to talk on the telephone with his 17-year-old
daughter and 13-year-old son, he said: "I just tell them I'll be home one of
these days. There's not much else I can tell them."

Sounding Like Soldiers

As the men of Alpha Company have become tougher and more able here in the
desert, they have also begun to sound more and more like soldiers, their speech
studded with military acronyms along with complaints about boredom, bad food and
loneliness.

When First Lieut. Bill Jinright, a life insurance salesman from Dalton, turned
29 eight days ago, he said, "I sang happy birthday to myself, but that was about
the extent of it."

Except for two days at Christmas, the 110 men who left Rome, Ga., for training
at Fort Stewart, Ga., on their way to the Mojave Desert, have been away from
their families since Dec. 3.

At night, when the temperature falls here as it does in the desert of Saudi
Arabia, the men huddle close to the warm engines of their tanks, and their talk
sometimes turns to the uncertainties of warfare.

"Most of the men here, if they ever have real bullets firing back at them, they
don't know how they're going to react," said Sgt. Jackie Dutton, 39, a painter
and handyman from Rome who was an Army combat engineer in Vietnam in the early
1970's.

Advice on Killing



Sergeant Burris, the vending machine attendant and Vietnam veteran, said some of
the younger men look to him for advice because, "I've been under fire. I've seen
people killed. I've seen dead babies along the side of the highway."

One of these young men is the 21-year-old gunner in the tank in which Sergeant
Burris is the driver.

"I wonder, when the time comes, if he's going to be able to pull the trigger,"
the sergeant said. "We are trying to teach him the killer instinct. We stay on
him. We keep telling him, this is no game. This is for real. You've got to pull
the trigger."

The battle that begins on Sunday will be fought with harmless laser beams rather
than live ammunition, but the men here say that even a laser "kill," which can
trigger an ear-splitting alarm, can be harrowing.

The "enemy" will be an experienced training unit known as "OpFor" based at Fort
Irwin, 100 miles northeast of Los Angeles, that has adopted the defenses and
tactics of Iraqi armor.

Through the Wire

On a recent one-day maneuver, the battle plan required the tanks and Bradley
fighting vehicles of Alpha Company to breach a trench 10 feet deep and 15 feet
wide, roll over a sand mound above it, skirt a minefield, cut through
triple-strand concertina wire and blast a line of OpFor tanks dug in on a ridge.

The exercise started well when the lead M-1, mounted with a mine-clearing plow,
crossed the trench and began cutting a safety swath. But it slowed suddenly when
the tank fell to enemy fire, a yellow light mounted on its turret blinking to
signal a laser hit.

"Roger, let's roll! Go! Go! Go!" the company commander, Capt. Roy C. Mears Jr.,
a 34-year-old gardener from Rome, barked over his radio. After a moment of
hesitation, half a dozen 62-ton M-1's rumbled through the mine-free area, their
105-millimeter guns swiveling back and forth.

"You get an adrenaline rush off of it," said Specialist 4 Gary Dowdy, a tank
driver in the Second Platoon, and at 19 the company's youngest soldier.

At night when the adrenaline has subsided, the fears remain even for an old hand
like Sergeant Burris.

"Sometimes I look up at the stars at night, and I can see shooting stars up
there, and I say, 'Man, why doesn't somebody get me out of here?"' he said.
"Sometimes I cry at night and I ask myself, 'Will I make it?' "

He said he likes to think of his favorite television series, "Star Trek," and to
imagine that he could leave his hardships and float up to join the stars he can
see. "I look up and I think, 'I'm ready to go,"' said Sergeant Burris. "I say:
'Hey, Scotty, beam me up. I'm ready to go any time.' "


LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Company A: A periodic visit to a Guard tank unit preparing for the gulf.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Soldiers of Alpha Company of the First Battalion of the 108th
Armor, part of the Georgia National Guard, going over their tank battle tactics
during a review at the National Training Center in Fort Irwin, Calif. Theirs is
the first Guard brigade to be placed on active duty in the gulf war; "I've been
under fire. I've seen people killed," said Sgt. James A. Burris, a vending
machine attendant from Atlanta who served in the infantry in Vietnam; "I get
tired of hearing that the 48th Battalion is no good, that we're not ready," said
First Lieut. Paul Tamburrino, an administrator with J.C. Penney in Atlanta.
(Photographs by Bart Bartholemew for The New York Times)

Map: California, indicating Fort Irwin Military Reservation.

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Saddam's Signal;
Underneath The Theatrics, A First Hint Of Concession

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1304 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


STRIP away the conditions, the flowery language and the hoopla surrounding the
latest Iraqi peace overture and what you are left with is a core fact: Saddam
Hussein flinched.

More than six months after invading Kuwait, and after a month of pounding by an
international army, the Iraqi President finally uttered the word "withdrawal."
To be sure, he surrounded that concession with a forest of conditions designed
as much to disguise his weakness as to probe what sort of payoff he might be
able to get for giving back that which he never should have taken. But a
concession it was. Nevertheless, it is far too early to pronounce this the
beginning of the end of the crisis. It is a new phase, though, in which Saddam
Hussein's steely gaze has given way to a certain groping for the exit.

It is instructive, at this turning point, to reflect on the reasons for the
Iraqi overture, because President Hussein's offer punctured many myths about
this conflict and spoke many unintended truths.

The first myth is the one peddled by various Middle East experts that President
Hussein believes he can win by losing -- that even if he is driven out of Kuwait
in a ground war all he has to do is inflict thousands of casualties on the
coalition forces and he will be hailed as a hero at home and in the Arab world
for having defied the West.

No one seems to appreciate what nonsense that is more than Mr. Hussein. He knows
you don't get to be a hero by elegantly losing. You get to be Gen. George C.
Custer or, at best, Gamal Abdel Nasser after the 1967 war, when his stature was
radically diminished.

Mr. Hussein seemed to be telling the world last week that he understands that
having ruined his country's economy, put its armed forces through a meat grinder
and isolated Iraq as an outlaw state, he more than ever needs something to show
for it. No one needs to explain to him that one doesn't retire gracefully as the
leader of Iraq: there is no Santa Barbara on the Euphrates. The law of the land
is rule or die, and unless he brings something back from this war he will indeed
be in peril.

The image of Iraq as a battle-hardened warrior state is also largely a myth. For
the most part, its eight-year war with Iran took place on battlefields far from
Baghdad and other cities. Thanks to Iraqi oil money and Arab gulf aid, life went
on normally in Iraq throughout its war with Iran and a new and relatively
pampered middle class was even born. Iraq was never an austere North Vietnam,
and it has never been asked to withstand the levels of deprivation now being
meted out.

This is one way to explain the wish list President Hussein attached to his peace
overture -- including a demand that an Iraqi pullout be linked to an Israeli
pullout from the occupied territories and a demand that the countries
participating in the war against Iraq must "undertake to rebuild what the
aggression has destroyed." President Bush dismissed that list as a "cruel hoax,"
and added for good measure that the Iraqi people should now try to oust Saddam
Hussein from power.

Another thing that the Iraqi leader's overture highlights is that the course of
battle, and not anything that happens around a negotiating table, will define
both this conflict and its aftermath. He clearly made this offer because he is
losing the battle on the ground.

The bombing last week of a hardened shelter in Baghdad, in which several hundred
Iraqi civilians were hiding unbeknown to the American command, was a tragic
event, and one the Iraqis tried to exploit in order to generate sympathy. But it
is important to distinguish between how the Iraqi leadership wants the West to
think about that tragic bombing and how they themselves probably thought about
it. It had to have been a sobering event, or, as one senior Administration
official put it: "Don't forget, that was only one of several command bunkers we
hit that night. The message to the Iraqi leadership was that 10 feet of concrete
didn't protect anyone."

In other words, it probably was not a coincidence that the Iraqi overture,
signed by the entire Revolutionary Command Council, came less than 48 hours
after that bombing. Just as it was not an accident that the chairman of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, Yasir Arafat, finally agreed to withdraw from
Beirut in August 1982 only after a wild day of Israeli bombing demonstrated to
him that the Israelis were prepared to be as ruthless as he was.

Wars take their grisly toll, and after men finish denouncing their enemies as
cruel and cowardly, after they vow revenge before the television cameras, they
quietly add up their losses and reconcile themselves with certain realities. It
has always been thus. There is not likely to be any charity here, or time-outs.
From the start of this conflict the choices for President Hussein were clear:
war or the bazaar. President Hussein chose the battlefield and now he wants to
go back to the bazaar. But he missed the turn.

That is why the prize for ironic quote of the week goes to the unidentified
Iraqi official who said to the Associated Press in Baghdad: "Why is the United
States attacking again when we have offered them a way out?" Mr. Bush is not
looking for a way out. He is looking for a military victory, because American
officials are convinced that only on the basis of a total victory in which
Saddam Hussein emerges a clear-cut loser in the eyes of his own people and the
region at large will any of their postwar political goals be achievable.

Even the Soviets, who apparently helped elicit the latest Iraqi offer through
the visit to Baghdad last week by their envoy Yevgeny M. Primakov, were
initially enthusiastic, but after a closer reading, noticeably cooled toward the
initiative. That seemed to suggest that until Mr. Hussein comes up with
something more concrete -- say a partial withdrawal from Kuwait and then an
appeal for some compensation -- he is unlikely to fracture the coalition. The
Soviets want to demonstrate some independence, but they won't isolate themselves
from their Western financial backers to save Saddam Hussein if he isn't ready to
save himself.

It was no accident that the pro-American Arab states, such as Egypt and Saudi
Arabia, were also quick to denounce the Iraqi offer as a sham. They understand
that if Mr. Hussein were let off the hook now, he would emerge from this war
with part of his army still intact, and seething with revenge. The Arabs still
standing with America do so not as some favor to Mr. Bush, but because they know
the rules of their world: You take a ride with the tiger, you gamble and bid for
power, and there is no mercy for the loser.

Their steadfastness, interestingly, comes after a week in which many analysts
were predicting that the tide of Arab public opinion was now turning decisively
in favor of Mr. Hussein. Actually, there seemed to be a general bewilderment in
the faces of the pro-Iraqi Arabs interviewed on the streets of Amman, or firing
their guns in celebration in Baghdad, after the Iraqi peace offer. Was this a
triumph they were celebrating, or the familiar ride with a pretender who tempted
the fates and was now telling them to dismount?

The image of the Arab world is of a land of romantic hazy dreams, where men
don't know how to calculate their own interests and where politics defies the
laws of gravity. It is anything but. What Saddam Hussein reminded everyone of
last week is that the laws of gravity also apply to him. That is not at all to
say that the battle up to now has been easy or that America and its allies will
be able to rest easy when it is over, or that power alone can redefine the
Middle East. Many troubles lie ahead. It simply means that for everything there
is a season and this is the season of war and it will be defined by the logic of
war.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq meeting in Baghdad last week
with the Soviet envoy Yevgeny M. Primakov; President Bush speaking on Friday at
the Raytheon plant in Andover, Mass., where Patriot missile components are
produced. (Agence France-Presse); In television footage cleared by Iraq,
grieving relatives are shown outside a bombed building in Baghdad last week.
(CNN via Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
The Right War Machine Provides a Decisive Edge

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 3; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1170 words

DATELINE: RIYADH , Saudi Arabia


THROUGH the 1950's and 1960's, the United States spent most of its weapons
dollars on machines to beat the Soviet Union with. Then, in Vietnam, it had to
make do with those weapons against an enemy that didn't fight the way the
Soviets fight in a place that bore no resemblance at all to the north European
plains. Hunting mosquitoes with howitzers. It didn't work.

As procurement accelerated again in the late 1970's and 1980's, the Soviet Union
was again the presumptive enemy, but in the war in the Persian Gulf, the
Americans have been more fortunate. The Soviets aren't the foe -- indeed,
they're an ally this time -- but Iraq fights mainly with Soviet weapons
according to Soviet tactical doctrine, and the desert terrain of Kuwait is
militarily not so very different from the fields of northern Europe.

So tanks, missiles and high-performance aircraft, all only marginally useful in
Vietnam, are just what the general ordered in the gulf.

That is one of the most important explanations of the militarily commanding
position in which the anti-Iraq coalition finds itself this weekend as the
second month of the war begins. No one knows for sure yet why President Saddam
Hussein of Iraq suddenly offered on Friday to talk about withdrawing from
Kuwait, but it is certainly plausible to conclude that he has begun to realize
how perilous the situation of his fighting forces has become.

The two events of the last week that captured the most headlines were the
American attack on what turned out, at least in part and at least at the moment
of the attack, to be a civilian bomb shelter in Baghdad, and the peace
initiative, which raised hopes everywhere until the fine print was read.

But it could be that the most important development was the extraordinary
speed-up in the rate at which allied bombers were able, according to official
statistics, to destroy enemy artillery and armor. In less than a week, Pentagon
numbers indicated, fighter-bombers and B-52's ranging up and down the potential
battlefield in Kuwait andsouthern Iraq put 550 Iraqi tanks out of action, almost
as many as they had demolished in the three previous weeks combined. One in
three of the main battle tanks on which Mr. Hussein has counted so heavily is
now gone.

He still has huge stockpiles of chemical weapons, and Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf, the allied commander, has conceded that they are so well dispersed
and well hidden that there's not much chance of eliminating them.

But after the air blitz of recent days, allied headquarters says a third of the
3,110 artillery pieces Iraq started the war with have also been destroyed. The
fewer the howitzers, the less the threat from poison gas, because the other main
means of spreading the noxious clouds, low-flying aircraft, is no longer
available to Mr. Hussein, except on an episodic basis. Like his air-defense
planes, his attack planes have been taken out of the equation, at least as a
force that can be used in a coordinated thrust.

Not many enemy defectors have come in, and their testimony is suspect, because
such people almost always exaggerate to please their new masters, and because
the line-crossers so far have mostly come from marginal units. Nonetheless, what
they have said, together with the physical evidence of blasted spans of bridges
across the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers, is enough to lend credibility to the
Pentagon's contention that Mr. Hussein has severe supply problems that will only
get worse in the coming days and weeks.

"Every night it is bomb, bomb, bomb," said an Iraqi prisoner of war the other
day, bootless, sitting on a blanket in the desert. Bombs can batter morale; even
the sinewy North Vietnamese admitted that after the war. But they can also
stiffen the determination to fight. A colonel listened to a general carry on for
several minutes one night last week about the shredded, quaking Iraqi defenders
that awaited an allied ground offensive and remarked quietly, "Remember Tarawa,
sir." Bombs and naval guns plastered that Pacific atoll in days of "battlefield
preparation" like that now taking place here, and the Japanese were still
murderously difficult to oust.

President Bush wants to improve the chances that Iraqi resistance will be less
vigorous, and he has been persuaded that more allied air raids can help achieve
that. The Pentagon figures on tanks and artillery appear to have borne him out,
and the bombing missions continue, as many as 800 bomb runs a day over Kuwait
and as many as 200 over the Republican Guards positions along Kuwait's border
with Iraq.

The Battle Plan

The decision has already been taken, to hear General Schwarzkopf and others tell
it, that there will be no all-out frontal assault against Iraqi fortifications
along Kuwait's southern boundary.  The plan appears to involve amphibious
landings north and south of Kuwait City; a great wheeling movement to the left
by American, British and perhaps French armor, which would bring them upon the
Guards from the west, and the deployment of airborne and air assault troops
behind enemy lines. Some or all of that, it is hoped, would draw the remaining
Iraqi main tanks into the open, where Warthog attack planes, Cobra helicopters
and other aircraft could knock them out.

During the Iran-Iraq war, Iraqi communiques boasted endlessly about military
triumphs and valor, but the reality was different. Baghdad's armies were timid,
poorly motivated and immobile, with little taste for battle once out from behind
their parapets.

Unless Mr. Hussein sweetens his peace terms soon, or his maneuvering weakens the
coalition by persuading some members that ground fighting should wait a while,
or Mr. Bush elects not to escalate for domestic political reasons, many officers
expect the offensive to be launched this week. If not this week, next. The
allies are approaching the 50 percent degradation of enemy weapons strength that
the British Defense Minister, Tom King, indiscreetly but accurately cited as one
of the main requisites for setting the battle in motion.

An Eye on the Weather



Other things being equal, moreover, General Schwarzkopf would rather not fight
in the sandstorms that will come in about three weeks or the heat that will
replace the current chill starting in about five to six weeks.

The allies are about as ready as they are going to get. The last tanks have
arrived; supplies are, for the most part, plentiful; troops have trained and
retrained until they can go through their paces in their sleep. Optimists think
it could all be over in a matter of days; pessimists speak of several weeks of
intense, bloody fighting, and recall that even Hitler, battered as he was by
Christmas 1944, still mounted the counterattack that led to the Battle of the
Bulge.

But Hitler didn't win that battle or the war, and Saddam Hussein, whatever his
prospects of gaining political and propaganda triumphs of considerable
importance, seems further than ever from military victory.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of the 1st Marine Division charging barbed-wire barriers
last week in northern Saudi Arabia during training in ground-war tactics. (Pool
photo via Associated Press)(pg. 3)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Blackford Oakes Goes to Nam

BYLINE: By David Haward Bain; David Haward Bain is the author of "Aftershocks"
and "Sitting in Darkness," nonfiction books about Vietnam and the Philippines

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 999 words



TUCKER'S LAST STAND
By William F. Buckley Jr.
259 pp. New York:
Random House.
$19.95.

This is the ninth spy thriller to feature William F. Buckley Jr.'s energetic
(and peripatetic) alter ego, the C.I.A. agent Blackford Oakes, who has romped
and battled his way past most of the signposts of the cold war; inevitably,
having addressed postwar Berlin, Eastern Europe, the U-2 incident, Cuba and
sundry other events and issues, Mr. Buckley now introduces his character to
Vietnam. It is 1964, and Oakes has been ordered on a secret task designed to
help bring about the Vietnam War. Oakes's mission succeeds. Alas, Mr. Buckley's
novel does not.

His premise is, as usual, a good one. "Tucker's Last Stand" takes place during
that time of domestic and international drama when President Lyndon Baines
Johnson faced Senator Barry Goldwater in a highly contentious Presidential
campaign, when our costly entanglement in Southeast Asia was still largely a
gleam in the eyes of Pentagon officials and not really a certainty in the mind
of President Johnson, when many colorful political figures were still alive and
thus available to answer Mr. Buckley's plot needs.

Accordingly, the narrative rocks back and forth in settings as various as the
White House swimming pool, Saigon, New York, the Laotian jungle, Arizona, Danang
harbor, Hanoi and C.I.A. headquarters in Langley, Va. Scenes are often populated
more by actual historical characters -- L.B.J., Mr. Goldwater, Robert F. Kennedy
and others -- than by those of the author's invention, although by dint of his
research and extrapolation, Mr. Buckley has allowed us access to these real
people's minds. In moving his narrative from the increasingly ugly Presidential
campaign to the high-stakes plotting in South Vietnam, the author does connect
all the dots, factual and imagined, but he does not produce a persuasive
narrative. Too often there are pointless scenes clearly meant to establish
verisimilitude, but which do not advance the plot or (even) explain Mr.
Buckley's opinions about the events he is re-creating. And much too frequently,
for a novel of action and intrigue, page after page is expended on monologues
and long conversations. Characters discourse at length while crouching in
guerrilla-infested jungles. They expostulate in cafes and in helicopters. They
explain over the telephone. They hold forth in meetings. They even lecture in
bed -- and about politics, not passion. "Tucker's Last Stand" is the talkiest of
the Blackford Oakes series.

With much of the action occurring offstage, we are left with Mr. Buckley's
ideas. They are not earthshaking. Apparently, it was important for Mr. Buckley
to tell us that Senator Goldwater (a major character in this story) was not the
reckless nuclear maniac he was advertised to be by the Democratic Party; that
President Johnson was pointedly uncouth; that Robert F. Kennedy was, if not
ruthless, then ambitious; that Jack Valenti did Presidential errands and Bill
Moyers helped orchestrate the press. One gets the feeling that Mr. Buckley is
using his superspy to settle old ideological scores. Manipulation all but
eclipses the storytelling and stifles the famous Buckley wit. Improbabilities
poke up much more noticeably, and objectionably, than in previous Oakes
escapades. And passages of leaden prose, camouflaged by plot or action in the
previous books, are all too frequent.

The title character is Tucker Montana, an adventurer who seems to have found his
twin in the smart, rugged, priapic, nonconforming Blackford Oakes. They are even
the same age. As is typical of books in this genre, Montana's life has taken him
through exceedingly improbable twists and turns (more so, even, than Blackford
Oakes himself). Scientifically precocious, he went from the military's campus
V-12 program during World War II directly to Los Alamos, where he invented the
trigger device for the atomic bomb. He was aboard the plane that dropped the
bomb on Hiroshima. The nuclear devastation he witnessed rocked his faith, both
political and religious, but subsequently he recovered from a nervous breakdown,
joined and quit the Benedictines, fought the Chinese in Korea and Communist
guerrillas in the Philippines and became a valuable "special operations" agent
for the Army.

Dispatched to South Vietnam before the commitment of American ground troops and
heavy air support, Montana and Oakes are given separate clandestine duties.
Oakes is to focus on the coastline and on slowing down the flow of North
Vietnamese military aid transported south in ostensibly civilian sea traffic;
Montana is to cut off aid moving along the Ho Chi Minh Trail. Superior
technology, of course, will be the answer to both problems. By the end, the
secret missions of Montana and Oakes convey the undeniably valuable (but hardly
fresh) moral that superior numbers and even technological genius will fall
before the force of die-hard, grass roots nationalism.

Since it is not the first time that Oakes finishes his adventure by quitting his
job in protest of his Government's actions, it does not give away anything to
disclose it here. Considering the delicacy of this mission, it seems certain
that his superiors will see that he is quietly "disappeared." Anything else
stretches credulity to the shattering point. But Mr. Buckley and his publisher
will object; Oakes is too much of a commodity. Even now Oakes is probably being
prepared to parachute into Nicaragua and the Irangate mess, to rehabilitate John
Poindexter and Oliver North. But beyond there is another direction that might
appeal to Mr. Buckley's well-known political sensibility. Why not give Blackford
Oakes a time machine? Unfettered from his own life's chronology, he could finger
Big Bill Haywood, collar Sacco and Vanzetti, ambush Sandino, pilot Franco back
to Spain and find a pumpkin for Whittaker Chambers. That's five novels right
there. Certainly Mr. Buckley is as up to the task as is his indefatigable hero.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: War Notebook;
This Time, Better Deal For Black Servicemen?

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 619 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Feb. 17


American troops say they think, and hope, that the war against Iraq has forever
changed the way hundreds of thousands of black and white servicemen see one
another.

"You know the saying, 'There's no atheists in a foxhole?' " said a Marine staff
sergeant, Bruce Shaw. "If the ground war starts, there will be no blacks or
whites out there, just marines."

Black soldiers and white soldiers often formed close bonds in the jungle
battlefields of the Vietnam War. But too often, the friendships fell apart when
the troops returned home.

Many black Vietnam veterans said they resented how they were treated by white
commanders, who, they complained, said, exhibited a not-so-subtle racism.

Few soldiers will deny that there is lingering racism in the military.

But many hope that things will be different when the troops head home this time,
if only because so many blacks and other officers from minority groups have
risen to top positions -- most importantly, Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

First Sgt. Frank Sinkler of the Marine Corps told an American pool reporter that
General Powell was, for both black and white servicemen, "the American dream
come true."

"He's telling the black community anything is possible," he said. "He is a
self-made man who is setting new trends and goals for everybody."

Hair Is the First Casualty

Another sign of an imminent ground war: Journalists close to the front lines
have been advised in recent days to submit to short, military-style haircuts,
known as "high-and-tights." Long hair and sideburns, they are being told, could
prevent a gas mask from sealing properly.

Arabs and Airplanes

American military officials say the war against Iraq has inspired a revolution
in the tactics of Arab armies.

For the first time, the Americans say, Arab soldiers are preparing to go to war
with allied aircraft flying overhead for protection.

It has been a hard sell by the Americans. Until now, Arab ground forces went to
war without air support, a reflection of a longstanding belief that it was too
difficult to tell the difference between friend and foe in the air.

Capt. David R. E. Halla of the Air Force, who has been working with the Kuwaiti
Army, told an American pool reporter that it was difficult at first to persuade
the Kuwaitis that allied planes could save their lives.

For years, he said, Arab military strategy held that "if they see an airplane,
they think it must be the enemy, so they shoot it down."

"In the Iran-Iraq war," he continued, "80 percent of the planes the Iraqis lost,
they shot down themselves."

What has changed many Arab minds, he said, is the A-10 Thunderbolt, a quiet,
slow-flying American attack plane that has been credited with destroying much
Iraqi armor.

No Bargain for the French

In a world without shopping malls or all-night convenience stores, soldiers camp
out in the middle of the vast Saudi desert and make do like the Bedouins.

They bargain over and swap the necessities of life: rain ponchos for webbed
belts, boots for a bayonet.

Now, there is an international flavor to some of the haggling. American soldiers
sick to death of prepackaged meals struck a deal when they met some French
troops .

According to a pool report, American soldiers began trading their rations for
the French equivalent, which come in a shoebox-size cardboard carton with cans
of sardines and tuna, thicker crackers than the American variety and French
entrees.

The Americans enjoyed the French food. But according to the pool report, the
French could barely tolerate what their American colleagues were expected to
eat. Few of the swaps are reportedly being made anymore.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cpl. Maria Gervasi, a radio operator in the Second Force Service
Support Group, filling sandbags as punishment for misplacing her rifle. The bags
are used to set up bunkers and defensive positions. (Pool photograph via
Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Washington Journal;
By the Center of Power, The Center for Protest

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 726 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 17


Janice Williams, a Detroit history teacher, brought students to Lafayette Park
last week so they could not only photograph the White House across the street
but also see the antiwar protesters in the park.

"This is history, too," said Ms. Williams about the dozen people protesting the
Persian Gulf war from cardboard pallets on the sidewalk.

The students from Farwell Middle School in Detroit milled about reading signs
like "Real Eyes Realize Real Lies" and avoiding a blanket-wrapped homeless woman
who was mumbling protests against her own internal war.

"My mother is in the Army Reserves and waiting for her call-up letter," said
Franklin Cleofhas, 12 years old, adjusting a cap labeled "Desert Shield." "I
just wanted to see what they were saying."

Since Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2, thousands of antiwar protesters have come
to Lafayette Park, seven acres of pin oaks and magnolias directly north of the
White House across Pennsylvania Avenue that are a Grand Central Terminal of
dissent.

But they are only the latest in a parade of the disgruntled, including families
of hostages held in the Middle East, abortion foes, opponents to nuclear power
and nuclear war, Albanian-Americans lobbying for Yugoslavia's Albanians,
supporters of the homeless and, on any day of the week, opponents of United
States policy in virtually any spot on the globe.

"Lafayette Park is a unique site for demonstrations because it's the symbolic
center of Government here in the United States, especially as power is viewed as
emanating from the White House," said Arthur B. Spitzer, legal director of the
local chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union. "It's the Hyde Park Corner
of the U.S."

Unlike that corner for soapbox speakers in London, Lafayette Park came into its
own as a protest property only during the Vietnam War.

"It was like guerrilla tactics all across the city then," said Earle Kittleman,
a spokesman for the National Park Service.

During those protests the Park Service, which has been responsible for Lafayette
Park since 1933, adopted regulations that required a permit for demonstrations
and limited the number of participants to 500. Later the United States Court of
Appeals raised the number to 3,000. Newer rules limit the size of signs,
prohibit building and ban camping, and more are being proposed.

Mark C. Billington, an antiwar protester who was beating a drum a few feet from
where Jun Yasuda, a Japanese nun, chanted to the beat of a similar drum, was
particularly attuned to a rule limiting noise.

"The police came around with a decibel meter, saying we couldn't exceed 60
decibels at 50 feet," Mr. Billington said. "But they gave up. By that measure
even the crows and sea gulls were illegal."

Last month President Bush complained that protesters pounding on huge drums had
kept him awake at night. Several drummers were arrested, but the drumming has
continued, though at a lower level. Mr. Kittleman said 121 people have been
arrested in the park or on the sidewalk across the street in front of the White
House since the fighting began in the gulf. The usual charge is demonstrating
without a permit, a misdemeanor carrying a $50 fine.

The land that became Lafayette Park was bought by the Government for $469 in
1791. Originally known as the President's Park, it was separated from the White
House lawn in the 1800's by President Thomas Jefferson, who wanted the public to
use it. When the Park Service took it over, it was officially named after the
Marquis de Lafayette, the French general and American Revolutionary hero.

Statues of Lafayette and three other Revolutionary heroes stand at the corners
of the park. An equestrian statue of Andrew Jackson stands in the middle.
Visitors and office workers come to the park to play chess, stroll by its formal
plantings, or sit and think on its benches.

Bernard Baruch, the New York financier and elder statesman, used to hold regular
conferences with reporters and Government officials on a bench near the Jackson
statue, telling them how much better he could run the Government if only
President Franklin D. Roosevelt would give him a job.

Baruch's critiques were undoubtedly more elegant and less ostentatious than
those of the year-round protesters who have taken his place in Lafayette Park.
Baruch also probably got a better hearing.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Since Iraq invaded Kuwait, thousands of demonstrators have come
to Lafayette Park, across the street from the White House, to protest. Because
of its location, the park has been host to demonstrations against abortion,
nuclear power and various United States policies. (Michael Geissinger for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              357 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Smugglers Overrun Germany's Border With East

BYLINE: By JOHN TAGLIABUE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 765 words

DATELINE: DRESDEN, Germany, Feb. 12


The Pannonia Express from Sofia, via Budapest, rumbled in pretty much on time,
and disgorged a group of men in dark clothes with bulging tote bags. Minutes
later, they haggled in sign language near Dresden's cavernous terminal with a
group of Vietnamese over prices for shabby sweaters that spilled from their
bags.

The traders, Hungarian gypsies and Vietnamese migrant workers stranded in what
used to be Communist East Germany, are part of an explosion of smuggling along
united Germany's border with the East. For if Germany is bracing for a predicted
wave of refugees from Eastern Europe, pushed to desert their homes by collapsing
economies in countries like Romania, Poland and the Soviet Union, the vanguard
consists of a legion of con men and contraband specialists who are taxing
Germany's ability to police its newly acquired eastern borders.

Market Was Disbanded

"Smuggling is surging," said Harry Baumann, a senior customs officer in Saxony,
along the mountainous border with Czechoslovakia. "All highly taxed goods, like
liquor, cigarettes, but also textiles, like sweaters."

Throughout eastern Germany, the scenes resemble the one at Dresden's station. On
folding clothes lines, Vietnamese traders display cheap Hungarian sweaters at
$10 each, pirated pop music tapes from Poland at $5, contraband Czechoslovak and
Polish cigarettes. Along Prager Strasse, two Poles hawk Becherovka brandy from
the Czech spa of Karlovy Vary. "Genuine stuff," one boasts. "Half liter, 10
marks." That is about $7.

Police officials at Dresden's station described how, until December, the main
hall turned into a huge market every morning at 5:45 when the night train from
Budapest arrived, until police and customs officials drove the smugglers
underground.

Embittered by the competition, Germany's cigarette industry, which spent
millions to paper eastern Germany with ads after Communism fell, protested to
the Bonn Government. Contraband Czechoslovak cigarettes go for one to two marks
a pack, compared with about four marks for Western cigarettes.

Mr. Baumann, who is from Stuttgart in western Germany, led a visitor through
cellar storerooms of confiscated cigarettes. Elsewhere, big plastic sacks of
sweaters climbed to the ceiling. In the courtyard, two trailer trucks, snatched
last week en route from Hungary with more than 5,000 smuggled sweaters, stood
idle.

In the last half year, officials along the 275-mile border with Czechoslovakia
confiscated 3.8 million cigarettes, 10,600 tapes and 21,500 sweaters. On the
Polish border, 300 pounds of caviar and, in one raid, 5,000 gallons of diesel
fuel were seized.

Typically, the smugglers are eastern Europeans -- Czechoslovaks, Romanians and
Poles -- or Vietnamese.They evade customs controls by hiding relatively small
amounts of goods in ceiling cavities and bathrooms of trains. The goods are
distributed to Vietnamese retailers on arrival in Germany. In January, of all
the smugglers detained in Dresden, there were 56 Bulgarians, 4 Czechoslovaks, 2
Poles, one Hungarian, and the rest Vietnamese.

Border Crossed in Darkness

For decades, Communist countries like Czechoslovakia and East Germany imported
tens of thousands of Vietnamese to ease labor shortages. Though many have
returned home, thousands are seeking political asylum as a means of staying in
Europe. A recent raid on a Vietnamese workers' hotel, near Dresden, uncovered a
cache of more than 454,000 smuggled cigarettes.

Far larger amounts of goods, however, are hauled by truck to the border, where
they are carried through the mountains on the backs of Vietnamese or gypsies at
night, to be picked up by accomplices on the German side.

The Bonn Government hopes to have the borders controlled by March. To that end,
former East German customs officers are being retrained, and Western officials
like Mr. Baumann are on loan to the new regions of Germany.

Demand for tighter surveillance in the East is growing, fueled by fears of an
impending invasion of refugees. Already, small numbers are trickling in.

The Polish daily Rzeczpospolita has reported that more than 280 people were
seized in January trying to sneak across Poland's 275-mile border with Germany.
In the first four days of February, the paper said, 32 people were caught. In
the Schmilka district of Saxony, on the Czech border, 57 people were detained in
January, including 25 Romanians, seeking to reach prosperous Germany, Mr.
Baumann said.

"The grand migration has not yet begun," he said. "But should it come, we can
only hope we'll be ready for it."

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map: Map of Germany showing location of Dresden.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              358 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Troops;
Some G.I.'s in Gulf Vanquish An Old Foe: Drink or Drugs

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1044 words

DATELINE: JUBAIL, Saudi Arabia, Feb. 17


The war against Iraq may not be over soon, but many American soldiers and airmen
stationed in Saudi Arabia for several months appear to be winning a victory over
alcohol and drug abuse.

Because this strictly Muslim nation bars the consumption of liquor and because
illicit drugs are all but impossible to find, soldiers who had a problem with
drinking or drugs have been forced to do without. And many have learned that
they can.

Specialist Keith Betterton of the Army, who is 26 years old, said he did not
believe that he had a drinking problem.

Yet on a typical Friday or Saturday night back home in Oklahoma City, he said,
he might consume 20 or 25 beers. At 16, he was placed on probation for a year
and fined $3,000 for driving under the influence of alcohol.

He says that he has learned to go without drinking here and that he likes that.

"It's definitely been a good drying-out period," he said. "The only good thing
alcohol ever did for me was to make it easier for me to dance in public and to
talk to women, and in Saudi Arabia I can't do either of those things anyway."

Fewer Disciplinary Problems

The Defense Department requires troops to undergo routine drug tests, a
procedure that it says has forced many soldiers in recent years to either
confront their problems with illicit drugs or leave the service. Alcohol abuse
is still widespread.

Pentagon officials say that because of the Saudi prohibition on alcohol, they
have noted far fewer disciplinary problems among American troops here than were
seen in the early stages of the war in Vietnam, where liquor and illicit drugs
were easy to obtain.

In the Army, the rate of disciplinary problems among soldiers in Saudi Arabia is
less than a third of that for Army troops stationed elsewhere in the world.

"Everything I hear is that disciplinary problems -- guys going out and fighting
or getting into some other sort of trouble -- just don't exist in Saudi Arabia,"
said Maj. Doug Hart of the Air National Guard, a Defense Department spokesman in
Washington.

Col. Robert P. Belihar of the Air Force, the military's command surgeon general
in the Persian Gulf, said today: "Soldiers appear to be dealing well with being
away from alcohol. Any problems relating to withdrawal have been rare and have
been dealt with at the unit level."

Asked about reports that some soldiers had been evacuated from Saudi Arabia
because they were alcoholics and had been unable to deal with the withdrawal
symptoms, a spokeswoman for Colonel Belihar said such evacuations, if they had
occurred, were "very, very rare" and would be difficult to confirm because they
might not be listed in medical records as related to liquor or drugs.

In Washington, Susan Hansen, a Pentagon spokeswoman, said her office was unaware
of significant problems involving withdrawal from dependency on alcohol or
drugs. But she said such cases would be handled by military hospitals in the
gulf, not in the United States. "I haven't seen anything that's come my way to
indicate that this is a major problem," Mrs. Hansen said.

Liquor is available in Saudi Arabia; it can be purchased on the black market, at
great risk. The penalties for a Saudi caught consuming alcohol can include
imprisonment and a harsh fine. For an American soldier, the penalty could be
demotion.

There have been reports that some alcohol and marijuana have been smuggled into
Saudi Arabia aboard military transport planes and that some soldiers have tried
to set up stills to make liquor.

Home Brew Poisons 8

Eight American soldiers stationed here as part of a Army transportation unit
were hospitalized in December after drinking what turned out to be a poisonous
homemade brew.

Yet many soldiers who have been living at remote desert camps for several months
now insist they have not seen alcohol or illicit drugs since they arrived.

"There's nothing -- no beer, nothing," said Specialist Kirk Swartz, 22, of
Omaha, a military policeman.

He said he had not had to arrest one soldier on an alcohol-related charge. "I
see guys letting off steam in other ways," he said. "People are playing a lot of
volleyball and football. I don't see any problems with booze."

Pvt. Barry Mitchell of Burlington, Vt., said he had not heard of a single fight
between soldiers since his Army squadron arrived here from an American base near
Stuttgart, Germany.

No Alcoholic Fights

"Back in Germany, a lot of people get off work and go drink, and on weekends
they go crazy," he said. "Alcohol can change your personality real quick, and
there were a lot of fights in the barracks. You don't see that here."

First Lieut. Anthony Gortemiller, 27, of Russellville, Ark., said, "People are
learning to deal with their problems here, and a lot of soldiers are seeing the
best part of themselves."

Lieutenant Gortemiller, a reservist in the Army's 142d Field Artillery unit who
is a football coach in civilian life, said a member of his company, a Vietnam
veteran, appeared to be overcoming a drinking problem because of his assignment
to Saudi Arabia.

"He had a pretty extensive career of drinking, and during the week back home I
think he drank every night," he said. "That's stopped now, and I think everybody
has a lot more respect for him."

He Stops Overeating

"It's not just alcohol or drugs," Lieut. Gortemiller said. "It's everything from
cigarettes -- they can be hard to get out here -- to overeating. I've lost 10
pounds myself. You get busy here, and you just don't have the time to worry
about eating."

Whether the lack of alcohol here will make for better-fighting ground troops has
yet to be tested.

The land war against Iraq could begin soon, and some soldiers say they should
have -- indeed, they may need -- the chance to relax over a beer after a long
day of what is expected to be brutal fighting.

But Specialist Betterton, who is working at an Army hospital close to the front
lines along the Saudi border, said that if there were alcohol here, "it would be
Vietnam all over again, with everybody boozing it up."

"What good is a drunkard with a gun?" he asked. "In a war, it's better to be
sober and scared, not drunk and scared. Your chances of getting out of here
alive are a whole lot better."

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Protest;
Talk of Ground War Intensifies Mood at Antiwar Demonstrations

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 724 words


Reports that a ground war in the Persian Gulf was imminent lent an urgent tone
to an antiwar rally attended by thousands in Times Square yesterday afternoon.

"Unless we make our voices heard more effectively, we may see a ground war very
shortly that will take the lives of innocent soldiers and civilians alike,"
Bella Abzug, the former Congresswoman, told the cheering crowd.

The rally was one of dozens of antiwar events from the Northeast to the Pacific
Northwest sponsored by various peace groups. Other events included teach-ins and
candlight vigils, acts of civil disobedience and mock funeral processions with
white-faced pallbearers carrying wooden coffins.

In remarks that were echoed at other rallies, Ms. Abzug said President Bush had
missed an opportunity for peace when he dismissed as "a cruel hoax" a proposal
by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to end the war.

"No sooner did George Bush hear there was an opening for the first time, instead
of saying we would have to see if more progress can be made they launched 3,000
more sorties," Ms. Abzug said. She spoke in support of a cease-fire and a
pullout of Iraqi troops from Kuwait, saying, "It's time to solve the problems of
the world through peaceful means, sanctions and political discourse and not the
use of force."

Arrests in Chicago

In Chicago, 500 protesters, some wearing paper masks in the form of television
sets, marched through streets whipped by strong winds in sub-freezing
temperatures. They said they were protesting news organizations' coverage of the
war, which they said unfairly equated patriotism with support for the war.

Traffic was backed up for a mile when the protesters stretched out in a human
chain across Lake Shore Drive. The police arrested 18 protesters on charges of
disorderly conduct.

In Olympia, Wash., police arrested 14 protesters who began digging mock graves
on the lawn of the State Capitol.

The New York City police reported no arrests and no disturbances in Times Square
among the estimated 5,000 demonstrators, who stood within barricades and waved
placards with slogans like "No Blood For Oil" and "Bring the Troops Home." Above
them, attached to the side of a building, images from cable television news
reports of the war flashed on a large screen that has become the latest
high-tech fixture at a crossroads long associated with more celebratory vigils.

One of the demonstrators, Charles Strozier, said the expectation of fighting at
close quarters in a ground war has rattled him; his son Michael is an Army
sergeant positioned with tanks near the front lines. "It makes my stomach churn
to read reports of a ground war," said Mr. Strozier, a 47-year-old resident of
Brooklyn. "It's as if it already happened."

Mr. Strozier, who was one of the speakers at the rally, said he hoped that
events like the day's protest would help politicians who voted against
authorizing force in the gulf to realize that there was a segment of the
population committed to ending the war.

Memories of Vietnam

"The problem is we're only at Day 30 of the war," he said. "It's hard to
generate a peace movement on the scale of Vietnam after only 30 days of war."

Memories of Vietnam were recalled at other rallies when speakers denounced the
bombing raids that killed hundreds of Iraqi civilians last week. The graphic
images of bodies being pulled from the smoldering rubble of an air raid shelter,
which the American authorities said was an Iraqi command center, spurred many of
the protesters to take to the streets.

"There were 347 civilians killed in My Lai and over 300 bodies have been
recovered from the bomb shelter in Baghdad," Ron Kovic, the author of "Born on
the Fourth of July," said at a Los Angeles rally attended by about 1,400 people.
Mr. Kovic was left a paraplegic from would he suffered while serving in Vietnam.

"This has pushed most of us in the antiwar movement to redouble our commitment
to end this war," he said. "We're sickened by the insensitivity and callous
disregard for life by this Administration."

Other demonstrators lamented that the deaths of Iraqi civilians might not be
enough to change American opinion. "Horrible as this sounds," said Jim Cloviel
at the Los Angeles rally, "what we really need to get people out here is boys
coming home in body bags."

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: An estimated 5,000 antiwar protesters demonstrated in Times
Square yesterday, as peace groups from the Northeast to the Pacific Northwest
sponsored events like teach-ins, candlelight vigils and acts of civil
disobedience to rally opposition to the war in the Persian Gulf. (Chester
Higgins Jr./The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              360 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Not Kennedy's Wish

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 105 words


To the Editor:

I must take exception to your comments in "Why the Gulf War Is Not Vietnam"
(editorial, Feb. 2) concerning John F. Kennedy's ever wanting a Pax Americana.
At American University in the summer of 1963, in one of the most inspiring
speeches by any American President, President Kennedy summed up his feelings
regarding this matter by saying "not a Pax Americana imposed on the world by
American weapons of war."

What President Kennedy was seeking was a United States that led the world by
example, "not only by our military might, but our moral might as well."

BARRY B. EDISON
New York, Feb. 2, 1991

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              361 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

On Baseball;
Maddox Maintains Community Ties

BYLINE: BY CLAIRE SMITH

SECTION: Section 1; Page 40; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 794 words


Ralph Kiner, the Mets' broadcaster, was once moved to say that "two-thirds of
the earth is covered by water, the other one-third is covered by Garry Maddox."

As a major leaguer, Maddox, known as the secretary of defense, indeed played his
position superbly, More important, he played his role even better in showing
what could be accomplished off the field as well as on.

Even though he is five years removed from the game, Maddox is still quite the
secretary of defense, only now he defends as best he can children who cannot
defend themselves.

He has done so for nearly 14 years as an integral part of the Philadelphia Child
Guidance Clinic, a place where the most innocent victims of violence in the home
can find refuge.

Knowing Violence First-Hand

Maddox knows all about such needs, for he has seen what violence can do to a
soul. The night of his most recent fundraiser for the children's clinic, Maddox
gave a hint of how thorough his education has been.

The occasion was the 14th annual Garry Maddox Celebrity Bowling Tournament put
on to benefit the clinic. This year the tournament happened to fall on Jan. 17,
which was also the second day of the United States-led coalition's war against
Iraq.

As other celebrities paired off the bowl at a South Philadelphia locale, Maddox
met with reporters. He was asked if he felt it was appropriate that the Super
Bowl go on as scheduled, considering the events of the day.

Maddox said yes. Such events are important to service men and women who might
listen on Armed Forces Radio or watch via satellite, he explained. Maddox knew.
He once clutched a radio so he could hear the 1969 World Series while serving as
an Army combat infantryman in Vietnam.

Apology of Sorts

Days later, Maddox was almost apologetic about the reference. "I've made it my
policy not to speak about the war," he said of the conflict that snatched him
from the minor league system of the San Francisco Giants at the age of 19. "I
hope you understand."

And rare have been the glimpses the quiet, almost introverted Maddox has given.
But there had been enough during his playing days for one to see that life at a
forward base near Chu Lai was hell because it was war.

Maddox came out of Vietnam whole if not completely healthy at first (skin rashes
caused by allergies made it all but impossible for him to shave, thus resulting
in his trademark beard, worn well before facial hair was commonly accepted in
baseball).

Most important, Maddox did not return a bitter man. Instead, he immersed himself
into society and the game which he played so spectacularly at times, as
evidenced by eight Gold Gloves and a championship ring.

Feelings of Obligation

Maddox came to the Child Guidance Clinic shortly after being traded to the
Phillies in 1975. He had to, Maddox figured, because he had just become a member
of an athletic community that was a veritable hotbed of such activities.

Julius Erving, Mike Schmidt, Bobby Clark, Bill Bergey, superstars all, seemed to
be everywhere espousing various causes.

"It was so different in those days," Maddox said. "If you came to play in
Philadelphia, you made it your home. And it seemed like everyone wanted to help
the community."

In 1977, the bowling tournament was born. In any given year in that era, Maddox
and his one-time co-host, Larry Bowa, would draft Erving, Schmidt, Pete Rose,
Steve Carlton and ballplayers from around the country to participate.

Today, it's still the draw; fans come to see Charles Barkley, the musician
Grover Washington Jr. and the like.

"Those guys are the ones who really make it successful," said Maddox. But it is
Maddox who's remained the constant.

Not that Maddox hasn't had a notion to give way.

"The 13th tournament was going to be my last," Maddox admitted. "But there's
been a tendency in this country to cut back.

"With fewer grants and the trouble Philadelphia is having with its economy, the
funds were getting real short. Being on the clinic's board, it was an easy
problem to recognize. I didn't have to be asked to stay."

Maddox is not alone in his fervor, but he sadly says he does see a difference.

'It's not the same," Maddox admitted. "Free agency has brought a lot of good
things, but a lot of changes, too. Players have become more dollar-conscious, so
there's a lot more movement from team to team. They just don't stay around as
long."

Maddox did stay though, through the end of his playing career in 1986, through
to this day.

Fourteen years and more than a million dollars in solicited donations later,
Maddox said: "It's not only just about giving something back. Whether we like it
or not, athletes are role models. The sooner a player realizes that the better
off he'll be."


NAME: Garry Maddox

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Garry Maddox, the former Phillies' outfielder, is still active
in the Philadelphia community, five years after his retirement from baseball.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              362 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Michael Creamer, a Casualty of Two Wars

BYLINE: By Tom Brokaw; Tom Brokaw is anchor and managing editor of NBC Nightly
News.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23; Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 994 words


All of us, in one way or another, have been living first with the prospect of
war and then with the reality of it since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. For many
veterans of Vietnam, this has been an especially anxious time. Many of their
worst memories have been reawakened. The Persian Gulf has become their second
war as it plays out graphically and continuously on television, radio and in the
press.

Michael Creamer was one of those veterans. He grew up in a South Boston
working-class family and served as a medic with the Rangers in Vietnam, winning
two Purple Hearts and a Bronze Star for his valor during long, dangerous
patrols.

When he returned he had trouble leaving his terrible experiences behind. He
dropped out of nursing school when an assignment to emergency-room surgeons
provoked a nightmare of broken bodies and horrible wounds from his combat days.
He returned to his mother's home and the life of despair common to victims of
post-traumatic stress disorder -- depression, bouts of violence, thoughts of
suicide.

Friends, other veterans, suggested that he confront his past by attending the
dedication of the Vietnam War Memorial in Washington, and that trip was the
beginning of a halting recovery. He met his future wife at the ceremony. She
persuaded him to join a veterans outreach program.

As his confidence returned, he decided to re-enlist in the Army. An injury
during parachute training short-circuited his career plans, so he returned to
New England and began to work with other troubled veterans, counseling them on
their problems, helping them find work.

By all accounts, he was extremely effective. One veteran, Tom Sullivan, was
deeply distressed and out of work until Mr. Creamer eased him back onto a path
of hope and confidence. Mr. Sullivan, now working in public transportation in
Connecticut, says simply, "The man saved my life."

Yet the day-by-day counseling took its toll. Dealing constantly with the
flashbacks of other veterans, Mr. Creamer could not escape his past. So he quit
and took a job on a dredge, restoring a lake in northwestern Connecticut where
he had settled on a wooded hillside.

Life wasn't perfect. He and his wife, Martha, were often separated. They lost
their only child to birth defects. He occasionally sought help in group therapy
at a Hartford veterans center. Still, to his friends and neighbors, he seemed on
the mend.

Richard Bramley, a softspoken country wine merchant, remembers going to the film
"Henry V" with Mr. Creamer and coming away deeply impressed with his friend's
knowledge of contemporary and ancient military history. "Here was a guy," Mr.
Bramley said, "whose life was so altered by the military and yet he was
fascinated by it."

Then Iraq invaded Kuwait. Desert Shield turned to Desert Storm. Mr. Creamer and
an untold number of other troubled Vietnam veterans again began to suffer
flashbacks of the horror of their war. Counseling centers reported a sharp
increase in veterans seeking help.

Television coverage of this war is much more vivid than it was during Vietnam,
the first so-called living-room war. This time, in their living rooms, Vietnam
veterans were seeing bombs, missiles and antiaircraft fire as if they were back
on the field of battle. One man at a Texas counseling center, said, weeping, "It
brought back memories -- and it keeps sticking in my mind -- of the people I
buried in B-52 bomb holes."

In Connecticut, Michael Creamer, extremely conservative in his politics, was
obsessed by the war. On the Friday night before the Congressional vote
authorizing force, he stayed up until 3 A.M. dialing members of the Connecticut
delegation, leaving messages on their answering machines, urging them to vote
"no." He removed from his fireplace mantel a picture of himself in uniform with
George Bush. He attended a prayer vigil with his friend Tom Sullivan on the
common in Litchfield. Mr. Sullivan said: "He looked so sad, this tough little
guy. I just hugged him."

Mr. Creamer talked to anyone who would listen about his fears of a ground war,
yet he tried to join the Army a third time, thinking his experience as a medic
would be needed. Counselors around the country have encountered similar
reactions from other veterans: fear, anxiety and a compulsion to re-enlist.

Martha Creamer, who had been living apart from her husband, decided to visit a
week after the bombing of Baghdad began. She recalled that before dinner Mr.
Creamer was listening to the radio and then, in her words: "He just blew . . .
kicking furniture, throwing a beer can. For the first time, I was frightened of
Michael. Always before I had been frightened for him."

She urged him to return to his therapy group and called his counselor before she
left on a business trip. He saw the counselor the next day; although he seemed
confused, he promised to return soon.

Instead, he drove back to his home in the woods just east of the Housatonic
River. He wrote letters to friends, pinned on his Vietnam medals, put on his
Ranger black beret and arranged his driver's license and Ranger identification
card at this side. When all was in order, he picked up his shotgun and killed
himself.

He left a note that said: "I'm sorry. I know many people will be hurt. This new
war has brought up too many nightmares of the last war. I don't think I could
again endure the pain of mass casualties produced by a ground war -- and this is
the only way out. When the survivors of this war come home, please treat them
with admiration and respect we Vietnam veterans never received until it was too
late."

He signed it:
Michael E. Creamer
Combat Medic
N-75th Rangers, Co. B
(Med)
5 May 70 -- 23 Jan 91

The following week, friends placed a testimonial in the local paper: "We salute
Michael -- a complex, compassionate and beautiful soul . . . a casualty of our
wars."

Four days later, Michael E. Creamer, combat medic, was buried at Arlington
National Cemetery.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Michael Creamer, about 1986.

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              363 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Court Rules on a Refugee

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 849 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Feb. 18


In the first court case to challenge the fairness of Hong Kong's screening of
Vietnamese boat people, a judge ordered a new hearing today for a Vietnamese man
who was denied refugee status because a decisive error was written into his
record by an immigration officer.

The case of the man, Do Giao, who was once forced to gather land mines with his
bare hands as punishment for his family's anti-Communist past, was ordered
returned to the Hong Kong Immigration Department for a new hearing. Both human
rights lawyers and the Hong Kong government claimed victory over the decision.

Justice Barry Mortimer of the High Court ruled that the 24-year-old Vietnamese
was entitled to a new hearing because an immigration officer had written,
incorrectly, that Mr. Do once worked in a state-owned factory, a statement that
appeared to contradict the young man's claim that he had been persecuted by the
Vietnamese Government.

The lawyers for Mr. Do, who said he was once tortured by Vietnamese officials,
said he had lived an underground life, dodging authorities and working only at
night because he had no identity papers.

Error Blamed on Interpretation

Justice Mortimer said the erroneous statement was included in Mr. Do's record,
probably because the immigration officer, who had only limited knowledge of
Vietnamese, had misinterpreted what Mr. Do had said.

Mr. Do was never allowed to read the immigration officer's report, or to correct
any inaccuracies in it, and the judge recommended that to avoid such problems in
the future, immigration reports should be read to the Vietnamese refugees and
then signed by them.

"The decision was technical and narrow, legally speaking, but politically it
will have enormous consequences," said Arthur C. Helton, director of the Refugee
Project of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, based in the United States.

Speaking from New York, Mr. Helton, who helped organize the Do appeal, said:
"This was the very first judicial challenge to the screening process, and a Hong
Kong judge found the screening decision flawed. I think that fact will figure
prominently in any future discussions among the United States, the United
Nations, Hong Kong and Britain over the fairness of the process."

Daniel Fung, the lawyer who argued Mr. Do's case in court, said, "I welcome this
decision as laying down some very important guidelines that ought to be
followed, and in establishing law governing judicial review of administrative
decisions." Mr. Do's case had been brought by the Hong Kong Legal Aid
Department.

Government Sees Vindication

But Clinton Leeks, refugee coordinator for the Hong Kong government, said: "The
fact is that following a very very close scrutiny of the screening process, our
procedures have been found to be pretty fair and accurate. The case tried to
cover an enormously wide area -- it was brought as an attack on a whole range of
screening procedures -- and in reviewing that wide area the judge has come down
to a problem with one specific point.

"Far from declaring our screening procedures in disarray, this decision
vindicates our procedures," Mr. Leeks said.

Mr. Leeks said the Hong Kong Government would consider the judge's
recommendation that every Vietnamese should have his application read to him to
check its accuracy. But he added, "We must weigh that consideration against the
thousands of people awaiting screening in the camps."

Hong Kong now has about 45,000 Vietnamese in camps awaiting resettlement as
refugees, or, if rejected by the screening process, eventual return to Vietnam.
About 20,000 of those have been screened already, and human rights lawyers
pointed out that since the court cases challenging the process were scheduled,
the number of Vietnamese allowed in as refugees has risen.

When screening began in 1989, on the average, less than 10 percent were allowed
in as refugees. In the last few months, the average has been between 15 and 20
percent.

Eight Other Cases to Be Heard

Robin Bridge, the solicitor in the Do case, said the judge set March 4 as the
date to begin hearing eight other cases challenging the screening process.

After news of Mr. Do's impending case spread through the camps this fall, camp
workers said the number of boat people volunteering to return home has dropped
sharply. Many of the boat people decided to wait for the court decision, hoping
the Do case would bring them another chance.

Both sides said today they had no idea whether the judge's decision would prompt
a flood of new court cases.

The decision in the Do case comes just two months after another judge ruled that
111 boat people had been held illegally in detention camps for 18 months. Those
Vietnamese had refused to submit to the screening process, asserting that they
were sailing for Japan and never intended to seek asylum in Hong Kong. Officials
here had seen the passing vessel and hauled it into shore, promising to repair
it. When repairs were deemed too expensive, the boat was scrapped and the
Vietnamese were told to apply for screening.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              364 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: P.O.W.'s;
U.S. Says Prisoners Seem War-Weary

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1048 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, Feb. 18


From the initial interrogation of more than 1,400 Iraqi prisoners of war, a
portrait is emerging of battle-weary front-line forces who in many cases are
hungry, demoralized and bitter at President Saddam Hussein for waging a war few
soldiers support, intelligence officers here and in Washington say.

American officials caution against drawing broad conclusions based on the
defectors and captured troops, who are largely young enlisted soldiers from
Iraqi minority groups who are so disgruntled they risk minefields and roving
execution squads to surrender.

From thousands of hours of interviews, however, the prisoners have provided such
tactical information as the location of minefields and troops, as well as
broader strategic intelligence such as the battle readiness and cohesion of
specific Iraqi units.

'A Solid Look'

"It's giving us a solid look we get from no other source," said Col. William M.
Robeson, commander of the 513th Military Intelligence Brigade, which handled the
interrogation of the nearly 500 prisoners who have passed through American
custody before being sent to Saudi detention camps.

The American interrogations, however, have run into serious obstacles since the
beginning of the gulf war.

A senior United States Army officer said today that the Saudi military is
refusing to allow American intelligence analysts to interrogate hundreds of
captured Iraqi prisoners because they are Saudi "guests" and "Arab brothers."

Indirect Questioning

The Army officer, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the two
coalition partners had improved their cooperation in recent weeks to permit
indirect questioning of Iraqis held by the Saudis. But he said it sometimes
takes days for American intelligence analysts to submit written questions for
the Saudis to pose, and then wait for the interrogation reports.

A Saudi military spokesman denied there were any problems in sharing information
gathered from the interviews of more than 900 Iraqi prisoners in Saudi camps.

"The United States actually and physically participates in the talks," a Saudi
military spokesman said in response to queries. "There is a full understanding
between the Saudis and the United States."

The disagreement, which Saudi and American officers tried to play down today, so
far has not seriously jeopardized the American military's overall
intelligence-gathering ability.

Friction Between Allies

The simmering feud, however, is a rare example of friction between the two major
allies, and exposes differences in the attitudes of Western and Arab nations
aligned in the coaltion against Baghdad.

Another American officer, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said, for
example, that Iraqi soldiers who defect, rather than surrender in battle, are
treated as "guests" by the Saudis. The Saudis have placed loudspeakers in the
desert and broadcast appeals in Arabic for the Iraqi soldiers to give up.

The United States treats defectors, or "linecrossers" as the Pentagon calls
them, and captured soldiers in the same way -- as enemy prisoners with no
special privileges except those accorded by the Geneva Conventions.

The conventions require a prisoner to divulge only his name, rank, date of birth
and serial number. Captors are prohibited from exerting physical or
psychological pressure to obtain information, although prisoners may volunteer
answers to questions.

A Senior Officer Captured?

The officer also said the Saudis are believed to have captured a senior Iraqi
officer in the border skirmish last month at Khafji, a Saudi coastal town.

"As of today we're not aware of having access to any information from the
interrogation the Saudis have done with him," the officer said.

The American military calls captured Iraqis enemy prisoners-of-war, or E.P.W.'s,
a term that replaced P.O.W. in the Pentagon lexicon after the Vietnam War to
avoid the association with American service members still listed as missing in
Southeast Asia.

In general, intelligence officers say, the Iraqi prisoners are in their 20's and
30's, and come from 20 of the 42 Iraqi divisions, most of them stationed close
to the Saudi border, where morale has been battered by unrelenting bombing.

Many Are Veterans

Many of the Iraqis are combat veterans, although no members of the elite
Republican Guard have been captured, American and Saudi officers said. There
have been a reports that a few Guards fled to Turkey.

"A significant number of them are veterans of the Iran-Iraq war that been
recalled to service," said Brig. Gen. Richard I. Neal, a Marine officer who is a
spokesman for the United States Central Command. "Of that number, almost to a
man, they're extremely tired of war."

Some of the prisoner reports are contradictory. Stories of lice-ridden,
malnourished troops conflict with reports of well-fed, clean-shaven soldiers.

"That demonstrates the inconsistency in their supply lines," said Colonel
Robeson.

One of the most persistent themes emerging from the interrogations is the
isolation of the Iraqi forces. Many of the prisoners say they were prohibited
from having portable radios.

"Some of the officers have broader intelligence, but for some of the E.P.W.'s
their life is on a company level," Maj. Gen. Robert B. Johnston, the Central
Command chief of staff, said in an interview. "Their world is literally a
bunker."

General Johnston said that Iraqi commanders have told their forces they are
three days from the Kuwaiti border with Saudi Arabia, when they were actually a
few hours away.

Obstacles to Surrender

Defectors say that Iraqi forces are impeded from surrendering, by a combination
of minefields in front and behind, reports of roving bands of soldiers with
orders to shoot deserters, and fear of reprisals against their families.

They say they have also been told that American soldiers will kill them, which
could explain why three times as many Iraqis have surrendered to Saudi, Egyptian
or Syrian forces than to United States troops.

"They're scared, they don't know what's going on," said Cpl. Raid Shihadeh, 28,
an American marine who grew up in the Middle East, and acts as an interpreter in
interrogations. "They think anybody can just shoot them."

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Iraqi prisoners of war have painted a grim picture of
battle-weary front-line forces, according to coalition intelligence officers.
Iraqi defectors sat on the ground on Feb. 5 after surrendering to Egyptian
troops. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              365 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

A Man Burns Himself to Death in a Peace Gesture

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 437 words

DATELINE: AMHERST, Mass., Feb. 18


A man carrying a cardboard peace sign set himself on fire on the Amherst town
common today and died, the police said.

Witnesses said the man, described only as white and in his 20's, arrived on the
common, next to Amherst College, about 1:50 P.M. They said he knelt on the
ground, poured two cans of flammable fluid on himself and lit a match, said
Lieut. Jeffrey J. Roy of the Amherst Police Department.

When that match went out, the man lit a second match, causing a fireball that
engulfed him in flames, Lieutenant Roy reported witnesses as saying.

The police said several passers-by tried to smother the flames. A police
officer, arriving within minutes, put out the flames with a fire extinguisher.
But paramedics declared the man dead at the scene.

One passer-by, Kenneth Albrecht of nearby Belchertown, Mass., said: "Five of us
tried to put our coats on him, but it was too late. We tried to get closer to
him, but there was no way to do it. He was covered in flames."

College officials said they did not think the man was a student. Witnesses said
a Massachusetts driver's license identifying him as a local resident was
attached to the cardboard peace sign, but the police said identification had not
yet been made.

More than 100 people gathered on the common after the man died. The police used
squad cars to block the body from view while they photographed it. One woman who
tried to push through the blockade to put a wreath on the body was arrested and
charged with disorderly conduct.

Within two hours after the incident, 30 local peace advocates, including
students from Amherst College and the University of Massachusetts, began a
candlelight vigil on the common, their numbers swelling to 60 near midnight.
Peace signs were placed over two charred spots on the ground, where the man had
stood with his arms in the air and then had fallen. Another sign at the vigil
read, "Stop this crazy war." Students said a peace rally was planned for Tuesday
at noon on the common.

Amherst, in western Massachusetts about 90 miles from Boston, has long been a
focal point for antiwar activity. During the Vietnam War, students and faculty
members from five nearby campuses made daily pilgrimages to the gates of
Westover Air Force Base in Chicopee, Mass., to demonstrate.

Similar peace pilgrimages to Westover began last August, after United States
troops were deployed to the Persian Gulf. Antiwar rallies have also been held on
the Amherst common.

On Dec. 9, a 48-year-old Vietnam veteran died after setting fire to himself in
Isleton, Calif., to protest the American action in the gulf.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              366 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Don't Call Today's Combat Soldier Low Skilled;
Latino Soldiers

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 196 words


To the Editor:

Anna Quindlen's column of Jan. 27, "A Human Face," vividly depicts the tragedy
of war through the Lozano family of California, whose three sons are stationed
in the Persian Gulf. The Lozanos also reflect another important fact: beginning
with the Second World War, Latino soldiers have suffered disproportionate
casualties.

In the 1940's the Texas civic leader Alonso Perales pointedly questioned the War
Department about why 50 percent to 75 percent of all South Texas casualties were
Mexican-Texans, while they constituted 500,000 of the state's 6 million
population. In his book "Are We Good Neighbors?" Perales wrote, "We are quite
proud of the opportunity afforded us to defend our country on the firing line;
but we want to ascertain for sure whether . . . there are not sufficient
soldiers of other extractions."

In that war Mexican-Americans garnered the most Congressional Medals of Honor:
17. In the Vietnam War, Puerto Ricans, followed by Mexican-Americans,
experienced the highest percentage of casualties.

Will they, once again, in this war?

JULIE LEININGER PYCIOR
Assistant Professor of History
Manhattan College
Bronx, Feb. 1, 1991

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              367 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SUPREME COURT ROUNDUP;
COURT TO REVIEW CASE FROM GEORGIA ON DESEGREGATION

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1338 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 19


The Supreme Court agreed today to try once again to define the point at which
formerly segregated school systems may be released from Federal court
supervision.

Barely a month after their ambiguous and tentative 5-to-3 decision in a school
desegregation case from Oklahoma City, the Justices placed the question on their
docket again by accepting an appeal from a school district that serves suburban
Atlanta.

The Court agreed to review a 1989 Federal appeals court ruling that the DeKalb
County School District, after more than 20 years of Federal court supervision,
had not yet sufficiently erased the legacy of official segregation to be
considered integrated.

Questions in Earlier Ruling

The Court's decision to revisit the issue so soon may reflect a recognition by
the Justices that their decision last month in the Oklahoma City case, Board of
Education v. Dowell, failed to provide much guidance to the hundreds of school
districts that were once segregated by law and that now seek to regain local
control, or to the Federal judges who retain jurisdiction over such day-to-day
matters as where students go to school and faculty hiring.

In the Oklahoma City case, the Court ruled that districts may be released from
Federal court supervision once they have taken all "practicable" steps to
eliminate the "vestiges" of official segregation. But the 5-to-3 opinion left
those terms largely undefined.

Justice David H. Souter, who joined the Court after the Oklahoma City case was
argued, did not participate in that decision. It is possible that Chief Justice
William H. Rehnquist, who wrote the opinion, and the other Justices in the
majority may have been eager to tackle the issue again with a full Court.

The DeKalb County case, Freeman v. Pitts, No. 89-1290, reached the Court last
year along with similar appeals by school boards in Topeka, Kan., and Denver.
The Justices deferred action on all three until they could decide in the
Oklahoma City case, which they had already accepted for review.

A Different Course

This situation occurs frequently when similar cases reach the Court within the
same term. The Court's ordinary course is then to order the lower courts to
re-examine the rulings in the related cases in light of the decision that the
Court has just issued.

But the Court did not take that course today. While granting review in the
DeKalb County case, it announced it would not hear the Denver case, School
District No. 1 v. Keyes, No. 89-1698, and it said nothing about the Topeka case,
Board of Education v. Brown, No. 89-1681.

The Court's silence indicates that the Topeka appeal, an offshoot of the
original 1954 desegregation case, Brown v. Board of Education, will now be
governed by whatever the Court decides in the DeKalb County case. That decision
will probably not come before a year from now at the earliest.

The DeKalb County School District, Georgia's largest, with 80,000 students, has
been the subject of numerous lawsuits and court orders dating to the 1960's. The
county is not under a busing order. Rather, the Federal District Court in 1969
abolished the county's former "freedom of choice" plan, closing the formerly
all-black schools and drawing new district lines.

Distribution of Students

The district is now 57 percent black. Half the black students attend schools
that are at least 90 percent black, while a quarter of the white students attend
schools that are at least 90 percent white.

In 1986, the school board asked the Federal District Court in Atlanta for a
declaration that the district was now integrated, or "unitary," and that court
supervision should end. Despite finding that faculty and staff assignments had
not been integrated, the District Court ruled that DeKalb County had "done
everything that was reasonable under the circumstances to achieve maximum
practical desegregation."

But the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, in Atlanta,
overturned that decision, ruling that a formerly dual school system could not be
considered "unitary" until it had achieved integration for a period of three
years in six areas: student assignment, faculty, staff, transportation, physical
plants, and extracurricular activities. Integration could not be achieved on a
piecemeal basis, the appeals court said.

In the Oklahoma City decision last month, the Supreme Court also cited this list
of six factors, which derive from a 1968 desegregation ruling, as important
indicators of desegregation. But the Court did not indicate whether the six
goals had to be achieved all at once, as the 11th Circuit insisted, or whether
they could be accomplished incrementally, as the United States Court of Appeals
for the First Circuit, in Boston, ruled several years ago.

One confusing aspect of the DeKalb County case is the appeals court's assumption
that a declaration that a school district has become "unitary" has a particular
legal significance. But the Supreme Court's decision in the Oklahoma City case
appeared to disparage this assumption. "We think it is a mistake to treat words
such as 'dual' and 'unitary' as if they were actually found in the
Constitution," Chief Justice Rehnquist said. It is unclear whether the Justices
now intend to elaborate on these terms or to develop another framework for
looking at the legacy of segregation.

Other developments at the Court today included the following:

Justice's Debut

The Court issued the first opinion written by its newest member, Justice Souter.
As is traditional for a new Justice's debut, Justice Souter was assigned an
uncontroversial case in which the Court was unanimous.

The case was Ford v. Georgia, No. 87-6796, an appeal by a black man convicted by
a nearly all-white jury of murdering a white woman. The Court ruled today that
the Georgia Supreme Court had improperly invoked a rule of state procedure to
bar the man, James A. Ford, from challenging the composition of the jury that
convicted him.

In the years since Mr. Ford's 1984 trial, the Supreme Court has substantially
increased a defendant's power to challenge a prosecutor's use of peremptory
challenges to exclude blacks from juries. Justice Souter's opinion said Mr. Ford
should have been given the opportunity to use the new legal developments.

Reservists' Rights

At the urging of the Federal Government, the Court agreed to settle a dispute
among the lower Federal courts over the rights of military reservists and
National Guard members to re-employment after leaves of absence for training.

The case, King v. St. Vincent's Hospital, No. 90-889, has no bearing on the
reservists and National Guard members who have been ordered to active duty in
the Persian Gulf. There is no dispute that their civilian jobs are protected by
Federal law for at least four years of active duty.

Rather, the dispute concerns the legal rights of reservists who request leave
time for periods of training. The Vietnam Veterans Re-employment Rights Act of
1974 provides that reservists and National Guard members must be granted leaves
of absence for "the period required to perform active duty for training."

No period of time is specified by the law, and several courts have ruled that
the requested leave time must be "reasonable." In the case the Court granted
today, the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit upheld a
Birmingham, Ala., hospital's refusal to grant a three-year leave to an employee
who had been offered a special position as the top enlisted member of the
Alabama National Guard.

In its appeal on behalf of the man, William King, the Federal Government is
arguing that the appeals court had no basis for establishing a requirement for
what is "reasonable."

The Government said such a requirement "creates a powerful disincentive to
service in training and other positions" that are needed for the readiness of
the reserve forces. About 45,000 reservists are currently on tours of "active
duty for training" of more than 180 days.

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              368 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Amherst Journal;
Candles in the Snow Honor Suffering

BYLINE: By SAM HOWE VERHOVEK, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 867 words

DATELINE: AMHERST, Mass., Feb. 19


The vigil began here barely an hour after a man carrying a cardboard peace sign
strode to the center of the town common on Monday afternoon, doused himself with
paint thinner and perished in a plume of fire seconds after striking a match.

All day and all night in a snow that turned to freezing drizzle, people laid
flowers, fruit and candles where the man died, and hundreds of students and
townspeople turned out for a memorial service on the common this afternoon, even
before the police had released the victim's name.

The public self-immolation of 30-year-old Gregory D. Levey, the third American
known to have burned himself to death in apparent protest of United States
policy in the Persian Gulf, would probably produce pity and bewilderment
anywhere else. But here in a university town that has been a focal point for
antiwar activities and other protests, it generated instant martyrdom.

Even as some of their fellow students berated them for glorifying the sorry deed
of a disturbed individual, many people at the vigil said they hoped that his
death would bring some cohesion to a protest movement that has floundered.

"This man said the war was wrong, and he made the ultimate sacrifice," Jennifer
Cannon, a 22-year-old junior at the University of Massachusetts, said of Mr.
Levey.

Mr. Levy, who graduated from UMass in 1984 with an English degree, worked
sporadically as a substitute teacher in nearby South Hadley and had no known
links to any local antiwar groups. A Hampshire College student, Aaron Fincke,
who along with Ms. Cannon and several other students stayed up all night keeping
candles lighted at the death site, said Mr. Levey's suicide was "more than just
a rash act of someone on the edge."

"It was a moral outcry," he said.

The vigil in the cold here quickly became a blend of mourning and protest.
Candles were passed among the crowd, Buddhist chants were recited, and signs
reading "Stop This Crazy War" and "Talks Not Troops" were held aloft.

"There's no question about it, this poor soul overnight became a kind of a cult
hero," said Timothy Banks, the owner of a shoe store across the street. "Nobody
seems to really know a thing about him, but these kids have turned this man's
death into a rallying point."

The events began shortly after 1:50 P.M. on Monday, when Mr. Levey, several
witnesses said, quietly walked to the center of the common and began stuffing
his shirt and pants with newspapers.

After dousing himself with the thinner, which the police said he had bought
shortly before at a nearby hardware store, he lighted one match that went out,
then a second that quickly ignited the thinner. He raised his arms once, then
fell into the fetal position.

"It was just a lot of billowing black smoke," said Jeffrey Kittay of Rye, N.Y.,
who was visiting Amherst with a high-school-age son. "Several people, myself
included, tried to put the fire out with our coats, but it just wasn't
possible."

A police officer arrived a few minutes later and put out the fire with an
extinguisher, but by that time Mr. Levey's torso was horribly burned.

"At first, it looked like one of those trash fires," said Ernie Follansbee, the
manager of the shoe store across the street. "Then I got over there and I saw
legs sticking out with argyle socks and loafers, and I said, 'My God, there was
a human being in there.' "

Mr. Levey, who was the son of Robert Levey, the restaurant critic for The Boston
Globe, and stepson of Ellen Goodman, a Globe columnist, lived by himself three
blocks from where he died. Both his landlord and a work associate described him
as deeply reclusive. The associate, Cecilia Buckley, said he had worked
intermittently as a substitute teacher at a nonprofit agency that provides
special-education services.

Mr. Levey's act reminded some of a Life magazine photograph of a Vietnamese
Buddhist monk burning himself in protest during the Vietnam War. "But I think it
has Christian elements as well," said Elizabeth Ahearn, who at 2 A.M. was
holding a candle against the wind and rain. "You take upon yourself the pain of
the world."

Others paid respect to the victim but did not approve of what he did. "To have a
sign that says stop the killing and then go kill yourself doesn't make a lot of
sense, does it?" said Gordon Fletcher-Howell, a Vietnam War veteran.

The two other incidents involving self-immolation in protest of the gulf
conflict occurred in Northern California. At least eight Americans burned
themselves to death in the Vietnam War-era protests.

There has not been unanimity about the gulf war. Indeed, a small group of
Amherst student lined up at the edge of the common early today, singing "God
Bless America" and "The Star-Spangled Banner" and urging support for President
Bush.

An economics professor at UMass, Samuel Bowles, recalled the departure of a
student who had been called up for duty in Saudi Arabia. The day he left,
Professor Bowles asked him to stand in a lecture hall. "There was just an
explosion of applause for him," Mr. Bowles said. "And this was in a class where
if you asked for people's opinion on the war policy, I think that almost all
would say they were opposed."

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "This man said the war was wrong, and he made the ultimate
sacrifice," said Jennifer Cannon, right, in Amherst, Mass., where a man burned
himself to death to protest the war. She and Lisa Nelson took part in a vigil at
the charred spot where Gregory D. Levey died. (Brooks Kraft for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              369 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Combat;
American Planes and Big Guns Hit Iraq, Keeping Up the Pressure

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1132 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Feb. 19


Artillery batteries and planes of the American-led coalition blasted targets in
Iraq and Iraqi-occupied Kuwait today, military officials said. Fighter-bombers
flew their full quota of missions, ranging over Baghdad and Basra, hitting Iraqi
front lines and striking emplacements of the Republican Guard.

A senior American commander in Riyadh, the Saudi capital, said, "Our pilots are
flying their missions, peace talk or no peace talk."

Ranking officers here declared that they could "start a ground offensive
tonight," if, as one of them put it, President Bush ordered them to do so in the
wake of his cool reaction to a Soviet formula for an Iraqi withdrawal from
Kuwait. But several said they expected no such orders until the Soviet
initiative had run its course.

"We are ready now," said Lieut. Gen. Thomas Kelly, the Pentagon's chief of
operations. He predicted at a Washington briefing that the Iraqi armed forces
would resist in the event of a ground attack, but "would be defeated in short
order."

The top American commander in the gulf, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, confirmed in
an interview with The Los Angeles Times that the Iraqis were losing more than
100 tanks a day to allied air attacks, which he described as a rate no army
could sustain. He several times used conditional phrases like "if there is a
ground war," suggesting that he now thought that air power alone might achieve
the defeat of Baghdad.

"The Iraqi military is hurting and hurting very badly," the report quoted the
general as saying today. "Our assessment is that they are on the verge of
collapse."

As further allied armor, infantry and amphibious forces moved into position
facing enemy territory, the United States command announced that the guided
missile cruiser Princeton, which hit an Iraqi mine on Monday, had been withdrawn
from action because of heavy damage. Also disclosed was the loss of an A-10
attack plane over Kuwait. The pilot is missing.

Brig. Gen. Richard I. Neal, the American military spokesman, said 2,800 missions
had been flown by pilots from coalition countries, who demolished five enemy
aircraft on the ground in Iraq and apparently destroyed five Scud
surface-to-surface missiles. Shortly thereafter, however, a Scud landed in
central Israel. American-built Patriot missiles roared aloft to intercept it,
and officials said it had caused no casualties or significant damage.

Asked whether American troops feared that a peace settlement might deprive them
of a clear-cut victory here, General Neal replied: "Anyone who has ever been in
war doesn't want to go to war again. I don't feel anyone will feel cheated if,
in fact, we have not executed our complete campaign plan."

In northern Saudi Arabia, the main highway paralleling the Kuwaiti border, known
as the Tapline Road, was suddenly free from the traffic that has choked it for
two weeks. Bulldozers and earth movers worked feverishly improving primitive
roads leading north across the sands from the highway. Hundreds of tanks and
other vehicles, tons of supplies and dozens of tents have marked the new rear
areas, just behind the allied assault positions.

United States Air Force C-130 transport planes, the logistical workhorses in
this war as in the war in Vietnam, took off and landed every few minutes from a
section of the highway that has been turned into a forward airstrip. Vehicular
traffic has been detoured across the desert.

American artillerymen in the relatively weakly defended region along the Saudi
border due south of Baghdad poured hundreds of rounds of howitzer fire into
enemy lines, pool reports said, forcing the Iraqi command to guess whether the
barrage constituted a prelude to an all-out attack or another feint by allied
strategists.

Soldiers Are Equipped

Soldiers in the jumping-off area, which cannot be more specifically located
under military ground rules, are seldom seen now without their flak jackets, gas
masks and M-16 rifles, a correspondent reported. Heavily reinforced squads of
military policemen enforced rigorous security, and all the troops said they
expected an offensive to get under way very shortly.

"You can feel it in the air," an Army specialist from San Antonio said. "The
whole mood is a lot grimmer. We're holding our breath."

Losing the Princeton was the most serious material damage the allies have
suffered thus far in the war. Her superstructure was cracked, and a propeller
and a rudder were severely bent, Navy specialists from the salvage ship Beaufort
said. Operating at half- power, the Princeton was said to be heading for a port
somewhere in the gulf.

One of Two Ships Operating

The helicopter carrier Tripoli, which had a 16-by-20 foot hole blasted in her
hull by another mine, patched the damage and remained on duty.

With a crew of 360, the Princeton is a member of the Ticonderoga class, one of
the Navy's most modern cruisers, carrying the highly advanced Aegis
computer-linked radar and missile system for air defense. Her normal assignment
is as part of the defensive screen for the carrier Ranger, but when hit she was
helping to protect the Tripoli.

The mine that the Princeton struck, unlike the old-fashioned one that damaged
the Tripoli, was an influence mine, a complex device that lies on the ocean
floor and is detonated by the noise, the water pressure or the magnetic field
generated by a ship that passes over it.

The Matter of Minesweeping

General Neal said no minesweepers had cleared the area where the explosions took
place, about 10 miles apart, because other allied ships had passed through
without incident. Other officers, speaking on condition that they not be named,
said that the mines raised questions about the feasibility of a Marine
amphibious landing, at least in the region involved.

Two Saudi minesweepers and a detachment of five British fiberglass vessels are
sweeping area waters as part of the mine-clearing operation.

The bombing in Baghdad was the heaviest that the city has experienced in a week,
if not since the war began on Jan. 17, Western correspondents there said. But at
the briefing in Washington this afternoon, General Kelly denied that the attacks
on the capital were any more intense than others in the last few days.

An Iraqi military statement broadcast on the Baghdad radio complained of
"barbaric raids," but said the people of the city were not disheartened. The
statement said allied attacks hit 65 civil and 179 military targets.

In Teheran, the newspaper Jomhuri Islami reported that Iraq's Deputy Prime
Minister, Saddun Hammadi, had told Iranian officials that 20,000 Iraqis were
killed and 60,000 wounded during the war's first four weeks. Previous casualty
figures issued by the Government had been much lower.

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The 16-inch guns of the battleship Wisconsin being test-fired in
Persian Gulf during visit by members of Senate Armed Services Committee. (Pool
photo via Reuters) (pg. A16)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              370 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Book Notes

BYLINE: By Edwin McDowell

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 980 words


'Scarlett,' the Sequel

Three years after Warner Books bid almost $5 million for a sequel to "Gone With
the Wind," the manuscript has been delivered and is being edited for publication
on Sept. 25. The book, written by Alexandra Ripley, will run almost 700 pages,
will probably sell for $24.95 and will be titled "Scarlett: The Sequel to
Margaret Mitchell's 'Gone With the Wind.' "

The William Morris Agency, which put the deal together, got permission for the
sequel from the Mitchell estate, which received the $5 million. The agency
conducted a search for the author, before settling on Ms. Ripley, who had
written several other historical novels.

There had been periodic rumors that the book was late, or that Ms. Ripley had
not been able to finish it or that the manuscript she submitted had been
unacceptable. Yesterday, Laurence J. Kirshbaum, the president of Warner Books,
said the book had taken almost three years to write because of its length (1,000
manuscript pages) and because the author had taken pains to insure that the
sequel was consistent with the original novel.

"It was not an easy book to do," Mr. Kirshbaum said, "because it required
creating a good story, wonderful characters and an authentic sense of time and
place. But we're convinced she succeeded, and that lovers of the book and movie
will feel very, very satisfied."

Ms. Ripley submitted a first draft of the novel several months ago, Mr.
Kirshbaum said, and then did a small amount of rewriting. The book was edited by
Jeanne Bernkopf, a freelance "book doctor" who had edited several novels by
James Clavell, and by Maureen Mahon Egen, the editorial director of Warner
hard-cover books.

Warner plans a 500,000-copy first printing. Wherever possible, the book, which
has already earned more than $5 million in foreign sales, will be published
simultaneously in other countries. In this country, Life magazine will publish
excerpts shortly before publication of the book, which is a main selection of
the Literary Guild.

Bush in an Earlier War

Whatever judgment history renders on President Bush as the Commander in Chief,
his reputation as a Navy pilot in World War II is likely to be enhanced by a
book being shipped to stores today: "Flight of the Avenger: George Bush at War"
( Harcourt Brace Jovanovich ) by Joe Hymes. The book was originally subtitled
"George Bush at War and in Love," but yesterday a spokesman for the publisher
said that given the state of current events, "the 'in love' part might sound
frivolous."

The book, based on interviews with the President and men who flew with him, is
largely about Mr. Bush's experiences as the pilot of an Avenger, at that time
the Navy's largest single-engine, carrier-based airplane. In an attack on
Chichijima, a Japanese-held island in the Pacific, in September 1944, Lieutenant
(j.g.) Bush's plane was hit and caught fire. Several hours after bailing out, he
was rescued by an American submarine.

The publication of the book, acquired more than a year ago, could hardly be more
timely. Because of pre-publication interest, the first printing has been
increased from 25,000 to 60,000, and the author's scheduled 3-city promotional
tour has since been expanded to include interviews via satellite to 20
additional cities.

Book by Peter Arnett?

For about a week, reports have persisted that a literary agent for Peter Arnett,
the CNN correspondent in Baghdad, has been circulating a book proposal, and that
publishers are likely to offer as much as $3 million for his behind-the-scenes
account of his experiences in the Iraqi capital. But a source close to Mr.
Arnett, who insisted on anonymity, said he did not have a literary agent (nor
even an agent to handle his television contract) and he had not proposed writing
a book.

Meantime, several publishers who seemed likely candidates to buy such a book
said that if Mr. Arnett got out of Baghdad soon and wrote a manuscript quickly,
the book would be published as an "instant" hard cover and that they would
consider paying between $200,000 and $300,000 for world rights. One publisher
said, however, that he would not buy an "instant" book, for fear it would not
sell when it was published in six months, but that he might pay as much as
$500,000 for a book recounting Mr. Arnett's many "swashbuckling adventures,"
including his years as a reporter in Vietnam.

More Muggeridge



 Almost 20 years ago, the autobiography of Malcolm Muggeridge, the English
iconoclast and former editor of Punch, was published by William Morrow & Company
in two volumes, "The Green Stick" and "The Infernal Grove." Last March, Regnery
Gateway , a publisher in Washington, reprinted the autobiography in one volume,
a $14.95 trade paperback titled "Chronicles of Wasted Time." It sold steadily,
but when Mr. Muggeridge died in November, 600 orders came in for the book. Megan
Brockey, Gateway's managing editor, said the first printing of 5,000 copies was
more than three-quarters sold out, and if sales continued the house would order
a second printing.

Demand for Devotions



From 1935 until 1987, Dodd Meadcoei & Company sold millions of copies of "My
Utmost for His Highest" by Oswald Chambers, a book of daily devotions. Mr.
Chambers taught at the Bible Training College in Clapham, England, and the book,
based primarily on his seminary lectures, was put together almost 20 years after
his death.

But Dodd Mead went out of business a couple of years ago, and the Chambers book
was acquired by Barbour & Company Inc., an evangelical Christian publishing
house in Westwood, N.J. And it continues to sell in record numbers. Barbour has
already sold almost a million copies, in eight versions ranging from a vest-
pocket edition to hard-back leather, and in both 1990 and 1989 it was the
biggest-selling hard-cover book in Christian bookstores.

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              371 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The Press;
Pentagon Defends Coverage Rules, While Admitting to Some Delays

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 637 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 20


The Pentagon's chief spokesman told a Senate committee today that Government
restrictions on press coverage of the Persian Gulf war were justified, but said
that in some instances the military had unnecessarily impeded efforts to gather
and report information.

In testimony before the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, the spokesman,
Pete Williams, argued that the Defense Department's efforts have enabled
journalists to adequately cover the war. At the same time, he said, the rules
have served to protect the lives of troops and the security of military
operations.

Without restrictions, Mr. Williams said, masses of reporters would try to wander
through the war zone, risking their lives and those of the troops.

The Pentagon has limited war coverage by requiring reporters in Saudi Arabia who
want to visit American forces or get near the front to travel in groups, called
pools, that are organized and escorted by military public affairs officers. In
addition, reports filed by journalists in these groups are subject to a security
review by the military.

But Mr. Williams said he knew of a number of cases in which military officials
needlessly delayed for more than a day the transmission of news dispatches that
had already been cleared by officers in the field. He also acknowledged that
some reporters had been denied interviews because their coverage was regarded as
unfavorable by military officials.

"We tried to weigh in on those cases," Mr. Williams said, " and suggest that
that's a very short term gain. I can't say that military commanders aren't
human, but it's certainly not policy, and it's certainly something we
discourage."

The hearing was organized by Senator Herbert H. Kohl, Democrat of Wisconsin, not
to consider legislation dealing with press coverage of the war, but to provide a
forum for journalists and the military to discuss their concerns.

'At War' With the Press?

One of those testifying, Cragg Hines, Washington bureau chief of The Houston
Chronicle, who recently returned from the gulf, said: "It is only the lightest
form of exaggeration to suggest that the U.S. military is also at war in the
Persian Gulf with the news media."

Walter Cronkite, the longtime CBS News anchorman and onetime war correspondent,
said he did not think the public had received complete news coverage from the
gulf.

"I'm not sure," Mr. Cronkite replied when asked if a relatively accurate picture
of the war has been conveyed. "That's the point. I don't know because the
American press is not able to go everywhere. We have no independent monitor on
whether the system is working or not."

Malcolm W. Browne, a New York Times reporter who recently returned from the gulf
and won a Pulitzer Prize for his reporting for The Associated Press from
Vietnam, took issue with Mr. Williams. He said the pool system in the gulf was
preventing reporters from truly finding out what was going on closer to the war
zone and turning them into "essentially unpaid employees of the Department of
Defense."

The biggest complaint among a panel of journalists who testified was the pool
system.

Frank A. Aukofer, the Washington Bureau Chief of The Milwaukee Journal, told the
committee of a reporter from New Orleans who was invited by the commander of a
Louisiana unit to join the troops for a Mardi Gras celebration. A public affairs
officer stopped him.

"I doubt whether that story would have aided the Iraqi war effort," said Mr.
Aukofer, noting that it probably would have been a positive hometown feature.

Mr. Williams said there are more than 1,400 journalists in the gulf region,
trying to cover movements of more than a half million troops. By the end of the
week, he said, 192 news people, including technicians and photographers, will be
out in pools with combat forces.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Pete Williams, right, the Pentagon's chief spokesman, told a
Senate committee yesterday that the Government's press restrictions on the
Persian Gulf war were justified. He waited to testify with Robert Taylor, a
Pentagon official. In center, at rear, was Walter Cronkite. (Paul Hosefros/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              372 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Grammys Turn Into Quincy Jones Show

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1183 words


The 33d annual Grammy Awards belonged to Quincy Jones. His album "Back on the
Block," an ambitious attempt to bring together black musical styles from jazz to
soul to funk to rap, was named Album of the Year, and it brought awards to
nearly everyone who worked on it, a multi-generational roster of musicians from
Ray Charles to the rapper Ice-T.

Mr. Jones was named nonclassical producer of the year and songs from the album
won in rap, rhythm-and-blues, jazz fusion and two instrumental arranging
categories; "Back on the Block" was also named best-engineered album. With 19
previous awards and 6 under his own name from "Back on the Block," Mr. Jones
became the musician with the second-highest number of Grammys, behind Sir Georg
Solti, who won 28.

Phil Collins's "Another Day in Paradise," a despairing song about homeless, was
named record of the year. The ballad "From a Distance," most recently recorded
by Bette Midler, was named Song of the Year, the second year in a row that Ms.
Midler had recorded the winning song.

The Song of a Lifetime

"From a Distance," a song that is five years old, has also been recorded by
Nanci Griffith and by the Byrds. It is an elegiac song about social problems and
global tension, and lately it has become associated with public sentiment about
the war in the Persian Gulf. "I lived through the Vietnam War and the civil
rights movement, and I feel that in one way or another I've been writing that
song my whole life," Ms. Gold said backstage.

Sinead O'Connor boycotted the awards last night, because she maintained they
honored commerciality rather than artistic achievement. "She worries too much,"
said Garry Shandling, the host, in his opening monologue. But even if she didn't
want it, she received an award for "I Do Not Want What I Haven't Got" in a new
category, alternative music. "If they send it to her, she'll send it back," said
Miss O'Connor's spokeswoman, Elaine Schock.

The Grammy Awards ceremony was held yesterday at Radio City Music Hall, in New
York for the first time since 1988. Virtually everyone in the major leagues of
the recorded-music business -- performers, executives, technicians, hangers-on
-- descended on the hall yesterday. By one count, there was a 3,000-person
waiting list for tickets to the 6,000-seat hall.

"It's harder to get tickets to the Grammys than to get nominated," said Ms.
Gold. The war with Iraq went nearly unremarked; a few performers mentioned
"peace," or said they were sending out prayers to the soldiers in the Persian
Gulf.

On a Different Coast

The awards ceremonies, telecast on CBS-TV, have usually been held in Los
Angeles, which has the largest local chapter and the headquarters of the
8,000-member National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. Backstage, New
York Mayor David N. Dinkins said he would do "anything I have to" to bring the
awards ceremony back to New York in the future. The ceremony was broadcast to
more than 60 countries, including, for the first time, Saudi Arabia, Poland and
Czechoslovakia.

Mariah Carey, the 20-year-old singer and songwriter from New York whose debut
album has sold three million copies, won the Best New Artist award and the
Female Pop Vocal award; another New York band, Living Colour, won in the Hard
Rock category. Alannah Myles, Anita Baker and Kathy Mattea won female vocal
awards in rock, rhythm-and-blues and country categories, respectively. Blues
awards went to B. B. King and to the Vaughan Brothers, who also won in the rock
instrumental category; Stevie Ray Vaughan died in a helicopter accident last
year. "What a year it's been," said his brother, Jimmie Vaughan, accepting the
award.

Many awards were posthumous. Leonard Bernstein dominated the classical category;
his performance of Charles Ives's Second Symphony was named best classical
album, his interpretation of two Shostakovich symphonies was named best
orchestral performance, and his composition "Arias and Barcarolles" was named
best contemporary composition. The pianist Vladimir Horowitz was given his 21st
award; Roy Orbison won the male pop vocal award.

Through the 1980's, the Grammys have been striving for both respectability and
hipness. In recent years, Lifetime Achievement Awards have been given to
performers who were overlooked in their prime; this year Bob Dylan, who received
no awards while he was revolutionizing popular music in the 1960's, was given a
lifetime award.

Dylan Was, of Course, Dylan

Mr. Dylan made a characteristically enigmatic appearance. He sang an unfamiliar
song and then, after being handed an award by Jack Nicholson, Mr. Dylan said his
father had told him: "It's possible to be so defiled in this world that even
your mother and father won't know you. But God will always believe in your own
ability to mend your own ways."

The respectability of the Grammys sustained damage last year when it turned out
that Fab Morvan and Rob Pilatus of Milli Vanilli, voted best new artist, did not
perform on the album under their names; the group was stripped of its award in
late 1990 for falsifying the album credits. At this year's ceremonies, Milli
Vanilli was the punchline for some of Mr. Shandling's jokes, and Mariah Carey
demonstrated her vocal prowess before winning the best new artist award.

The Grammys try to offer something for everybody. When there are enough
complaints that a style is overlooked, the recording academy adds a new
category, as it did in the 1980's with new categories for heavy metal, rap, new
age music and polka, as well as splitting rock from pop. There were 77
categories in this year's awards, and the list of nominations gave at least
passing notice to performers as diverse as the rock band Jane's Addiction, the
rapper Queen Latifah, the South African chorale Ladysmith Black Mambazo and the
Mexican-American accordionist Santiago Jimenez Jr., although none of them won
awards.

A Multiple Also-Ran

The British singer, songwriter and drummer Phil Collins received the most
nominations this year for "Another Day in Paradise" and the album that includes
it, ". . . But Seriously." Other contenders for multiple awards included M.C.
Hammer; Wilson Phillips, daughters of the 1960's California rock aristocracy of
the Beach Boys (Brian Wilson) and the Mamas and the Papas (John Phillips), whose
debut album sold four million copies. Ms. Carey received five nominations.

The 33d annual Grammy Awards covered recordings released from Oct. 1, 1989 to
Sept. 30, 1990. The Grammy Awards are selected by the more than 6,000 voting
members of the recording academy, who qualify by amassing at least six credits
on album tracks or singles -- as, for instance, performer, songwriter, producer
or engineer -- and paying dues to join the academy. The entire academy votes on
Song, Record and Album of the Year and Best New Artist; each voter can then
select nine other categories, except for technical categories such as Best
Engineered Recording, which are voted on by those in the field.

A list of the winners, page C17.


LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mariah Carey, left, won the Best New Artist and Female Pop
Vocal awards. M.C. Hammer won three awards, including Best Rhythm-and-Blues
Song. (Photographs by G. Paul Burnett/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              373 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 22, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Moynihan Tries to Save Puerto Rico Referendum

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 521 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 21


Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan assailed Senate colleagues today for what he
called a "shameful display of negativism" concerning a bill that would authorize
a referendum in Puerto Rico on the island's future.

A day after most members of a pivotal Senate committee had expressed deep
misgivings about the proposal, Senator Moynihan, Democrat of New York, voiced
the gloom of many of the measure's supporters. The issue is of pressing concern
to New York State's population of Puerto Ricans, which the state's office in
Washington estimates at 1.4 million.

"I rise in a mood of dismay," Mr. Moynihan told a nearly empty Senate chamber.
"Yesterday, in the Energy and Natural Resources Committee, we saw the most
shameful display of negativism I have yet to encounter in 15 years in the
Senate."

That "negativism" was bipartisan, with only 3 of 19 committee members joining J.
Bennett Johnston, the Louisiana Democrat who heads the panel and is sponsoring
the bill, in support of the measure.

A Milder Bill

The referendum would allow Puerto Ricans to choose among statehood, independence
and enhanced-commonwealth status. Senators at Wednesday's hearing expressed
concern about the costs of Puerto Rican statehood, noting that a majority of the
population would qualify for welfare benefits. They also questioned whether
Puerto Rico, with its own culture, language and tradition, was ready to become
fully a part of the United States.

Today the committee's Republicans worked on an alternative bill that instead of
authorizing a referendum would merely assert Puerto Rico's ability to petition
for statehood, the usual first step by which a state enters the Union. The
feeling among statehood opponents is that Congress would feel less obliged to
act immediately on a petition initiated by Puerto Rico than on a Congressionally
authorized referendum in which statehood proved to be the winner.

In his talk on the Senate floor, Mr. Moynihan said Puerto Rico had a right to
self-determination that was dictated by morality, practicality and international
law. He said this right was recognized by American Presidents dating back half a
century.

Mr. Moynihan said 15,000 Puerto Rican troops were serving with United States
military forces in the Persian Gulf and that Puerto Ricans had fought in World
War II, Korea and Vietnam. "When people fight for a country, they get claims on
a country," he said.

Presidential Loyalty

The Senator noted that President Bush had publicly supported Puerto Rican
statehood and, pointing to the Republican side of the chamber, said, "The
members on that side of the aisle have an obligation to see that the President's
commitment is kept."

Mr. Moynihan's speech was viewed as the opening salvo in an effort to save the
measure before a committee vote next Wednesday. The committee approved a similar
bill in August 1989 by a vote of 11 to 8, but the measure never made it to the
Senate floor, apparently lacking the needed votes there. The House, which passed
a referendum bill last year by a voice vote, is awaiting Senate action before
reconsidering it.

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "We saw the most shameful display of negativism I have yet to
encounter in 15 years in the Senate," Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan said
yesterday. (The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              374 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 22, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Economic Scene;
The Impact Of the Gulf War

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 878 words


HISTORICALLY, wars have given a powerful thrust to the economy by increasing
spending on arms and manpower, reducing unemployment, raising consumers' incomes
and putting pressure on industrial capacity. World War II wiped out what
remained of the Depression; the Korean War ended the 1949 recession, and Vietnam
kept the longest expansion on record rolling.

Is the war in the Persian Gulf different from these in its economic effects?

The economic section of President Bush's budget message for the fiscal year
1992, which was developed jointly by the Council of Economic Advisers, the
Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget, states: "The precipitous loss
of consumer confidence since July was due to an external development, the
Persian Gulf crisis, rather than internal weakness. Confidence can be restored
quickly if it becomes evident that there will not be a replay of the previous
oil shocks."

And, in his Congressional testimony this week, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the
Federal Reserve Board, repeated his view that "an extended war with Iraq" could
damage public confidence and spending, but that with an early end to the war
"this downturn could well prove shorter and shallower than most postwar
recessions."


The two main surveys of consumer confidence lend support to the Administration's
contention that the crisis in the gulf kicked off the recession and that an
early end to the war would end it. The University of Michigan's Index of
Consumer Sentiment stood at 88.2 last July; in August it plunged to 76.4 and
kept falling until it hit 63.9 in October. Then it began to edge up, reaching
66.8 in January. The February data are not in yet.

The Conference Board's Index of Consumer Confidence fell even more steeply; it
dropped from 101.7 last July to 84.7 in August, and slid to 54 inJanuary, the
lowest level in 10 years. But, after Jan. 17, when the United States and
coalition forces began their attack on Iraq, the Conference Board index
apparently began to firm up.

"Survey results recorded in the first half of January were down sharply as
last-minute peace negotiations failed," said Fabien Linden, executive director
of the Conference Board's consumer research center. "But after military action
began, consumer confidence picked up slightly, presumably because early
indications suggested a short war. A reasonably quick victory might well provide
the psychological thrust to invigorate the economy."

Are these measured changes in consumer confidence useful forecasters of the
business cycle, or do they simply reflect real economic factors, as consumers
currently assess them? They certainly wiggle about in reaction to breaking
business, political or military news. A sudden event -- a President's heart
attack, like Eisenhower's, or assassination, like Kennedy's, can give consumer
confidence and the stock market a jolt, but with little lasting effect on the
economy. That was even true of the stock market crash of October 1987.

Indeed, many economists believe that the true causal sequence between consumer
attitudes andobjective economic conditions is the reverse of what the
psychological approach assumes. When layoffs are rising, consumer confidence
sinks. As the job picture starts to improve (just after consumer confidence
touches bottom), consumers' spirits rise -- and they spend more.

George L. Perry, the Brookings Institution's chief forecaster, finds that
surveys of consumer attitudes have little or no predictive value, say, six
months into the future. But he thinks the surveys provide useful clues to the
consumer's very short-term behavior. Thus, if the effects of a war, or the end
of a war, on consumer attitudes is prompt and sharp, a quick and successful end
to the war may provide enough lift to consumer spending to end the recession.

Consumer spending constitutes two-thirds of the gross national product. A surge
of spending could lift the G.N.P. into positive numbers by the third quarter of
this year, or possibly even before the second quarter is over.

Even in the longer run, psychological factors might act as a vital link between
real incomes, consumer spending and economic growth: An optimistic public would
convert income into expenditures at a higher rate than a pessimistic public, and
thereby lead to more rapid growth, until the economy reaches its full-employment
and capacity limits, and inflationary pressures intensify.


This view may be regarded as a translation into macroeconomics of the
personal-psychological thesis of Dr. Martin E. P. Seligman's new book, "Learned
Optimism": that an optimistic attitude may cure psychological depression by
overcoming the resigned and helpless attitudes of individuals who habitually
react to adversity pessimistically.

But "positive thinking," of itself, is no automatic cure for the ills of
depression, psychological or economic. Ill-founded optimism can be a pipe dream
that helps cause crashes or breeds crunches. The great virtue of pessimism is
that it looks at reality and forces individuals, or a nation, to recognize their
serious problems. A sound balance between optimism and pessimism can lead to
both realism and constructive action, rather than an evasion of problems by
happy-talk and wish-think.

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              375 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 22, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF;
Medal for All in the Military

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 136 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 21


The Pentagon is awarding the National Defense Service Medal to all members of
the United States armed forces in connection with the Persian Gulf war, Defense
Secretary Dick Cheney said today.

The medal goes to all members of the armed forces who were on active duty after
Aug. 2, 1990, whether or not they served in the Persian Gulf.

The award recognizes "the outstanding performance of ourarmed forces during
Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm," said Mr. Cheney, who authorized the
award.

The red, white, blue and gold ribbon is coupled to a circle of brass bearing the
insignia of an eagle and the words "National Defense."

The medal was awarded to members of the armed forces during the Korean War and
the Vietnam War. The National Institute of Heraldry, an Army organization,
designed the award.

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              376 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 22, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

New Orleans Journal;
In One City, 2 Campuses Worlds Apart on War

BYLINE: By JASON DePARLE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 898 words

DATELINE: NEW ORLEANS, Feb. 16


Two black Avia hightop sneakers rest at the bottom of an abandoned locker in the
Xavier University gym, and the size 15 feet that used to fill them are now
swathed in military leather. Chris Harvey, a 6-foot 7-inch junior, had just
become the basketball team's starting center last November when the mobilization
put his athletic career on hold. Like many black students, this former reservist
is in the Army now.

Similar stories of interrupted lives are being told across this modest campus,
home to one of the nation's 41 historically black colleges. Many students here
have left to fulfill military obligations, often incurred to help pay for
college, and virtually everyone has friends or family in the Persian Gulf.

That personal contact is bringing bitterness; almost unanimously, Xavier
students speak angrily about the war. They argue that the United States is being
hypocritical by seeking to fight problems overseas while ignoring those at home,
and that the nation is asking blacks to bear a disproportionate burden on both
fronts.

Dr. Norman C. Francis, Xavier's president since 1968, used the word "pall" to
describe the campus mood and said today's students felt more threatened by this
war than the previous generation did by the one in Vietnam. The difference, he
said, is that today's fighting comes as students are already fearful of what
they see as their own waning economic prospects and an assault on civil rights.

The attitudes at Xavier are strikingly different from those at Tulane, a
predominantly white university about mile away but a world apart in the
backgrounds of its students. The proportion of Xavier students who have been
forced from school because of military obligations is many times greater than
that at Tulane. Perhaps as a result, it is almost as hard to find an Xavier
student willing to defend the war as it is to find one at Tulane willing to
criticize it.

The contrast suggests that in the absence of a draft, which helped form a
generational division on the war in Vietnam, student views on this war are
sculptered less by age than by forces like race and class.

"War Disrupts Campus," proclaimed the Xavier Herald, where one editor of the
student newspaper wrote of "50,000 body bags per month" coming home and another
described her husband's call to active duty as a form of slavery.

In a locker room discussion after basketball practice this week, Mr. Harvey's
former teammates voiced similar disenchantment.

"I'd rather go to Canada," said Raymond Brothers, a 21-year-old senior guard
from Lafayette, La. "The U.S. steps in in Iraq, but they've got apartheid in
South Africa -- why doesn't the U.S. step in there?"

Merlin Peters, the team's co-captain, served four years as a marine before being
spotted in a pickup game and offered a basketball scholarship to Xavier. He said
his mother pressured him to join the service to get him away from the street
corners of a New Orleans housing project.

"They're not over there by choice, by no stretch of the imagination," said Mr.
Peters, whose brother is a marine in the gulf. "Blacks mainly join for economic
reasons."

The registrar's office said about 33 of Xavier's 2,900 students have withdrawn
to fulfill military obligations.

That rate is about 10 times as high as at Tulane, where about a dozen of 11,000
students have left for military reasons. There, the war brought few protesters
and no student editorials.

On a campus where nearly a third of the students are Jewish, some support for
the war is concentrated in organizations like Hillel, which has sponsored
several demonstrations in favor of United States policy. "Any time there's a
threat to Israel we see it as a threat to ourselves as well," said David Fox,
the 19-year-old sophomore who is president the group.

Most fraternity members support the war as well. The Sigma Alpha Epsilon
fraternity house appeared a hotbed of social rest on the day after Mardi Gras,
with the smell of stale beer wafting upstairs to the room where Spencer Ott sat
watching a videotape movie. Mr. Ott won the agreement of his fraternity brothers
when he said the United States was the only country capable of stopping
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq. "It's our duty to the world," he said.

Mr. Ott, whose father is a Naples, Fla., investor, said he could already see
domestic gains from the war, in a rising stock market and falling oil prices,
and he was unpersuaded that it reflected social inequities.

"You could argue that there are more black people fighting because there are
more black people who are poor," he said. "But it's better that they're doing
something with their lives, not turning to crime and drugs like you see on T.V."

Like Mr. Ott, Mr. Harvey, the former Xavier center, did not envision himself
being involved in a war. Though Xavier provided him with a full scholarship,
friends said he joined the Army Reserves last spring

to earn some extra spending money: $112.48 a month for one weekend's duty as an
administrative clerk.

The walls of his mother's home in the St. Thomas housing project here are
papered with similar emblems of his strivings: commendations for his work in
school, on the court and in summer jobs at the sheriff's office.

No one recalls hearing him complain when he learned he was being called up. He
is now at Fort Polk, La., awaiting further orders.

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Raymond Brothers, Xavier student - "The U.S. steps in in Iraq
but they've got apartheid in South Africa - why doesn't the U.S. step in
there?"; Merlin Peters, Xavier student - "They're not over there by choice. . .
Blacks mainly join for economic reasons."; David Fox, Tulane student - "Any time
there's a threat to Israel we see it as a threat to ourselves as well."
(Photographs by Matt Anderson for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              377 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Weapons;
Napalm's Formula Is Simple, But Its Properties Are Lethal

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 352 words


Napalm, which allied aircraft have reportedly begun dropping on Iraqi
fortifications and tank obstacles in Kuwait, is one of the simplest but most
effective weapons against enemy troops sheltered in caves, bunkers and other
enclosed places.

Invented at Harvard University in cooperation with the United States Army during
World War II, napalm is essentially jellied gasoline, thickened with an
aluminum-based soap and other ingredients. Among these thickeners are naphthenic
and palmitic acids, from which the word napalm is derived.

The substance, renamed "Incendergel" by the military in the Vietnam War, is used
to fill bomb casings or as the fuel in flamethrowers. Napalm burns with intense
heat, and it sticks to anything it touches, sometimes causing terrible
casualties.

One of its chief values to field commanders is its ability to deplete the air of
oxygen. A wave of napalm-fueled fire splashed across the mouths of a system of
caves or trenchworks may fail to burn the occupants but can remove so much
oxygen from the air that the defenders suffocate. For this reason, some
opponents of its use have argued that napalm should be classified as a chemical
weapon and banned.

Nevertheless, napalm remains a mainstay of armies and air forces throughout the
world, and has been used in many wars and minor conflicts since it was
introduced in World War II.

Gasoline and thickeners can be mixed just before use to make napalm bombs.
Canisters resembling external fuel tanks are filled with the gel and ignited at
the instant of impact by a fuse and booster similar to those used in explosive
bombs.

According to news reports from Saudi Arabia, allied aircraft are dropping napalm
canisters on ditches excavated by Iraqi forces in Kuwait as tank obstacles. It
is expected that Iraqi forces will partly fill these ditches with oil and set
them alight in the event of an allied land assault. Dropping napalm appears to
be an effort to burn off the oil before an attack.

The napalm attacks may also be intended to inflict casualties on front-line
Iraqi troops and to depress their morale.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A napalm bomb being attached to a Marine Harrier jet that was
being prepared at a base in Saudi Arabia for a bombing run yesterday.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              378 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Zhang Wenjin Is Dead; Chinese Envoy Was 76

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 176 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Feb. 22


Zhang Wenjin, a former Deputy Foreign Minister and Ambassador to the United
States and Canada, died on Monday, China Central Television reported today. He
was 76 years old.

The report gave no cause of death.

Mr. Zhang participated in historic meetings including Henry Kissinger's secret
talks with Prime Minister Zhou Enlai in 1971, Zhou's meeting with President
Nixon a year later and the Paris peace talks on Vietnam in 1973.

When Mr. Kissinger came to China in 1971 as the first step in normalizing
relations, Mr. Zhang was the Foreign Ministry's senior official in charge of
relations with the West.

He was Ambassador to Canada from 1973 to 1976 and to Washington from 1982 to
1985. He was Deputy Foreign Minister from 1978 to 1981.

When he died, Mr. Zhang was vice chairman of Foreign Affairs Committee of the
National People's Congress, China's legislature, and president of the Chinese
People's Association for Friendship With Foreign Countries.

He began his career in foreign affairs in the 1950's as a translator for Mao and
Zhou.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              379 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Combat
BUSH DEMANDS IRAQ START PULLOUT TODAY DESPITE ITS ASSENT TO 3-WEEK SOVIET PLAN;
OILFIELDS AND TRENCHES AFLAME IN KUWAIT
AIR WAR IS PRESSED

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1375 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Feb. 22


Allied fighter-bombers pounded enemy troop emplacements in every corner of
Kuwait today, flying a record number of missions over the emirate despite clouds
of inky smoke from oil-well fires, apparently set by Iraq, that covered a
quarter of the nation.

Firing volley after volley of shells and missiles, American and British
howitzers and rocket launchers joined in the final preparation for a ground
offensive, as did armadas of United States Army and Marine Corps helicopters.

The attack could come as soon as dawn Sunday, officers of the American command
said, if President Saddam Hussein does not heed coalition demands that he begin
pulling his forces out of Kuwait by Saturday.

'Question of a Few Hours'

"The start of land operations is programmed," the French Defense Minister,
Pierre Joxe, said in Paris. "It's a question of a few hours."

Anti-personnel cluster bombs clattered down on Iraqi troop positions, dispatches
from front-line reporters said, and hundreds of canisters of napalm, the gel
that bursts into flame when it lands, were dumped into deep, oil-filled trenches
in front of enemy lines to try to burn off the oil.

It was the first known use of napalm in the Persian Gulf war.

Iraq's 'Scorched-Earth Policy'

Brig. Gen. Richard I. Neal, the American military spokesman, said at a briefing
in Riyadh that Mr. Hussein had ordered "a scorched-earth policy" into effect in
Kuwait, setting fire to about 140 of the 950 oil wells in the country. He said
that at least 100 of them had exploded in the last 24 hours, and that tanks,
pipelines, warehouses and shipping terminals associated with the oil industry
had also been knocked out in a systematic campaign.

"It looks like he's carrying out his policy of destroying Kuwait," General Neal
said.

The rising tempo of allied ground operations, including highly aggressive probes
from Saudi Arabia into Iraq and Kuwait, also indicated that a land assault was
imminent unless the Iraqis quickly pulled back. So did a pointed statement from
Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the American commander, who said tonight that "U.S.
forces are fully prepared for the execution of any action ordered by the
President of the United States."

Saudi troops penetrated more than six miles into Kuwaiti territory to open a
lane through an Iraqi minefield, a Saudi spokesman reported, and they lifted
about 75 mines without encountering any enemy opposition.

By late tonight, American pilots and listening posts had detected "not a shred
of evidence" that the Iraqis were preparing to leave Kuwait, an officer at
General Schwarzkopf's headquarters in Riyadh said. He said there was "no radio
traffic, no movement of tanks, trucks, nothing."

All Wells Mined, Arafat Says

Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, warned in an
interview published in France that Baghdad had mined every oil well in Kuwait,
and allied intelligence officials said some of the burning wells were sending
plumes of fire and smoke 400 to 500 feet into the air. Rear Adm. Mike McConnell,
the Pentagon's chief of intelligence, exhibited maps at the daily briefing in
Washington showing fires in the big Rumaila and Bahra fields in northern Kuwait,
as well as others south of Kuwait City.

General Neal said American soldiers had been trained to fight in the murky
environment of oilfield fires, but Admiral McConnell said the smoke would make
it harder for allied pilots to identify their targets.

Some of the fires were visible 40 miles away in Saudi Arabia, their orange
flames boldly outlined against the horizon. At Khafji, the border town where the
war's biggest battle so far was fought three weeks ago, the sky was almost dark
at midday.

Baghdad's behavior puzzled American officials. General Neal said he was "as
confused as you are" when asked by reporters to explain the contradictions
between Mr. Hussein's bellicose speech on Thursday night and the subsequent
peace negotiations in Moscow.

Scud Launched at Bahrain

While those negotiations were under way, the wells were torched and a Scud
missile was launched toward the island nation of Bahrain in the Persian Gulf
about 25 miles from Dhahran.

No one was hurt and no property damage was caused by that missile or three
others fired only a few hours earlier at other Saudi cities. The first three,
said Lieut. Gen. Thomas Kelly, the Pentagon chief of operations, were all fired
from launchers positioned within Baghdad, which is a new operating procedure.

"The troops are in a difficult position, psychologically," a Medical Corps
officer just back from an evacuation hospital in the north said. "They have to
prepare for war and prepare to let go, too."

But most soldiers said they were deeply suspicious of Mr. Hussein's motives and
thought that the only way to deal with him was to attack. "Tell the boss we
ought to go ahead and bash this guy," said a military policeman at a roadblock
here.

Airman 1st Class Mike Gray, waiting for a plane at the big air base, said of the
Iraqi leader, "I can't see him keeping his word, not someone who talks about
peace and fires Scuds."

Iraq Says Battle Has Begun

In a reflection, perhaps, of strained nerves, the Baghdad radio reported this
morning that "the enemy has started the ground battle." The American command
quickly denied it, and a Pentagon official remarked tartly, "If the Iraqis are
leaping to the conclusion that the ground battle has begun on the basis of a
single division shooting artillery fire, then they really don't comprehend the
strength of the firepower of the coalition."

The air, artillery and naval barrage that opens the war, General Neal said, will
make what has gone before look like "the tip of the iceberg."

A feature of the withering artillery volleys of the last few days has been fire
from the Army's self-propelled multiple-launch rocket system, used here in
combat for the first time. It can blast off its rockets, then speed away before
enemy artillery can zero in -- "shoot and scoot," the troops of the First
Cavalry Division call the tactic, according to a pool report.

General Neal said enemy counter-battery artillery fire had killed one marine and
wounded five others. They were involved, he said, in one of three clashes with
enemy forces along the Kuwaiti border today that led to the destruction of 18
Iraqi tanks and 15 other vehicles and produced 100 prisoners.

After 36 days of combat, 20 Americans have been killed, 30 are listed as missing
in action and 9 are carried as prisoners of war.

Surrender of 400 Described

A delayed report from the front on the surrender Tuesday of more than 400 Iraqis
disclosed for the first time that it was helicopters of the 101st Airborne
Division that flushed them out of their bunker complex in Iraq. Loudspeakers on
the choppers broadcast messages in Arabic urging them to give themselves up, and
all of them did, including at least 10 officers.

Division intelligence officers said the prisoners were well dressed and reported
that they had been getting three meals a day. And the heliopter pilots said the
bunker system was well-built and very heavily reinforced.

The Associated Press quoted an unidentified Marine air officer as saying napalm
was being used against Iraqi troops, as it was against the enemy in Vietnam. But
Lieut. Comdr. John Tull, a command spokesman, denied the report, asserting that
allied warplanes were dropping the gel only on Iraqi defensive works.

As the air campaign thundered on, now into its sixth week, allied pilots flew a
total of 2,700 missions. A little more than half the flights on any one day are
combat missions, which means roughly 1,400 sorties in the last 24 hours went
north of the border. General Neal said 1,000 went to Kuwait, with 100 more over
Republican Guard positions on the Iraq-Kuwait border, leaving only 300 over Iraq
proper -- a sharp change in emphasis.

Nevertheless, American planes returned to the Baghdad area, bombing during
daylight hours for the first time. The Baghdad radio denounced the raids, which
it called "bestial crimes," but it sent mixed signals, speaking also of Iraq's
"desire to establish security and stability in the region."


LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thick, Black smoke from burning oil wells in Kuwait, apparently
set ablaze by Iraq, blackened the sky at noon yesterday Over Khafji, Saudi
Arabia. The abandoned town, near the border with Kuwait, was the site of a
battle earlier this month between Iraqi and coalition forces. (Associated Press)
9pg. 1)

Map of Kuwait showing oilfields, pipelines, refineries and roads (pg. 8)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              380 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Troops;
Harlem's Guard Troops Complain of Treatment

BYLINE: By CHRIS HEDGES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1164 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Feb. 22


Members of the Harlem Hell Fighters, one of the country's oldest and most
renowned black National Guard units, say it has been broken up, stripped of much
of its equipment and moved into front-line positions without proper preparation
or training.

Many of the National Guardsmen from the 369th Transport Battalion, over 50
percent of whom served in Vietnam and most of whom are over 40, have found
themselves appendaged to a regular Army combat battalion that they say does not
respect their experience, age or professional status.

"We have three strikes against us," said Specialist Ruben O. McCann, a postal
worker from the Bronx who served for two years in Vietnam. "We are from the
Guard, we are from New York, and we are black."

Army officials in Saudi Arabia said they had little sympathy for the soldiers'
complaints.

"National Guard units, like any other Army units, will be positioned wherever
they must go to perform their unit mission," said Capt. Thomas Nickerson, an
Army spokesman in Riyadh. "If that mission requires going to the front lines,
that's where they go."

Many Intend to Resign

Morale in the unit has plummeted as many say they intend to resign from the
National Guard when they return to New York.

"We feel like outcasts," said Sgt. Franklin D. Williams, a 50-year-old retired
police officer who has a son serving in the Persian Gulf. "All we are waiting
for now is to go home."

"We are out here fighting two armies," said Cpl. Theo H. Lewis, a Vietnam
veteran who lives in Brooklyn. "The U.S. Army and the enemy."

"We are 10,000 miles from home," he said. "We have no say in what we do. We have
lost our rights. As far as most of us are concerned,we are prisoners."

The soldiers, who have an average age of 43 and many of whom are New York City
police officers, firefighters and Transit Authority workers, have little empathy
for the war.

"This war seems to me like a personal vendetta between Bush and Saddam Hussein,"
said Specialist Hope L. Scott, who is from Harlem. "Let them fight it out. I
don't think we should be here."

'Most of Us Are Too Old'

"The war is over oil," said Sgt. William A. Pace, 49, of the Bronx, "and I'm not
going to get any of it or any more money from it. Most of us are too old to be
out here crawling around in the mud under fire for this."

The families of about 350 of the soldiers, who have organized a support group,
have protested to the National Guard about the placement of the troops near the
front line.

"We were told before they left that they would be based near a pier or an
airport," Linda E. Williams, who heads the family support group, said in a
telephone interview from the Guard armory in Harlem. "But this did not turn out
to be the case. They should not be out in the desert at their age. They are
weekend warriors who are not prepared to be in a ground war. It is almost like
suicide."

The first contingent in the battalion arrived in Saudi Arabia on Nov. 8.

The soldiers said they had been told that they would ferry supplies to depots
from the ports and airports for six months and would not be stationed near
combat areas.

'One Lie After Another'

The reality has been far different from what they expected.

"Since we arrived, it has been just one lie after another," said Sgt. Mario
Rodriguez, a 39-year-old Vietnam veteran who was wounded three times. "I had it
better in Vietnam."

The unit was moved immediately into the desert, and many of the soldiers are now
stationed close to the Iraqi border, within range of artillery shells.

The six months has been extended to 12 by President Bush, an extension that the
soldiers say has put an intolerable strain on their families and their
professions.

The soldiers also said the Army and the National Guard bureaucracy had made it
impossible for them to get promoted.

"The Army says the National Guard should do it, and the Guard says the Army
should do it," Sergeant Williams said. "So no one does it."

Battalion Is Split Up

To make matters worse, the battalion was split up, and two platoons are now
working for other transportation units.

Many of the 100 or so vehicles that the unit brought from New York have been
taken away and turned over to Regular Army units.

The lack of spare parts has forced the Guard unit to cannibalize their few
remaining trucks.

"We are a transport and supply unit with almost no vehicles," Specialist McCann
said.

When his 719th Transport Company was moved to a forward area two weeks ago, the
troops waited for an Army bus. But an hour before departure, the Army officer
said there was no bus available. They had to fit three or four people in truck
cabs designed for two for the 11-hour drive. When the company arrived at the new
location, the Army appropriated even more of their vehicles.

"Ever since we got here, they have just been stripping our unit down," he said.
"Pretty soon there won't be anything left."

Much of the 719th Company's supplies, including their meal rations, lay stacked
in the sand. The company's one mess truck is scheduled to be taken by a Regular
Army unit on Saturday.

Can't Get Out in a Hurry

"If we wanted to pack up and get out in a hurry, we couldn't," said Staff Sgt.
Cornelius D. Seon, who is from the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn. "We don't
have enough vehicles now to move."

Sergeant Seon, who is in charge of the company's decontamination procedures,
said the unit did not have its own decontamination station in the event of a
chemical attack. He bought the company a small weather station with his own
money so he would be able to monitor the wind speed and direction if chemical
agents were in the area.

"We are supposed to wing it in a chemical attack," he said.

Because many of the Guard members are older and hold positions of some authority
in New York, they have chafed at what they perceive to be the curt treatment by
many Regular Army officers.

One 49-year-old sergeant, who served in the Military Police in Vietnam and who
is now a New York City police officer, found a young captain giving him a
tongue-lashing because she felt he had not done his job the way she requested.

The sergeant, an imposing, heavy-set man, told the captain that he was not used
to being treated with disrespect.

'Did Not Have to Respect Me'

"She told me she did not have to respect me," he said.

The captain has brought charges to deduct six months of pay and reduce his rank.

The Guard members said that often when they go to make telephone calls home,
they must wait until all the Regular Army soldiers have finished before they can
use the phones.

"I was in the Army in 1958," Sergeant Williams said. "It was a Jim Crow Army
then. We had a black water fountain and a black U.S.O. I get the same feeling
being over here. There is no one to speak up for us so we're being kicked
around."

"They want us to die like soldiers," said Sgt. Donald C. Ingram, "but they treat
us like children."

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of the 369th Transport Battalion in Saudi Arabia shortly
after arrival last November. Since then, the National Guard unit from Harlem has
been split up and two platoons are now working for other units. (Angel
Franco/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              381 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: White House Memo;
Bush Moves to Control War's Endgame

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1202 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 22


By ordering Saddam Hussein to begin getting out of Kuwait at high noon on
Saturday, President Bush moved decisively to take control of the war's endgame.

With the Iraqi leader facing military defeat, Mr. Bush decided that he would
rather gamble on a violent and potentially unpopular ground war than risk the
alternative: an imperfect settlement hammered out by the Soviets and Iraqis that
world opinion might accept as tolerable.

The President grabbed for a clear-cut allied victory that would strip Mr.
Hussein of so much prestige and hardware that he would be unlikely to play the
phoenix of Baghdad any time soon.

No Dealing Now

Mr. Bush was too committed to a war he sees in moral terms to let the Iraqis
continue to bargain with the Soviets for a better deal towithdraw from Kuwait.
Nor was he willing to let Mr. Hussein use diplomacy to convert the prospect of
military defeat into a face-saving opportunity.

The United States, the Soviet Union and Iraq were all playing an angle aimed at
their domestic and international audiences. Even though he considered the
possibility that his terms would be too stringent for Mr. Hussein, Mr. Bush
wanted to cut through what the White House regarded as the fog of diplomacy
generated by the Soviets and Iraqis and force all parties toward a deal that was
best for the alliance.

Having cornered the man who mocked him as "a liar" and the "Satan in the White
House," the President offered Mr. Hussein a choice between two forms of
humiliation -- losing a ground war or succumbing to a 24-hour deadline.

When Appearances Count

The conventional wisdom here on Thursday said that Mr. Bush could not begin a
ground war while the Soviets and Iraqis negotiated, for fear that he would look
like he was unreasonably prolonging combat. But today, Mr. Bush reversed the
conventional wisdom by insisting that a ground war could be a quicker route to
peace than a negotiation with a foe who was setting fire to Kuwaiti oil wells.

He was intent on forcing the action at an extraordinary moment, one that found
national leaders conducting public diplomacy. Where Mr. Hussein had been verbose
in his speech on Thursday, Mr. Bush seemed brief and plain-spoken.

"People underestimated George Bush's determination to make good on what he said
Aug. 4, that 'this will not stand,' " a senior Bush adviser said. "He wants this
thing rolled back. He doesn't want Saddam to have a graceful retreat. He doesn't
want him to be able to go back into Kuwait in six months. He doesn't want a
compromise solution. He doesn't want Saddam Hussein to save face. Bush wants to
win."

Fortunately for him, a President who has surprised many by playing the role of
chief hawk in his inner circle found himself today with mighty leverage. He had
the advantage of a remarkably successful air campaign that has left Iraqis
reeling.

American generals and admirals, living down Vietnam with a vengeance, were able
to deliver everything they had promised and more. With few Americans killed in
the war so far, Mr. Bush faced little domestic pressure to stop fighting.

At each stage of the Persian Gulf crisis, President Bush has been willing to
move further and faster than anyone expected. Some have felt he moved too fast
at times, others considered his swift moves skillful. Until he took on Mr.
Hussein, Mr. Bush had a reputation as a leader who loped rather than swaggered,
a politician who labored over decisions and preferred a split-the-difference,
middle-of-the-road approach.

Must Pay the Price

But when he returned from Ford's Theater on Thursday night, where he saw a play
about black World War II pilots called "Black Eagles," Mr. Bush and his high
command decided that if Mr. Hussein was to pay any real price for invading
Kuwait, and if the President was to live up to his pledges, they had to, as an
aide put it, "hold him to the line."

The Bush Administration may be annoyed that the Soviet Union has elbowed its way
into the coda of the war. And in two telephone conversations on Thursday night
and this morning, the President "told Gorbachev, nicely, to bug off," a top
Administration official said.

But the President took care -- in saying publicly that "very frankly we
appreaciate" the Soviet efforts, and in the uncommon duration and delicate tone
of his conversations with the Soviet leader -- to give President Mikhail S.
Gorbachev the proper respect, even as he tried to explain that he no longer
wished to be involved in a three-corner negotiation.

The White House was as tense as it has been on other landmark days, such as
those of the Cuban missile crisis and Jimmy Carter's failed effort to rescue
American hostages in Iran in 1980, longtime Washington analysts said.

This morning, an intense and intimate moment captured by a television camera set
up outside the Oval Office, Mr. Bush could be seen through a frame of white
curtains sitting at his desk, calling allies and Congressional leaders and
cobbling together the right language for the ultimatum.

Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d stood with a phone to his ear, and the
national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, crouched with a portable phone. Vice
President Dan Quayle and John H. Sununu, the chief of staff, hovered around the
President's desk and occasionally peeked out the window at waiting journalists.

In the week since the Soviets began negotiating a peace proposal with the
Iraqis, there has been an uneasiness at the White House and dread at the
Pentagon, where the generals were eager to finish carrying out the battle plans
that had brought Mr. Hussein to the verge of surrender.

The President was nervous that the Soviet-Iraqi negotiations might leave Mr.
Hussein as a formidable regional military power rather than a weakened dictator
vulnerable to an overthrow by his own people.

As it is, Pentagon officials said today that Mr. Hussein will be able to
evacuate his Republican Guard forces and virtually all their equipment because
they have been positioned just inside the Iraqi border north of Kuwait.

But that leaves thousands of tanks and artillery pieces dug in with front-line
Iraqi forces in Kuwait, and therefore the swiftness of the withdrawal is a
crucial consideration in how strong a fighting force he will be able to keep
intact. Officials of Arab governments in the coalition have pushed for
strategies that would diminish Mr. Hussein as he retreats.

When Mr. Bush, in his first months in office, he ordered a review of national
security policy, Pentagon and C.I.A. officials warned that the United States
must deal with third-world threats unambiguously.

"In cases where the U.S. confronts much weaker enemies, our challenge will be
not simply to defeat them, but to defeat them decisively and rapidly," the
national security review concluded. "For small countries hostile to us, bleeding
our forces in protracted or indecisive conflict or embarrassing us by inflicting
damage on some conspicuous element of our forces may be victory enough, and
could undercut political support for U.S. efforts against them."

Those close to Mr. Bush he is minful of that, and determined that this war's
ending will not be ambiguous.


LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush walking from the White house yesterday to
announce his ultimatum to Iraq. with him was Vice President Dan Quayle. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              382 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Camps Victimize Vietnamese Boat People

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 382 words


To the Editor:

"Far Fewer Boat People Coming to Hong Kong" (news article, Feb. 7) refers to
Vietnamese television crews being brought to Hong Kong and Thailand to film
difficult living conditions in the Vietnamese refugee camps to discourage
further arrivals of boat people. I have visited these detention camps in Hong
Kong and Thailand. This seemingly innocuous tactic masks serious human rights
violations -- both detain the Vietnamese under harsh and deliberately deprived
circumstances as a deterrent.

Last December, we wrote to Sir David Wilson, Governor of Hong Kong, about the
Vietnamese boat people detained in camps in Hong Kong and to present a sworn
statement by a Vietnamese-American woman who worked recently in several camps.
Her statement gives a detailed account of hardships inflicted on Vietnamese
asylum seekers detained in Hong Kong.

She describes intimidation and neglect of duty, inadequate medical care,
unattended health problems and lack of privacy. Parents struggle in vain to
shield their children from predatory criminals, while guards publicly humiliate
detainees for alleged infractions of camp rules. She describes the grim prison
atmosphere of the camps. Most "have high fences with up to 12 rolls of barbed
wire," and except for "a few smaller camps that have trees, only steel, metal
and concrete surround the detainees." The prisonlike environment is intensified
by severe restrictions on movement in the camps. Asylum seekers must choose fear
of persecution on return to Vietnam or fear of violent encounters, even death,
in the camps.

The onerous character and deterrence rationale of Hong Kong's 1988 detention
policy render it clearly arbitrary. International law prohibits prolonged
arbitrary detention, even by a state that has not acceded to international
instruments that prohibit such mistreatment.

As with every other government, Hong Kong and Thailand are bound by
international law to respect human rights. The woefully inadequate living
conditions in the detention centers reflect a conscious government policy to
deprive Vietnamese asylum seekers of basic dignity. This violation of human
rights must end forthwith.

ARTHUR C. HELTON
Director, Refugee Project, Lawyers - Committee for Human Rights
New York, Feb. 7, 1991

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              383 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
His Kingdom For a Horse, Not a $2 Bet

BYLINE: By Joseph Durso

SECTION: Section 1; Page 43; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 786 words

DATELINE: HALLANDALE, Fla.


In this age of high-tech sports, video scoreboards, pay-per-view TV and
satellite betting, Tom Meeker has a message for the horsey set: Put the horse
back in horse racing.

If not, he warns, you'll end up sitting in a casino someplace far from any race
track, betting your bucks on an electronic blip on a screen. And, he says,
raising the specter of the ultimate nightmare for all sports in the electronic
era, "We may yet rue the day when racing is conducted before empty stands."

He means that you can't have a bet without a barnyard, and you can't have a
barnyard without a horse.

"The goal," he said, "should be to bring people to the track to watch horses.
We've got to get people to the race track: feeling it, seeing it, smelling it."

Thomas H. Meeker isn't just a voice crying in the wilderness of racing. He is
the president of Churchill Downs, the home of the Kentucky Derby and the capital
of the bluegrass country. He also is the new president of the Thoroughbred
Racing Associations, and the nearest thing to the spokesman for an industry that
breeds nearly 50,000 thoroughbreds every year and that attracts bets of maybe
$12 billion on those who eventually make it to the races.

And there's the rub. You no longer have to go to a race track in person to bet
your money on a horse. You can go to your neighborhood Offtrack Betting parlor,
a casino in Atlantic City or Las Vegas or even to another race track that
exports races via satellite to places where bettors gather, far from farm and
finish line. In fact, you can stay home and take the plunge by telephone without
even seeing a horse.

Tom Meeker spent 13 years in the Marines, served three tours in Vietnam and left
as a lieutenant colonel with multiple decorations. He graduated summa cum laude
from the University of Louisville Law School, later became general counsel to
Churchill Downs and in 1984 president of the track. Two weeks ago, he was
elected top dog of the T.R.A., whose mission is "to serve as a strong and
unified voice of the thoroughbred racing industry."

But the voice is being distorted these days, as it is in all sports, by
fundamental differences over money: how to get more of it from the public. And
in racing, horses run and people bet, and more new high-tech ways are being
found to get people to bet far from the tracks where the horses run. But Meeker
is asking: Can you keep exporting your product without undermining it?

"What product are you selling?" he reflected the other day on the telephone from
his office at Churchill Downs. "Why do I need a barnyard with all those animals
if the mentality is the selling of a gaming product? I might just as well run
races and pipe them to Santa Anita. Pure gaming is O.K. But I think our product
is live horse racing.

"People have made the argument that TV, which is a market-expanding technology,
has helped the National Football League. Look at the filled stadiums. And that
is true.

"But I suggest that racing is different. It's not football. Unlike the N.F.L.,
we haven't clearly defined our product. At Churchill Downs, we describe it as
live racing at the track for 80-plus days, and that's where I split with some of
my colleagues."

"When I came into racing," Meeker said, gathering speed on the far turn, "we
were trying to see the entertainment value of racing, the color, the horses
coming down the stretch, all that collage of excitement.

"Then along comes offtrack betting, and TV gets a new use. Offtrack betting in
New York was first. Then came all the other forms of betting away from the
track. Satellite, intertrack, everything.

"I'm concerned when a horseman says we ought to have more intertrack wagering
because the purses will go up. But I say, 'Where will you get new owners to
invest in our track?' The way you get new owners interested is to bring them to
the paddock all gussied up and let them feel the horse is Secretariat. And then
let them watch their horse run. Let them run up to the winner's circle and have
that moment in the sunshine.

"You don't get any of that by sitting in a cold OTB parlor."

"Let's look at the breeding industry," Meeker went on, turning into the
rhetorical homestretch. "If you ship your product out to betting parlors around
the country, by the year 2000 you might have fewer logical racing sites, fewer
races, fewer horses. But I still have to produce the same number of foals every
year to let the law of averages produce quality. You still have to deal in the
horse environment and hope 10 percent become good race horses."

"I'm not running a G.M. production line," Tom Meeker said. "I can't just switch
to Cadillacs."

He's running a barnyard, and he wants to keep it that way.

NAME: Thomas H. Meeker

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas H. Meeker (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              384 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

John Sherman Cooper Dies at 89; Longtime Senator From Kentucky

BYLINE: By ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1081 words


John Sherman Cooper, a liberal Republican from Kentucky who represented his
state in the Senate for more than two decades, died in a Washington retirement
home on Thursday. He was 89 years old.

His brother, Richard, said Mr. Cooper died of heart failure.

Throughout his long career in the Senate, Mr. Cooper, a patrician Kentuckian who
served his country in diplomatic posts as well as in Congress, maintained a
reputation for absolute independence.

His first roll-call vote, transferring investigatory powers to a special War
Investigation Committee soon after World War II, went against the wishes of his
party's leaders. So did his second vote, which prompted Senator Robert A. Taft,
Republican of Ohio, to storm up the aisle and demand: "Are you a Republican or a
Democrat? When are you going to start voting with us?"

"If you'll pardon me," Senator Cooper replied, "I was sent here to represent my
constituents, and I intend to vote as I think best."

Led Opposition to McCarthy

In the years that followed, Senator Cooper proved that he meant what he said. He
was one of the first Republicans in the Senate to denounce Senator Joseph R.
McCarthy of Wisconsin for the tactics of Mr. McCarthy's anti-Communist campaign.
When it was unpopular to do so, Mr. Cooper also opposed legislation to remove
from reluctant witnesses the Fifth Amendment's protection against compelled
self-incrimination.

In the Vietnam War, Mr. Cooper joined with a Democratic, Senator, Frank Church
of Idaho, in drafting the Cooper-Church amendment, which was aimed at barring
further United States military action in Cambodia.

Mr. Cooper worked quietly, avoiding histrionics. He left behind no ringing calls
to action, perhaps because he was, by his own admission, "a truly terrible
public speaker." On the rare occasions when he did take the Senate floor, he was
often inaudible. He mumbled and swallowed his words, and apparently made no
effort to avoid use of Kentucky dialect in which "great" sounded like "grett,"
"government" became "guv-ment," and "revenue" was pronounced "rev-noo."

Mr. Cooper was born on Aug. 11, 1901, in Somerset, the seat of Pulaski County in
Kentucky. He was named for his father, the wealthiest man in town. The elder Mr.
Cooper, like his own father and grandfather before him, was a county judge and a
circuit judge, and it was always assumed that the next generation of Coopers
would provide the county its leaders.

After a year at Centre College in Danville, Ky., Mr. Cooper went to Yale, where
he was captain of the basketball team, and in 1923 was voted most likely to
succeed.

Forced to Leave Harvard

He went on to Harvard Law School but had to withdraw in 1925 after learning from
his dying father that the recession of 1920 had virtually wiped out the family's
resources.

Assuming his father's debts, Mr. Cooper sold the family mansion. Over the next
25 years he paid off the debts and sent six brothers and sisters to college. He
passed the state bar examination and was admitted to law practice in 1928.

Mr. Cooper won his first elective office in 1927, a two-year term in the
Kentucky Legislature. From 1930 to 1938 he served as county judge, a powerful
local administrative post that controlled county patronage.

Mr. Cooper was elected three times to fill unexpired terms in the United States
Senate. The first was in 1946, after A. B. (Happy) Chandler resigned to become
commissioner of baseball. Mr. Cooper failed to win in the 1948 general election,
but in 1952 he was elected to fill the unexpired term of Virgil Chapman.

In the next general election he was defeated by Alben W. Barkley, a Democrat who
was Vice President under Harry S. Truman, but Mr. Barkley subsequently died and
Mr. Cooper was elected to fill his unexpired term in 1956. Mr. Cooper's Senate
service continued until his retirement in 1973.

Service in Military Government

In 1942, after he had campaigned unsuccessfully for the Republican nomination
for governor, Mr. Cooper enlisted in the Army as a private. Earning a commission
in Officer Candidate School, he was assigned to a military government unit.
After Germany surrendered, he was put in charge of reorganizing the court system
of Bavaria. While in the Army he married a registered nurse, Evelyn Pfaff. They
were divorced in 1949.

Mr. Cooper's brief first stint in the Senate won him friends, among them Arthur
Vandenberg, a Republican maverick, and President Truman. In 1949 Mr. Truman made
Mr. Cooper a delegate to the United Nations; in subsequent years Mr. Cooper
served in other missions to the United Nations and as a special assistant to
Secretary of State Dean Acheson.

In 1955, shortly before he had become Ambassador to India and Nepal, Mr. Cooper
married the former Lorraine Rowan Shevlin, a Washington social figure. But their
stay in Asia lasted only a year because, after the death of Mr. Barkley,
President Dwight D. Eisenhower summoned Mr. Cooper back to Kentucky to run for
Mr. Barkley's unexpired term.

In the 17 years of Senate service that followed, Mr. Cooper, a member of the
Foreign Relations Committee, generally followed the liberal internationalist
line on foreign policy. In so doing, he was often in conflict with Old Guard
Republicans, notably Senator Everett McKinley Dirksen of Illinois. In 1959 Mr.
Cooper sought to become Republican leader of the Senate, but Mr. Dirksen
defeated him by four votes.

Limits on Combat Troops

Perhaps Mr. Cooper's greatest Senate victory was his move in 1969 to bar the use
of United States combat troops from the fighting in Laos and Thailand.

At first it appeared that the Cooper drive had little chance of success, but
after Mr. Cooper had enlisted the aid of Senator Mike Mansfield of Montana, the
leader of the Democratic majority, the measure was passed by the Senate and then
the House, and President Richard M. Nixon signed it into law.

After leaving office early in 1973, Mr. Cooper joined the Washington law firm of
Covington & Burling. Mr. Nixon chose him to be the first United States
Ambassador to East Germany shortly after Washington formally recognized that
Government. But Mr. Nixon was forced from office in 1974 before he could make
the actual appointment, and it was his successor, President Gerald R. Ford, who
did so. Mr. Cooper remained in the East German post for two years.

He is survived by his brother, who still lives in Somerset, and a niece, Rebecca
Spencer, of Lexington, Ky.

NAME: John Sherman Cooper

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Sherman Cooper (Paul Conklin, 1982)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              385 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

God and Man in Provincetown

BYLINE: By Mona Simpson; Mona Simpson, the author of the novel "Anywhere but
Here," is a Bard Center Fellow at Bard College. Her new novel, "The Lost
Father," will be published this fall.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1608 words



RESUSCITATION OF A HANGED MAN
By Denis Johnson.
257 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $19.95.

There has always been a strain of American fiction that seems to grow directly
from Melville and Conrad. The foremost voice of this sensibility in our time is
Robert Stone, but certainly Marilynne Robinson's stark, beautiful "Housekeeping"
contains it, as does most of the work of Denis Johnson.

Mr. Johnson is a novelist and a poet, and occasionally also a short-story
writer. His "Car Crash While Hitchhiking," first published in The Paris Review
and then collected in the 1990 edition of "Best American Short Stories," is an
amazing six-page incantation and, even at that brief length, possibly the
volume's most arresting work. At the heart of this little piece is the voice of
a lone man, swinging on the down-curve of drugs, who hitchhikes into an auto
accident. The narrative spins and swerves, but despite all these different tacks
we still know this man -- his passivity, his sensory imprisonment, his essential
decency and his aspiration toward holiness. He says, of an accident victim who
is certainly going to die, "I knew that, but he didn't, and therefore I looked
down into the great pity of a person's life on this earth. I don't mean that we
all end up dead, that's not the great pity. I mean that he couldn't tell me what
he was dreaming, and I couldn't tell him what was real. . . . My secret was that
in this short while I had gone from being the president of this tragedy to being
a faceless onlooker at a gory wreck." The victim's wife "shrieked as I imagined
an eagle would shriek. It felt wonderful to be alive to hear it! I've gone
looking for that feeling everywhere." The story ends in a fluid apostrophe, with
the narrator in a detox emergency room, years later. "A beautiful nurse was
touching my skin. 'These are vitamins,' she said, and drove the needle in. It
was raining. Gigantic ferns leaned over us. The forest drifted down a hill. I
could hear a creek rushing down among rocks. And you, you ridiculous people, you
expect me to help you."

There has never been any doubt about Denis Johnson's ability to write a gorgeous
sentence. The author of "Angels," "Fiskadoro" and "The Stars at Noon" has become
increasingly musical in his prose, and his latest novel, "Resuscitation of a
Hanged Man," depends on such sentences as the primary unit of narrative motion.
The novel seems, like a poem, to be written line to line. It is very much a book
about one man, one sensibility.

At the outset of the novel, Leonard English, driving to the tip of Cape Cod in
the off season, stops for a drink, then spins out of control, running his car
onto a traffic island. He ends up taking a taxi to his destination, which is
Provincetown. He has attempted suicide before the book's beginning; now he is
moving to the Cape to work for Ray Sands, a private investigator who also owns a
small radio station. When we can see him most clearly, English seems very
similar to the narrator of the short story -- drifting, guilty, in a world of
strangers, striving to connect with another person and with his God.

English is very much an onlooker rather than a participant in life, his
fundamental condition one of deracination. As the novel progresses, we follow
him as he lives at the edges of Provincetown's community. Many of the people
English encounters seem to be gay (usually cross-dressers as well) or addicted
to some potentially abusive substance; others are Vietnam veterans or missing
persons. "Resuscitation of a Hanged Man" may be Mr. Johnson's flirtation with
the detective genre, and Leonard English seems meant to be an investigator in
the mold of Jake Gittes in the film "Chinatown," the detective attempting to
solve his own mysteries as he searches for a kind of doppelganger.

Roman Catholicism is a persistent theme in Mr. Johnson's work, from "Angels,"
his first and most fully resolved novel, to this present book. Mr. Johnson uses
Christianity much as Robert Stone does, evincing a deep attraction to the lavish
emblems and ritual of the Mass. Indeed, Mr. Johnson's protagonists are what
William James described, in "The Varieties of Religious Experience," as "the
twice-born." Their faith contains within it a constant element of struggle.

But Mr. Johnson does not favor the large social canvas that Mr. Stone prefers.
Mr. Stone's apprehensions of the aspiration toward God are more variegated; in
his work we see characters with different kinds of religious faith, both in
their inner lives and in their acts. But, with the exception of "Angels," Mr.
Johnson doesn't plot as heavily as Mr. Stone does.

On English's first day in Provincetown, he wanders into a church, where he sees
a woman; "to get her legs out of his mind he swore to himself he'd talk to her
on the way out and make her acquaintance." He does. "My name's English," he
tells her. "My name's Portuguese," she snaps back. She is also, she quickly
announces, a lesbian. Just a few pages later, English is perching in a tree,
illicitly recording the woman's conversations with her lover as part of his
detective work. Still later, he does have an affair with her.

By then he is on his second investigation for Ray Sands, a missing-persons case
involving an artist, Gerald Twinbrook. Increasingly, English becomes obsessed
with Twinbrook, particularly when the eccentric Ray Sands dies. Gradually,
English comes to believe that Sands may have been part of a malevolent
conspiracy involving the local Catholic bishop. As English's money starts to run
out, with his options closing in around him, he hears what he thinks may be the
voice of God, a voice directing him to an inevitable act. It is an act that --
to most of us -- makes an unfortunate allusion to an actual news event, an
assassination attempt on a well-known public figure.

But Leonard English is so profoundly isolated that by this time he has lost much
of his power to affect the reader. He seems to have no human past, only the
abstract condition of an attempted suicide. His consciousness, though
free-roving and endlessly responsive to the sensory present of the story, seems
oddly empty of memory, of family, of childhood, of old friends. He seems to meet
people for the first time in the present-tense action of this book. Yet his
religious desire itself seems vaguely sweet, as if it holds for him some pill of
nostalgia. He is eerily, almost mythically alone.

Denis Johnson is an artist. He writes with a natural authority, and there is
real music in his prose. Yet in this book he has not found a subject to match
the scale of his talent and intelligence. Nor has he found a steady vantage
point from which to view that subject. Mr. Johnson's novels waver between
different levels of naturalism, with the more prophetic and narrowly focused
(like "The Stars at Noon") tending toward the lyric and the more realistic and
inclusive (like "Angels") told in simpler, more staccato sentences. Almost every
character in "Resuscitation of a Hanged Man" is a character, an extreme type,
yet the book doesn't have the exuberant choreographic energy that is necessary
to pull off this sort of masked pageant. Denis Johnson wants to write about one
man's wrestle with the voice of God. Ultimately, the other characters are merely
gorgeously written figures in the landscape behind him.

In Esquire a few months ago, Mr. Johnson published an article about the surreal
civil war in Liberia, describing a scene in which 15-year-old rebels in shower
caps and looted bridal gowns stormed the presidential palace, killed the
president and cut his ears off in front of video cameras, while their gun-toting
rivals wore stolen wigs. But in between the extremes of the two rebel factions,
Mr. Johnson chronicled the condition of the city itself -- its destruction, the
debris floating in torrents of water down the main road, the ordinary citizens
starving to death in the capital and the wild, corpse-eating dogs who, in all of
the region, were the only creatures to have grown fat. In this powerful piece of
journalism, Mr. Johnson's prose had the clipped clarity of that in his novel
"Angels."

One longs to see what would happen if Mr. Johnson were to put this sort of
writing together with the characters of novels like "Angels" and "Fiskadoro" --
and with Leonard English -- to form a larger, more complex community and to feel
the reverberations of its collisions.




BREAKING THE SPELL

The try at self-murder he classified as an embarrassing phase of development,
that is, nothing really serious.

Somehow the spiritual things, questions like what was really wanted of a person
and just how far God would go in being God -- he couldn't have said what
exactly, but he guessed it was the depth of these conundrums, the way he could
spend an afternoon thinking about them and never get anywhere but feel he'd made
great strides -- something, anyway, had dizzied him, and for a while he couldn't
function. Stepping off a chair with a rope around his neck and hanging there for
a minute had broken the spell.

The same mesmerization had overcome him yesterday in the empty church when he'd
gone back after his wallet. . . . Instead of leaving right away, he stood among
the pews like a solitary farmer in a big, plowed field, holding it in his hand.
The mural taking up three whole walls was scary now. From inside His blue storm,
Christ called out to the believer to sail up against His rock and be shattered
like a dish. What concerned English, night and day, was whether somebody would
actually do that. -- From "Resuscitation of a Hanged Man."

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              386 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Splendid Little War

BYLINE: By David Murray; David Murray is a former Chicago Sun-Times reporter who
writes frequently on military affairs.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 25; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 695 words



SOMETHING TO DIE FOR
By James Webb.
333 pp. New York:
William Morrow & Company.
$19.95.

As a Marine officer in the Vietnam War, James Webb won some of this country's
most prestigious decorations -- including the Navy Cross, the Silver Star, two
Bronze Stars and two Purple Hearts. Later, he served in the Department of
Defense and rose to become Secretary of the Navy during the Reagan Adminis
tration.

His first novel, "Fields of Fire" (1978), was based on his combat experiences;
it is part of the Marine Corps's official reading list for noncommissioned and
commissioned officers. Mr. Webb's new novel is grounded in high-level Washington
political scheming and combat in the Middle East and the Horn of Africa. As
topical as today's news, "Something to Die For" should push Mr. Webb onto
anyone's list of first-class military-political writers.

In the novel, Ronald Holcomb, an ambitious and ruthless Secretary of Defense,
teams with Adm. Mad Dog Mulcahy, a throwback who misses "all the rock and sock
of sailing into harm's way" and who desperately wants a war so that he can cap
his career. Holcomb and Mulcahy plot to maneuver feckless President Everett
Lodge and the Congressional leadership into taking advantage of civil strife in
the Soviet Union and expanding a fabricated international incident in the Red
Sea to create what they hope will be a limited war.

Such a small war, in Holcomb's scheme, would accomplish two goals: it would
deflect attention from a potentially embarrassing conflict with Japan over the
transmittal by a Japanese conglomerate of United States military secrets to the
Soviet Union, and it would justify an inflated defense budget that has been
stalled in Congress. He envisages a military crisis that would win the backing
of the American people, "unite their anger and get their blood going, without
causing them any economic or personal discomfort." He wants to provide Americans
with "a conflict they could follow as if it were a football game." The plan will
carry the code name "Operation Justifiable Anger."

The troops who go on to fight this war are epitomized by Col. Bill Fogarty, a
battle-hardened, muddy-boots Marine officer. The dedicated Fogarty believes in
Napoleon's tenet that "there are no bad regiments, only bad colonels." He also
views the war-loving Mad Dog Mulcahy as "a man of brilliance, whose career had
come down to idiocy." There are well-drawn allies and adversaries, including
French Foreign Legionnaires and a Cuban colonel who will command the enemy
ground troops in the splendid little war.

In Washington, the players include a Senate Majority Leader and a veteran House
committee chairman who, eager to manipulate others, find themselves manipulated
by Holcomb and Mulcahy. As for Holcomb, when his plans threaten to go completely
awry, he is ready for a classic Washington attempt at spin control: "He wouldn't
lie. He almost never lied. He would merely package the facts, box them up and
wrap them with a bright, optimistic ribbon. And anyway, his version could never
be challenged."

Many topical political novels fail because they mirror outlandish events so
accurately that they appear to be burlesques, which is probably why there have
been few successful novels based on Watergate. When politics is combined with
military affairs, particularly in the post-Vietnam era, the author must make
comprehensible the modern military's array of Nintendo-game weaponry and at the
same time provide a political framework that is credible. David Poyer's novel
"The Gulf" succeeded in doing that last year.

But Mr. Webb is even more ambitious in attempting to combine war and politics,
since his is a global theme. In this he succeeds masterfully. He understands and
describes well the high-tech quality of modern war as well as the blood, sweat
and fears of its soldiers. He is also skillful and credible in depicting the
world of Washington, and his characters are both universal and believable.
"Something to Die For" is a remarkable and angry counterpoint to the dispatches
from the Persian Gulf, which, by contrast, often seem pastel versions of Mr.
Webb's fictional account.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              387 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CRIME

BYLINE: By Marilyn Stasio

SECTION: Section 7; Page 31; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1129 words


Dr. Kay Scarpetta, the Chief Medical Examiner for the state of Virginia and a
woman who loves her morbid job, performs it with verve and brilliance in BODY OF
EVIDENCE (Scribners, $18.95). Patricia D. Cornwell's nerve-jangling sequel to
"Postmortem" finds the pathologist stunned by the savagery of a young novelist's
death ("stab wounds spread open like large red buttonholes") and outraged by the
cavalier response of the Richmond police to the victim's futile pleas for
protection. "If it had been me," one apologist offers, "I would have been
suspicious the lady was lonely, wanted the attention."

Like her capable heroine, Ms. Cornwell works in a forensic laboratory, and she
knows how to translate house procedures into high drama. Even clods who flunked
Chem 101 can share the buzz when Dr. Scarpetta picks up microscopic fiber clues
to the killer's identity or sifts through fireplace ash for traces of a missing
manuscript.

Curiously, the author seems not to trust her own skill at involving the reader
in these absorbing details of forensic crime technology. Although she fabricates
intricate plots and paces the action at an ankle-turning clip, she also burdens
the narrative with red herring subplots, forcing her heroine into situations
that compromise both her professionalism and her common sense. Some side trips,
like one to the behavioral science unit at the F.B.I. National Academy, are
worth taking; but frankly, it's more fun back at the morgue.

In the mountains of eastern Kentucky where Frank C. Strunk sets his
Depression-era mystery, JORDON'S WAGER (Walker, $19.95), folks call themselves
Zack and Homer and Ike and Emma and Rufus. Like her name, pretty Bitsy Trotter
was a little bit different, a little bit special -- and also a little bit
pregnant, which might explain why someone killed her and left her body in the
woods. Her neighbors in the coal-mining town of Buxton suspect one of the
"foreign" boys from out of state working at a nearby Civilian Conservation Corps
camp. But Deputy Sheriff Berkley Jordon wonders if Bitsy's death had something
to do with her job at the Buxton lumber mill, or her affair with young Harry
Buxton.

The mountain people in this distinctive first novel live by their own customs
and codes (even Jordon enjoys his illegal jar of moonshine) and express
themselves in a vivid vernacular. (An old woman called Rachel, so wise she's
reputed to be a witch, considers the men she's known and allows as how she's
"seen a few good ones, but most ain't worth the salt it'd take to cure 'em.")
There's real respect, though, in the author's character portraits and a sharp
tone of regret when he speaks of the families who came down from the mountains
only to lose their freedom and dignity in the mines. Mr. Strunk's view of hard
times in the Kentucky coal hills is far from picturesque and miles removed from
quaint.

You can say this for THE EMERALD LIZARD (Dutton, $17.95), Chris Wiltz's third
book featuring the New Orleans private eye Neal Rafferty: the story does not
take place during Mardi Gras, and the action skirts both the French Quarter and
the Garden District. Instead of pandering to the tourist trade, Ms. Wiltz take
the reader deep into the working-class precincts of the Irish Channel, where the
pool hall regulars include women "capable of wielding both a cue stick and a
stiff uppercut," and Westwego, where messy "chicken drop contests" are a popular
barroom entertainment.

Jackie Silva, who owns such an establishment, the Emerald Lizard, asks her old
flame Rafferty for protection from a local hood named Bubba, who has threatened
to cut out her tongue as a debt payment. But while the private eye is busy
dancing attendance on a spoiled uptown girlfriend he calls "the princess,"
Jackie is murdered, the Lizard is torched and Bubba is off to Lafitte,
innocently catching redfish.

Apart from the overdone scenes of physical brutality and violent sex that have
become formulaic in this hard-boiled series, Ms. Wiltz keeps the story on its
feet by letting her offbeat, unpredictable characters run away with it. And to
such unfashionably interesting parts of town, too.

Let's punch holes in the plot of A LONG COLD FALL (Putnam, $19.95), Sam Reaves's
debut mystery about a Chicago cabdriver who turns detective when a woman he once
loved falls (jumps? trips? is shoved?) from the 23d floor of her condo building
on Lake Shore Drive. Would you safeguard the life of a 14-year-old boy being
pursued by murderous thugs by letting the kid bus tables in a restaurant and
maintain an apartment with casual friends? Me neither. It also seems unlikely
that the hero would have such a tough time getting the attention of the cops --
especially after someone nails his hand to his kitchen table.

Such clunkers jar the crime novel's realistic style, but not to the point that
you'd write the thing off. Cooper MacLeish, the cabby who can't drive fast
enough to lose his memories of Vietnam, is too promising a hero and too darned
nice a guy. His efforts to protect the boy he suspects is his son may be
foolhardy, but they are also touching, in a story that has some sensitive points
to make about father-son relationships. For all his rough manners (what he does
to a holdup man seems unlikely to make the hack handbook), Cooper doesn't have
the stomach for violence. He just can't help attracting it. And that's about as
good a definition of a hero as you get in this genre.

It's not that sex and politics don't mix; it's just that when they do, the
players tend to murder one another. Or so suggests Janet Neel, who writes
sophisticated mysteries about people who work in the upper reaches of British
law, government, industry and the arts, but who play around all over town.

The situation seems delicate enough, in DEATH OF A PARTNER (St. Martin's,
$16.95), when a Treasury minister informs Scotland Yard that his fiancee -- the
star lawyer for a firm of lobbyists -- is missing. Things get stickier, though,
after the lobbyist is found murdered and her busy sex life is revealed in all
its damaging political implications.

Ms. Neel, a former solicitor with a background in government and industry,
writes with knowledge and bite about the questionable ethics of her crowd. (When
confronted with evidence of his fiancee's promiscuity, the Crown official
admits: "I stopped thinking about it -- very easy to stop thinking in politics,
one's so busy.") At the same time, she works her broader themes of fidelity and
honor into a romantic side story in which the attractive Chief Inspector John
McLeish is himself unfaithful to the woman in his life. Their sexy relationship,
begun in the first novel of this series, is by no means settled here. Busy or
not, it bears watching.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              388 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

POP VIEW;
Caution: Now Entering The War Zone

BYLINE: By Jon Pareles

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1232 words


You've seen the timeworn 1960's image: Jimi Hendrix at Woodstock in 1969,
playing "The Star-Spangled Banner" with screaming siren notes and blasts of
feedback that suggested the chaos and carnage of Vietnam bombing raids.

Now that image has an unironic 1990's counterpart: Whitney Houston's
"Star-Spangled Banner," sung live at the Super Bowl as the war against Iraq
entered its second week. A full orchestra accompanies Ms. Houston's sinuous,
sultry voice, which makes the national anthem voluptuous; under the last note is
the whoosh of F-16 jets flying overhead.

The video clip ends with a view of those jets, symbolically streaking toward the
Persian Gulf. By the sound of his "Star-Spangled Banner," Hendrix saw terror as
well as power in weapons technology. But in the 1990's, after "Top Gun" and
numberless action movies, warplanes have been recast as sexy and exhilarating.
In the video clip, they complete the montage that ABC Sports made of Ms.
Houston, unsmiling soldiers and more flag-waving than a year of semaphore
school. Crowd members hold up banners -- "Go U.S.A." -- as if the Super Bowl
were a pep rally. Profits from the video clip and from the single are to be
donated to the American Red Cross's Gulf Crisis fund. Meanwhile, the packages
plug Ms. Houston's current album; pop marketing goes on.

American pop music's response to the war has been muted and anything but
unanimous in its first month. Reports from the Persian Gulf suggest that heavy
metal and rap are keeping up aggressive spirits among the young forces; El
Diario reported that Hispanic soldiers wanted more salsa on Armed Forces radio.
On the home front, although the Government has not been censoring songs --
unlike the British Broadcasting Corporation, which has banned the likes of
Roberta Flack's "Killing Me Softly" and John Lennon's "Imagine" for the duration
-- performers have kept their heads down.

After a decade in which benefit records and messages of compassion have been as
close as most mainstream performers get to politics, few musicians want to
address potentially divisive issues of war and peace.

Most of the pop-music sphere, including radio stations as well as musicians, has
followed the tone set by the Government: somber, angry at Saddam Hussein,
convinced that war was the only possible response and concerned about the
troops. That's the tone of a forthcoming all-celebrity single (with performers
from Mike Tyson to Billy Crystal to Tiffany), "Voices That Care," which is to
benefit the Gulf Crisis Fund and the U.S.O.

But with a little prompting from radio stations, many of which have mixed news
sound bites in instrumental passages, the pop public has drafted pre-existing
songs for wartime service. The songs that have benefited from the state of war,
notably the Bette Midler hit "From a Distance," Johnny Cash's "Going by the
Book" and Styx's "Show Me the Way," have been wistful and fatalistic -- an
uncertain search for justification.

Hendrix made his wordless statement after years of a fruitless war, when a huge
antiwar movement was established; in the Vietnam War's early stages only a few
protest singers denounced it. Right now, patriotism and jingoism are ascendant
as pop culture comes to terms with the war. Along with "The Star-Spangled
Banner," radio stations have revived Lee Greenwood's "God Bless the U.S.A.," and
Billboard's regular reports on radio promotional campaigns show all sorts of
variations on flag-waving.

In concert, performers who mention the war at all have been drawing applause by
insulting Saddam Hussein or simply saying things like "God bless the troops" --
except for one oh-so-tasteful act that announced, "They're out there fighting so
we can party tonight!" Neil Young, taking no chances, played Madison Square
Garden on a stage set with both peace signs and a yellow ribbon, singing Bob
Dylan's "Blowin' in the Wind." Sting kept mum last Friday at the Beacon Theater,
but drew an unprompted wave of applause with words from "Fragile": "Nothing
comes from violence, and nothing ever would."

Opposition to the war is generally couched and understated, even among
performers whose vaunted ecological consciousness might have them thinking about
the role of oil consumption in the conflict. Perhaps the mild dissents are a
response to polls that show more than 70 percent of Americans supporting current
policy. (The racial gap is wider than the generation gap, with significantly
fewer blacks than whites supporting the war; antiwar raps are probably on the
way.)

Sean Ono Lennon and the born-too-late hippie songwriter Lenny Kravitz put
together a group-talked update of John Lennon's "Give Peace a Chance" that
includes M.C. Hammer, Peter Gabriel, Bonnie Raitt, L.L. Cool J. and Tom Petty,
attaching the refrain to lyrics about everything from AIDS to environmental
worries; perhaps both problems would have been alleviated by the vanished peace
dividend. During the first day of the war, "Give Peace a Chance" was played
hourly on MTV, and it went on to draw many listener requests through the first
week; now, its exposure is tapering off.

Randy Newman (who appears on "Give Peace a Chance") had a song sent to radio
stations called "Lines in the Sand," a Stephen Foster-tinged hymn to the troops
that can be interpreted as supportive or quietly despairing. Only Jello Biafra,
the former Dead Kennedys lead singer, has rushed out an unequivocal denunciation
of the war, a single summed up in its title, "Die for Oil, Sucker."

But the pop audience, nudged by radio stations, has endorsed existing songs that
events caught up with. Mr. Cash's "Going by the Book," recorded before the war
began, gives a fundamentalist view, finding echoes of biblical prophecy in
"rumors of war from the East" and a "rumble in the desert like thunder gettin'
closer." By inserting snippets of news reports, many radio stations have made it
seem that the song is about the inevitability of war with Iraq.

Styx offers more comfort by making global questions a matter of personal
involvement. Styx's song "Show Me the Way" is about the singer's struggle to
find faith, but A & M Records' "Desert Shield Mix," widely played on radio
stations, invites listeners to overcome private misgivings -- a little girl's
voice says, "I want my daddy to come home!" -- and join a nearly holy war. "Give
me the strength and the courage to believe," the singer belts, just before a
newswoman announces the approval of a Congressional resolution backing the use
of force against Iraq.

Yet "From a Distance," written by Julie Gold in 1986, has become the most
popular anthem for the first weeks of the war, and it's anything but gung-ho.
Every verse emphasizes distance, as if the song (recorded before Iraq invaded
Kuwait) somehow recognized the sense of insulation that has been enforced by
military censors on all sides. In its climactic verse, the hymnlike ballad
confesses, "Even though we are at war / I just cannot comprehend what all this
fighting is for."

"The Star-Spangled Banner" memorializes "bombs bursting in air," and the quiver
in Ms. Houston's voice finds seductiveness in the rockets' red glare. But so
far, despite the gleaming high-tech weapons paraded on the nightly news, the pop
public hasn't joined her. For the moment, it is keeping its distance and hoping
the worst will be over soon.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Whitney Houston singing "The Star-Spangled Banner" at the Super
Bowl (H. Darr Beiser/USA Today); Johnny Cash, whose "Going by the Book" has
benefited from the state of war (Camera Press); the Jello Biafra single "Die for
Oil, Sucker." (Spoken Word)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              389 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TV VIEW;
TV Flexes Its Muscles and Takes Some Punches

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27; Column 3; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 895 words


The 1989 champ is taking a beating in 1991. Little more than a year ago,
television was being acclaimed not just as the bearer of good tidings from
around the globe but as a freedom fighter in its own right. Not only was
television there at the fall of the Berlin wall, but scenes of protest and
crackdown that it sent forth from the streets of Beijing and Bucharest, Prague
and Moscow were credited with rousing the long oppressed against their
oppressors. The small, light, easy-to-use video cameras that suddenly appeared
everywhere were hailed as the people's weapons against authority's big guns.

And this year? Soviet paratroops blast into Lithuania's television center. After
a flurry of openness, Soviet television resumes its old role as the court
droner. In Beijing, the last two leaders of the inspiring spring 1989
demonstrations in Tiananmen Square, seen on television around the world, are
sentenced to 13 years in prison; you did not see it on television.

The medium has also been taking a beating in the Middle East. Whatever the next
days and weeks bring in the Persian Gulf, the war there has already provided a
case history of the powerful tension between the imperatives of television when
left to journalists, and the imperatives of government, any government.

On one side in the gulf war, the tube was immediately besmogged by official
briefings in Pentagonese that sometimes resembled a combination of pep rally and
audition for a talk-show host. Got up in battle garb and supported by gee-whiz
photographs taken through targeting sights, the generals became the hottest
properties on television, an all-American's dream. From the other side came
pictures of civilian corpses. In Baghdad, the camera was pressed into the
service of Saddam Hussein; in Saudi Arabia, it has been closely supervised by
military minders. Has yesterday's powerhouse become a 90-pound weakling?

Not exactly. Television is like a servant who may seem to dominate the household
today, only to be booted downstairs tomorrow; yet the masters of the house can
no longer get along without the creature, who is always capable of rudeness or
even rebellion.

The latest blackouts and manipulations represent the tribute from one power to
another. Officialdom of every variety recognizes the threat: the camera exists
to expose, and in all societies, ruthless or benign, the people in charge can do
without exposure, thanks. They know that pictures are inherently kinder to
underdogs than to big shots. In democracies, television is generally courted; in
dictatorships, it is often kicked; everywhere the desire on high is to keep the
camera from getting in the way.

As the invasions of Panama and Grenada demonstrated, war brings out the censors
even in information-easy Washington. Officials learned in Vietnam that when it
comes to pictures of human distress, the camera is not patriotic. It favors the
victim who happens to be in focus. That applies to all parties in all conflicts.
If the Western correspondents who have been doting on casualties in Baghdad had
been taken on a guided tour of Kuwait City while the Iraqi invaders were working
their will, viewers would have found themselves moved by the sufferings of
Kuwaiti women and children.

Some governments, of course, are more comfortable with repression than others.
What greater tribute could there be to the power of the medium than for the
Soviet military to choose the television tower in Vilnius as its first target?
(In 1989, Bucharest television was a prime target of the Securitate forces of
Romania's dictator, Nicolae Ceausescu, but they were finally beaten off.) In the
Soviet Union, where both the press and television have had more leeway in recent
years, the press may still criticize the Kremlin, but television is now
considered too dangerous for such permissiveness. Its reach is too broad, its
impact too immediate.

So for now, through much of the world, television is not being allowed to do its
inimitable work. Will it regain its punch?

In Eastern and Central Europe, television journalists are exercising a freedom
that they have only recently come to enjoy -- and it is being defended. "Guns,
Tanks and Gorbachev," the tough PBS documentary last week on the Soviet
crackdowns, which contained dramatic pictures taken by unauthorized cameras,
showed a poster that had been set up near Lithuania's television center. It
declared: "Hands off Television!" But democracy in the region is still shaky,
and democracy is television's muscle builder.

The Middle East, with the exception of Israel, is not known for a tradition of
independent journalism. Whatever happens to Iraq, it cannot become much more
repressive. But there is no great reason to expect that it will become less so,
and prospects for a video explosion soon in Iran, Syria or Saudi Arabia are no
brighter than in, say, Yemen.

As for China and the Soviet Union, pessimism is in order. And yet the resurgent
mandarins and apparat chiks must know that having had a glimpse of a freer
television, their peoples are bound to recognize a reshackled television as the
sorry thing it always was. That may not translate into dissent, but it must
breed suspicion and cynicism. One may only hope that the people's sometime ally,
television, having been let loose for a while, will prove restive in
confinement.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: 1991: Lithuanian independence forces set up a barricade of
trucks at the television tower in Vilnius that was stormed by the Soviet Army
(Reuters); 1989: Bucharest residents approach an army roadblock at the Romanian
television station, which was a target of Nicolae Ceausescu's forces.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              390 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On Not Getting Away From It All

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KONIK; MICHAEL KONIK is a journalist and playwright who lives
in New York.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 33; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1391 words


NO what matter their motives for leaving home, be it a crucial conference in
Grand Forks or an incredible cruise to Grand Cayman, voyagers with a clear
agenda usually return satisfied. Sure, the typical inconveniences confronting
travelers -- delayed flights, lost luggage, bad weather -- often rear their
unwelcome heads, but such annoyances are almost expected and, thus, easily
overcome. Let's face it, no matter how much travelers complain, the majority of
them, whether seeking a sun-drenched pina colada or a notarized contract, come
back from their distant destinations having accomplished what they set out to
do.

If, however, you are not a business traveler or a tourist, life is not so
simple.

Some intrepid explorers, myself included, travel to fulfill inchoate longings
for abstract ideals. As with most practical ventures, doing something for the
sake of abstract ideals is usually not a good idea. But we do it. Instead of
telling friends, "I am going to Washington for the primary purpose of seeing the
Vietnam Memorial and, if I have time, to find out if my Congressman really
exists," or, "I am going to Orlando for the primary purpose of seeing Donald
Duck, buying T-shirts and making my skin brown," we often cannot formulate a
concrete reason for our lengthy excursions. Like ambitious artists, our travels
are frequently a quest for ethereal concepts like "paradise," "unspoiled beauty"
and "purity." We trek to remote regions of the planet (say, Antarctica and the
Galapagos and New Guinea) to find the adventure and wildlife and culture that
life at home, because it is home, simply cannot offer.

Such travel is doomed to failure.

Like Sisyphus rolling his rock, adventure travelers never really accomplish what
they set out to do. Those of us pushing our dreams to the edges of the planet
inevitably have them shattered by the omnipresence of Western Civilization. By
this I don't mean finding a Quikmart on what you had thought was an uninhabited
island somewhere in the South Pacific. I'm speaking of the little things. The
inapt little things that, with cruel insistence, remind you home may be 3,000
miles across an ocean but, in psychic terms, it's never more than a few feet
away when you least want it.

I am climbing the Mayan ruins of Tikal, in the rugged highlands of Guatemala. To
get to this archeological wonder, you must fly to a tiny airport in the village
of Flores, over an hour away, and drive on one of the country's only paved
highways, going past grass huts and flooded fields until you arrive at this
real-life Shangri-La. Tikal is an awe-inspiring collection of temples and
sacrificial altars sprouting out of the rain forest. With toucans perched in
pungent spice trees and gymnastic monkeys crashing through the jungle canopy
above, it's not hard to imagine you're Tarzan, or Henry Stanley, or, heck,
Indiana Jones on one of his daring excavations. Not hard at all until you crawl
to the top of one of the precipitously steep temples and discover a pile of
recently stomped cigarette butts.

Litter is the scourge of anyone who is trying to get away from it all, or wants
to pretend he has. While traversing Costa Rica's Tortuguero River, searching for
three-toed sloths and black howler baboons, you can try to tell yourself the
iridescent strips of blue you occasionally see waving in the mangrove and banana
trees are the feathers of a seldom-seen parrot species, but close inspection
reveals the rare birds you've been spying are simply the remains of a
wind-whipped plastic trash bag. The PBS series "Travels" (a staple of the
homebound adventure traveler's television diet) has aired several episodes this
season documenting the illusion-ruining effects of trash. The stigma of
modernity was particularly poignant during one show titled "Sacred Way: Greece,"
in which the narrator retraced the smoggy, polluted 14-mile journey from Athens
to Eleusis, a journey made in ancient times to honor Demeter, the earth goddess.

I am in Bali, far from the crowded beaches and persistent peddlers (and litter)
found near the airport in Denpasar. I am deep in the sylvan countryside, far
from hotels and discotheques and telephones. In fact, I am not exactly sure
where I am. But it is peaceful. As I walk down a dusty path traveled, it seems,
only by stray animals and children toting sacks of grain, I marvel at the
solitude of this place, the quiet. Property boundaries don't appear to be
marked; a prospective landowner, I tell myself, probably just settles a parcel
of land sufficiently removed from his nearest neighbor and tends to his
elemental needs. An island full of Thoreaus! Shortly thereafter I come upon a
farmer and his oxen. While the massive beasts drink from a crude trough, the
Balinese man squats near them on the ground, hunched over what appears to be a
book. I walk toward him, thinking how I will explain where I am from, and what
skyscrapers are and how a subway works -- gargantuan constructions I'm certain
he's never seen or perhaps even read about. As I contemplate the delightful
simplicity of this man's daily routine, reflecting on the chasm between his life
and mine, I hear an alarmingly familiar tune emanating from where the farmer
sits, though I cannot immediately place the innocuous jingle. Ah, yes, it's the
theme to "Super Mario Brothers," and the farmer, I can see now, is playing with
his Nintendo Game Boy.

Electronic gadgets, one eventually accepts, are inescapable. If a remote village
is not wired for electricity, you can be sure someone's got a hoard of batteries
stashed away. Similarly, if the town's residents are too poor to afford
televisions, rest assured at least one pillar of the community will have a
working set, which, for big events, becomes the village's impromptu movie
theater.

I am in Chiang Mai Province in northern Thailand, near the southern border of
Myanmar (Burma). This is the Golden Triangle, a densely verdant region of the
planet that produces most of the world's heroin and opium, a place where vast
fields of poppies blanket land that, if it were America, might be devoted to
shopping centers. That the locals drive motorbikes and Jeeps ought to trigger my
cultural alarm. It doesn't. Engine-powered vehicles, one eventually accepts, are
no longer solely possessed by "developed" countries. Even in the poorest areas,
mopeds are as common as burros.

I'm enjoying riding a motorcycle through the arboreal hills, vainly trying to
communicate in phrase-book Thai with the locals. But cultural dislocation only
goes so far: Tonight the United States soccer team is playing in the World Cup
and I want badly to watch. Granted, the game will begin at roughly 2 A.M. and I
have no idea how to say "television" in Thai, but I am determined to try. As I
roll into a clearing that apparently serves as the village square, I quickly
realize my search for the linchpin of Western culture will not be quite the
odyssey I envisioned. The peasants here enjoy their World Cup action on the
expanse of a roughly 12-foot by 16-foot Panasonic color television screen.

Television, of course, is not America's most pervasive import to seemingly
virgin foreign territory. It's Coke.

If I've learned anything in my travels, it is this: Coke is inescapable. You can
run from it, but you can't hide. Sooner or later, no matter how far you think
you've ventured from the comforts and conveniences of the modern world, Coke
will find you. Go to the foothills of the Himalayas, the hurricane-pounded
fishing islands off the coast of Nicaragua -- go to the birthplace of
civilization, if you like. Coca-Cola will be waiting for you, ready to remind
you that, in a perverse way, you can travel to the ends of the earth and yet
somehow never get very far from Atlanta.

That said, I'll continue to take my malaria-fighting chloroquine pills and
journey in search of unspoiled islands and jungles, where I hope to meet strange
and wonderful people who live astonishingly different lives than I. If one of
these people invites me into his thatched hut for some iguana stew, I will
accept enthusiastically. If he shows me an unfamiliar woodwind instrument and
asks me to play it, I will be delighted. And if he asks me to join him in
watching his newly purchased videotape of "Wrestlemania VII," I won't be at all
surprised.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              391 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CUSTER ON TV;
Truth Is Beyond Interpreting

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4; Column 5; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 236 words


To the Editor:

I well understand that John J. O'Connor's essay on "Son of the Morning Star" is
a television review, and that Mr. O'Connor is probably not a historian.
Nevertheless, his hunch that the truth about Custer that has taken 100 years to
emerge may slip out of history's control again deserves comment.

Mr. O'Connor avers that "different times, different interpretations" are
responsible for the current revisionist image of Custer as a stupid soldier, but
that changing times could again reinstate the general to his pedestal as an
American hero.

The factors that allowed Custer to become a hero in the first place --
chauvinism, racism and ignorance, to name a few -- still color historical
perception. But now, ignorance is no longer on Custer's side. Years of study
have stripped away many layers of war paint to arrive at the truth: the Indian
Wars were a bloody, racist, shameful episode in history, and there can be no
other way of "interpreting" it any more.

To say that faddism and cultural phenomena might restore the old lies gives too
much credit to the mass populace's interest in the historian's endeavor. If
television images override the historian's work to such an extent, we might as
well suggest that we emerged victorious and proud from Vietnam, that the war on
poverty succeeded, and that B-52 bombs don't kill civilians in Baghdad.

IGNACIO GALLUP-DIAZ
New York City

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              392 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Asians Spread Across a Land, and Help Change It

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 22; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1624 words

DATELINE: BAYOU LA BATRE, Ala.


In Birmingham, where eating out long meant barbecue, there are now 60 Chinese
restaurants. In Huntsville, Korean managers at the Korean-owned Gold Star
television factory give orders to their American workers. And here in Bayou La
Batre, at the tip of Mobile Bay, a third of the old Cajun fishing village's
2,600 inhabitants are now Vietnamese or Cambodian.

In a state that a quarter-century ago was a symbol of racism, these new settlers
are part of a wave of immigrants that has increased the Asian-American share of
Alabama's population by 124 percent in the past decade, according to figures
recently made public by the Census Bureau.

And they reflect one of the most dramatic findings of the 1990 Census -- the
explosion of Asian and Pacific Islanders around the United States. Although
Asian-Americans were once largely confined to a few states, like California and
Hawaii, and clustered in urban centers like the Chinatowns of New York and San
Francisco, they have now spread to virtually every part of the nation.

So far, the Census Bureau has released ethnic statistics for about half the
states. But Frederick W. Hollmann, a demographer with the Census Bureau, has
estimated that around the country the Asian population increased by 79.5 percent
in the 1980's, rising to 6.88 million from 3.83 million. That is seven times
faster than the general population and "makes them far and away the most rapidly
growing" ethnic group in the country, Mr. Hollmann said.

Some Figures Are Startling



In some of states, the growth of the Asian-American population is stunning: New
Jersey, up 162 percent to 272,521; Texas, up 165.5 percent to 319,459, and Rhode
Island, up 245 percent to 18,325.

The 124 percent increase in Alabama means there are now about 22,000
Asian-Americans in this state, whose overall population increased by 3.6 percent
in a decade. The Asian-American population in Mississippi went up almost 76
percent, to about 13,000, while the overall state population increased 2.1
percent. Louisiana's Asian-American population went up almost 73 percent, to
just over 41,000, while the overall population went up only three-tenths of 1
percent.

The figures for California, home to about one-third of all Asian-Americans, have
not yet been released. But in 1988, state researchers estimated that Asians had
reached 9.3 percent of the state's population, surpassing the black population
of 7.5 percent.

Over all, the growth of the Asian-American population has been so large and
widespread that "Asians are just becoming part of the landscape," said Stanley
Karnow, the Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist and author who is writing a book
about Asians in America. "Where in the past they were odd and exotic, now they
are accepted."

And in many ways, they are changing the landscape. On Feb. 15, firecrackers
pierced the morning in Bayou La Batre as Tu Phuc and other immigrants celebrated
Tet, the Vietnamese lunar New Year festival. Until recently, most people here
associated Tet with the 1968 Communist offensive that changed the course of the
Vietnam War.

Mr. Tu, a refugee from Saigon, settled here in 1985 as Vietnamese, Cambodians
and Laotians flocked to the warm climate and jobs in the shrimp and crab
business that were being abandoned by white and black workers who left for
higher-paying jobs in Mobile.

Mr. Tu, an ethnic Chinese who fled Vietnam on a small fishing boat in 1977, now
runs the grocery store, which sells sacks of rice from Thailand, chili sauce and
cassette tapes of Vietnamese music stars. He also owns a pool hall frequented by
Vietnamese, and some fishing boats, trailers and apartments.

"It is just like in Saigon; the Chinese ran the stores there, and they run the
stores for Vietnamese here," Mr. Tu said, speaking in Chinese. He sends his
three children to a Roman Catholic school 40 minutes away. "I am a Chinese and
want them to get the best education," he said.

The heavy influx of immigrants has sharply altered the composition of the Asian
population in the United States. Until 1970, two-thirds of all Asian-Americans
were of Japanese or Chinese descent, and most were members of families that had
been here since the late 19th or early 20th century. Most also lived in urban
concentrations, like the Chinatowns in New York and San Franciso.

Is a Term a Myth?

The flow of immigrants has changed the ethnic balance radically. Whereas in
1970, Japanese formed the largest group, in 1980 Chinese surpassed them, and in
1990 Filipinos jumped over them, according to a report by Leon F. Bouvier for
the Center for Migration Studies in New York. Mr. Bouvier estimated that in 1990
there were 1.4 million Filipinos, 1.26 million Chinese, 859,000 Vietnamese,
814,000 Koreans, 804,000 Japanese, 684,000 Asian-Indians and 706,000 others,
including Cambodians, Laotians and Pacific Islanders.

Given this diversity of national origins -- and perhaps an even greater
diversity in social classes among the immigrants between peasants and nuclear
physicists -- some Asian-American leaders say it is misleading to use the term
"Asian-American" at all.

"Asian-American is a myth," said K. W. Lee, editor of The Korea Times in Los
Angeles. "You have Chinese who have lived here for 100 years, Koreans who have
just arrived, and poor Cambodian and Laotian refugees who are living lives of
quiet desperation."

From 1985 to 1989, Asian immigration figures ranged from 268,000 to 281,000l
annually, said Michael Hoefer, chief of demographic statistics for the
Immigration and Naturalization Service. The Philippines, with an average of
50,000 immigrants a year in the latter half of the decade, was the leadig source
of Asian and Pacific Island immigrants.

Turning Point in 1965

The combined annual figures for China, Taiwan and Hong Kong from 1985 to 1989
averaged more than 40,000, while the number of immigrants from South Korea
averaged 35,000 a year, Mr. Hoefer said.

The key to this surge was a 1965 change in the immigration law by President
Lyndon B. Johnson that removed restrictions on Asians that had been in place
since early in the century.

As a result, the number of Asian-Americans jumped from 891,000 in 1960 to 1.4
million in 1970, and then to 3.8 million in 1980, according to the Census
Bureau. Demographers say it may be close to 7 million for 1990.

Another change in the immigration law last year, giving greater preference to
applicants with certain skills, is expected to further increase the flow of
Asians, many of whom are nurses, doctors, engineers and scientists, Mr. Hoefer
said.

The new Asian immigrants have tended to cluster in towns or cities where a
friend or relative first settled, following patterns of earlier waves of Irish,
Italian, Polish and Jewish immigrants from Europe.

Drawn by Countrymen



In Rhode Island, much of the growth of the Asian population began with two
Cambodian students who found themselves unable to return to their homeland after
it fell to the Khmer Rouge in 1975. They then offered to sponsor Cambodian
refugee families, who in turn sponsored other families, said Sophai Moeuy, a
former sergeant in the Cambodian army who fled to a refugee camp in Thailand in
1978.

"When my time came to leave the camp, I did not know where I was supposed to
go," said Mr. Moeuy, who is now a postal worker in Providence. "But when I went
to my interview, I told them I had a friend named Pally Nak who had lived in the
camp before who was now in the United States. I showed them a piece of paper
with his address in the United States, and they took me here. I didn't now if it
was cold or snow or hot here. I didn't know anything. But here I am."

Starting a Community

In the pine woods of Alabama between Bayou La Batre and Mobile, a group of
Cambodian families have bought 200 acres of land, started their own crab
processing plant, moved in some trailers and erected a makeshift Buddhist
temple.

The Cambodians, like many of the Vietnamese, were originally brought to the area
by the Mobile office of Catholic Social Services, which helps them with English
classes and job counseling. The Cambodians also renamed the dusty road where the
temple sits, calling it South Angkor Street, after the medieval capital of
Cambodia.

In Birmingham, many Chinese and Koreans and some Japanese have come as students
or scholars to the University of Alabama at Birmingham and its large medical
center. Yoshimi Saito, a gentle, graying 52-year-old professor of mathematics
arrived in 1983 from Kyoto, at first somewhat skeptical. "I had never heard of a
Southern mathematician," he said in the living room of his comfortable
ranch-style house in the hilly suburb of Homewood.

But Mr. Saito expresses satisfaction with his move now. He says he has felt no
racial prejudice. He is a member of a Southern Baptist church. And his daughter,
Yoriko, did so well in high school that the school sent her to the University of
Alabama for her science classes starting in her sophomore year. When she
graduated, she finished third nationally in the Westinghouse Science Talent
Search. She is now part of a special joint graduate program at the Harvard
Medical School and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

At the Great Wall restaurant in Birmingham, Candice Diong and Jet Wee Ong are
the managers, as well as being husband and wife. They are both Chinese from
Malaysia who met after they came to Alabama to college.

"Birmingham sure has changed since I came here in 1984," Mr. Ong said. "There
were only a half dozen Chinese restaurants here then; now there are 60. It used
to be quite difficult to explain to people what an egg roll is. Now they're just
like french fries."


LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Birmingham sure has changed since I came here in 1984," said
Jet Wee Ong, who manages the Great Wall restaurant in Birmingham, Ala., with his
wife, Candice Diong. "There were only a half dozen Chinese restaurants here
then; now there are 60 (Mike Clemmer for The New York Times); Tu Phuc, a refugee
from Saigon who settled in Bayou La Batre, Ala., sells rice from Thailand and
cassette tapes of Vietnamese pop music stars at his grocery store. (Dave Hamby
for The New York Times)

Graph: "A Growing Asian Population," tracks population in 1980 and projected
1990 population, by country of origin (Source: Census Bureau)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              393 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The Front;
Soldiers Poised on the Edge of the Unknown

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1072 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Feb. 23


The soldiers who stand here call it The Berm, the manmade ridge of sand and
brush and dirt built along the northern border of Saudi Arabia, all that remains
between these anxious young men and the unknown.

As the deadline passed today for Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait or face a
ferocious American-led ground attack, the men of the Third Squadron of the
Second Armored Cavalry Regiment did not need to be reminded that they are at the
front lines of this war.

They are the front line. No one, they say, is closer.

The German-based armored platoon that calls itself "the Merchants of Death" is
expected to be among the first to cross The Berm, and its soldiers insisted that
they were ready to open the attack that could begin the greatest adventure --
and the most horrifying ordeal -- of their lives.

Virtually all of these soldiers are young. Many say they are frightened to be so
close to the front, and have kept their families ignorant of the platoon's
dangerous location. Some say they are eager to fight, if only to have this
long-delayed war over with.

"The Grim Reaper is sort of my mascot," said Sgt. Kirk Alcorn, a 23-year-old
gunner aboard one of the Bradley armored vehicles perched along the front lines.

On his ring is the skull head of the Reaper and his sickle. On his upper right
arm is a Grim Reaper tattoo.

"This is where I wanted to be," Sergeant Alcorn said in the slow drawl of his
native Green Cove Springs, Fla. "This is what I wanted to do. I've stopped being
nervous. I don't have any worries."

The five-man Bradleys look much like a tank and carry armor-piercing ammunition,
TOW missiles and blocks of deadly C-4 explosives. Because they are lighter and
more mobile than a tank, the Bradleys are used here as scouting vehicles.

Out in Front of Tanks

Army scouts have the treacherous job of setting off before the tanks, searching
for the enemy and trying to ward off surprises for the soldiers who follow. They
and their Marine counterparts would be the first Americans to encounter -- and
fight -- the Iraqis in a ground offensive.

"I walked into the recruiting office and read about the cavalry scouts, and it
sounded romantic," Sergeant Alcorn said, looking off toward the undulating,
windswept hills separating him from his foes. "I wanted to be a scout."

For others on the Bradley, however, there is nothing romantic about what faces
them across The Berm, which is so close to this American position along the
border that individual shrubs on Iraqi-held land can be made out in the
distance.

They say they are ready for the fight, but at the same time they wonder how fate
could have brought them to face death in this bleak desert.

Cpl. Phillip Gilman, 21, of Flint, Mich., wanted to be an Army welder. But when
he was transferred by the Army to Italy three years ago, his orders did not
mention welding, and he suddenly found himself assigned as an infantryman.

"I was 18 and dumb and didn't complain," he said, tugging nervously on the
zipper on his flame-retardant, olive-green tanker suit.

Even though Corporal Gilman says he has come to accept his fate here, his
anxiety was transparent as he waited for what appeared to be an imminent order
to charge across The Berm.

Pvt. Michael Anthony O'Donnell of New Hyde Park, L.I., turns 22 next week. He
left his job as a truck driver and joined the Army in May, "looking for a little
discipline, a little adventure." On the day he graduated from basic training at
Fort Knox, Ky., Iraq invaded Kuwait, a faraway country he said he had never
heard of.

Six months later, he was standing on the sandy border of that country, risking
his life to liberate it.

"I can feel it breathing down my neck," he said of the war, his left hand
resting near large gray plastic containers of armor-piercing ammunition. "I'd
like to come home in one piece. I can't wait to get out of here."

One Combat Veteran on Team

The one combat veteran on this Bradley team is the commander, 39-year-old Sgt.
Ron Mullinix.

He describes his team as "a good bunch of men" and insists that he is confident
of a quick victory against Iraq.

"I think it's going to be quick and deliberate," he said. "My best guess is that
it will take a month. My hope is that it's a week."

But Sergeant Mullinix served in Vietnam, and he says that in many ways, the war
against Iraq "ain't no easier" to fight.

He said that in Vietnam he learned a difficult lesson about battle, and it
applies here, too. "You start pumped up, you go into it scared to death, and you
come out of it wondering what you did," he said.

First Lieut. Paul Calvert, 27, of Athens, Ga., directs the men of the "Merchants
of Death," and he does not deny that there is fear in what may be the final
hours before battle.

"There's always a fear factor," he said. "You've got to be cognizant of the fear
factor in yourself."

But he said he chose an assignment in the Second Armored Cavalry, an elite
regiment that dates back to the 1830's and led the advance for Patton's Third
Army in World War II, and "I feel safer in this unit than any other place in the
war."

Lieutenant Calvert said he knew that battle would be easier for him than for
many of his soldiers, if only because he can share his fear with his older
brother, Capt. Mark Calvert, 29, who works in the regimental headquarters a
short drive south from The Berm.

"I've always got somebody I can grab hold of," Lieutenant Calvert said. "We've
always had so much in common. We've passed for twins."

A New Bond for Brothers

The war, he said, offers them "the kind of bond a lot of brothers never
experience."

Both brothers are married, and the families live only 45 minutes apart in
Germany, where the regiment is based. Mark has two daughters. Paul's wife is
pregnant with their first child.

Their father died years ago. "And my mom's real worried," Lieutenant Calvert
said. "I know from letters she is extremely proud of us. She's got faith in us.
She's got faith in our abilities."

As for his brother, Paul says he believes that Mark would prefer to break away
from the safer confines of the regimental headquarters and come here to The
Berm, to lead the attack, the brothers side by side.

"I know he'd want to be here," Lieutenant Calvert said proudly of his brother.
"He's an outstanding soldier, and this is why we joined the Army. This is where
the war will happen."

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              394 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The Overview;
ALLIED FORCES STORM IRAQ AND KUWAIT AFTER HUSSEIN IGNORES U.S. DEADLINE; BUSH
SEES A SWIFT, DECISIVE VICTORY

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1448 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Sunday, Feb. 24


A vast, multi-pronged land attack against Iraqi forces began two hours before
dawn today after President Bush's deadline for the start of an Iraqi withdrawal
from Kuwait slipped by with no sign in word or deed that President Saddam
Hussein would comply.

"The liberation of Kuwait has now entered a final phase," President Bush
announced in Washington.

Hundreds of tanks and tens of thousands of allied troops began racing into Iraq
and Kuwait behind a deafening artillery and naval gunfire barrage shortly after
4 o'clock this morning, which was 8 P.M. Saturday, Eastern standard time. At
almost the same moment, air-raid sirens wailed in major cities in Saudi Arabia
as Iraqi missiles were launched. No casualties were reported from the missile
attack.

 Racing for Kuwait City



Field reports said that American columns, kicking up enormous clouds of dust as
they dashed across the desert, quickly penetrated about six miles into enemy
territory, with large numbers of Iraqi troops surrendering.

A general at allied headquarters reported that United States Marines had punched
a large hole in Iraqi defenses and were racing for Kuwait City, encountering
considerably less resistance in the early stages than had been expected. He said
amphibious landings from Failaka Island, about 20 miles east of the city, were
also part of the plan but had been delayed.

A second general said that allied warplanes and Apache attack helicopters were
bombing enemy tanks in support of the allied advances.

Some Saudi elements were reported accompanying the Marines as they moved up the
coast, but details were extremely sketchy, and officials said there would be no
briefings here or in Washington for a number of hours because of security
concerns.

Bush Returns to Washington



As a 12-mile column of tanks and other vehicles wheeled into position somewhere
on the 250-mile front, pool reports said, young American soldiers waved flags
and gave the V-for-victory sign. Other reports said that in preliminary
fighting, Marines had discovered sizeable caches of enemy chemical weapons just
inside Kuwaiti territory.

Mr. Bush returned to the White House tonight from Camp David, his retreat in
Maryland, to make his statement on the long-awaited effort to wrest control of
Kuwait from Mr. Hussein -- an effort that is considered certain to bring heavier
American casualties than the five-week-old air war.

A senior United States officer said Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the American
commander in the Persian Gulf, had been given the authority by the President,
effective with the expiration of the deadline, to launch a land offensive when
he thought it best to add ground forces to the continuing attacks from air and
sea.

As was the case when the coalition began air strikes against the Iraqis on Jan.
16, he chose to move with the minimum possible delay.

American pilots and their comrades from nine other nations flew bombing missions
over Kuwait at a record pace for the second straight day, with 1,200 strikes
directed at Iraqi troop positions. In an effort to make way for armor and
infantrymen, they used napalm, ground-clearing fuel-air bombs and cluster bombs,
which the G.I.'s describe as "steel rain."

At the front, bulldozers were at work cutting openings through sand berms that
run along Saudi Arabia's northern border. Big howitzers fired furiously,
intensified reconnaissance patrols moved out and waves of helicopters ranged
farther north. At least one helicopter base has already been set up in Iraq,
pool reports said, but American headquarters denied that.

At sea, coalition mine sweepers moved in close to Kuwaiti beaches to clear sea
lanes for an amphibious assault.

Iraqi Executions Asserted



Allied bombers also struck hard at Baghdad, where Mr. Hussein was reported by
the Baghdad radio to have met again with the governing Revolutionary Command
Council. A broadcast including patriotic songs exhorted the Iraqi armed forces
to stand firm in the face of allied numerical and technological superiority and
told soldiers, "The angels are at your shoulders."

Unusually loud explosions shook buildings in the central part of the capital as
the ultimatum expired, Western correspondents there reported. Only 10 minutes
before the deadline, at 7:50 P.M. Saturday local time, 11:50 A.M., New York
time, a Scud surface-to-surface missile, fired from western Iraq, slammed into
Israel, but the authorities reported no casualties.

Officials of the American command in Riyadh, the Saudi capital, adopted a
matter-of-fact tone as the hour for the ground offensive approached. But Brig.
Gen. Richard I. Neal of the Marine Corps, the American spokesman, accused the
Iraqis of carrying out "a systematic campaign of executions" against people
picked up on the streets of Kuwait City. Some of those seized, a British
official said later, were boys as young as 14 years old.

Rear Adm. Mike McConnell, the Pentagon intelligence chief, said the Iraqis had
blown up or set fire to 200 oil wells, up from 140 on Friday, in addition to 100
that had already burned themselves out. Together, the two figures constitute a
third of the country's oil wells. An immense plume of dark smoke covered the
eastern part of the country, but winds appeared to be blowing some of it out
over the gulf.

Front-Line Emotions

In the immense Saudi desert, more than 700,000 allied troops -- Americans,
Britons, Frenchmen, Saudis, Egyptians and smaller contingents from dozens of
other nations -- waited for an assault that could involve as many as 400,000 of
them in a coordinated air, land, sea and amphibious operation intended to push
more than 500,000 Iraqi defenders out of their bunkers in Kuwait, the wealthy
little emirate they seized on Aug. 2.

As of this morning, there were just over 533,000 American service men and women
in the Persian Gulf region, according to a Pentagon tally, very close to the
maximum number of American military people to serve in Vietnam.

General Neal reported a number of skirmishes between Iraqi troops and American
forces on Saturday, including Army and Marine units. In one encounter, a patrol
identified in pool dispatches as part of the Second Marine Division took 87
prisoners, he said, and in another, marines destroyed four enemy tanks with TOW
missiles and took 143 Iraqis prisoner. More than 3,550 prisoners are now
reported in the custody of the Americans and the Saudis.

Mortar Attack on Vehicle



In the first of the firefights, a pair of young marines, Lance Cpl. Robert
Grady, 21 years old, from Madison, N.C., and Lance Cpl. William Noland, 25, of
Memphis, narrowly survived when an enemy mortar round slammed into their utility
vehicle. Some have suggested that the Iraqis are washed up as a fighting force,
but Corporal Grady indicated otherwise.

"From where I was sitting, they don't look that weak," he said.

Reporting what he called updated figures on allied destruction of heavy Iraqi
equipment, General Neal said that 1,685 tanks had been put out of commission, of
a prewar total of 4,280, compared with 1,400 10 days ago. A ranking United
States commander told The New York Times two days ago that the correct figure
was 2,100, but General Neal said even greater efforts than in the past were
being made to give out conservative damage assessments.

The general also said that 925 enemy armored personnel carries had been
demolished out of a total of 2,870, compared with 800 on Feb. 13, and that 1,485
artillery peieces had been destroyed out of 3,110, compared with the earlier
figure of 1,100.

2 U.S. Copters Lost

Reports from Washington in recent days have spoken of a dispute between the
Central Intelligence Agency and the Defense Intelligence Agency, on the one
hand, and the command here, on the other, about the correct figures. General
Neal said everyone was now in agreement, but he also said that the intelligence
agencies in Washington were using outdated numbers.

Two more American helicopters were lost in noncombat incidents on Saturday, the
general reported. A Navy UH-46E Sea Knight from the replenishment ship Seattle
ditched in the Red Sea, with three of its crew members rescued and one listed as
missing, and a Navy SH-60B Seahawk from the frigate Halyburton lost power and
crashed on takeoff. Its crew was saved.

The United States has now lost 20 aircraft in noncombat accidents.

General Neal said 2,900 air missions were flown on Saturday, of which 1,200 went
into Kuwait and 100 targeted the Republican Guards. On Friday, the previous
heaviest day over Kuwait, 1,000 sorties were reported, preparing for an eventual
land attack.


LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: British troops from the 26th Field Regiment of the 1st Armored
Division firing on Iraqi positions Friday with self-propelled howitzers. The
Pentagon said Iraq had blown up or set fire to 200 Kuwaiti oil wells, up from
140 on Friday, in addition to 100 that have already burned out. (Pool photo via
Associated Press) (pg. 16)

Maps: Persian Gulf region, indicating positions of allied and Iraqi forces as
the allied ground offensive began (pg. 1); Kuwait, indicating burning oil
fields, other oilfields, oil pipelines anf refineries. (pg. 16)

Table: "The Pentagon's Damage Estimates," listing Iraq's losses of major weapons
through Feb. 23, 1991, including:

TANKS: Destroyed: 39% (1,685)/Prewar total: 4,280

ARMORED PERSONNEL CARRIERS: Destroyed: 32% (925)/Prewar total: 2,870

ARTILLERY: Destroyed: 48% (1,485)/Prewar total: 3,110

COMBAT AIRCRAFT: Out of action: 34%/Prewar total: 689
 Destroyed: 98 (42 in combat, 56 destroyed on the ground) (pg. 16)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              395 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Washington;
Pentagon Plans to Stop Giving Information to Avoid Aiding Iraq

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1368 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 23


President Bush announced tonight that after giving President Saddam Hussein "one
last chance" to get out of Kuwait, he directed the commander of allied forces in
the Persian Gulf to begin ground operations and drive the Iraqi Army from
Kuwait.

"I have complete confidence in the ability of the coalition forces to swiftly
and decisively complete their mission," the President said in a brief statement
in the White House press room at 10 P.M..

Speaking at the Pentagon a few minutes after Mr. Bush, Defense Secretary Dick
Cheney said that with the commencement of "large-scale ground operations," the
Pentagon and the headquarters of the United States Central Command in Saudi
Arabia would temporarily stop holding news briefings in an effort to restrict
the flow of information that might be helpful to Iraq.

Deadline Not Met, Bush Says

After giving the Iraqi leader until noon today begin a full-scale withdrawal of
his occupation forces, Mr. Bush said, "Regrettably, the noon deadline passed
without any agreement of the Government of Iraq."

"To the contrary," Mr. Bush said, "what we have seen is a redoubling of Saddam
Hussein's efforts to destroy completely Kuwait and its people."

In announcing the suspension of news briefings about the war, Mr. Cheney said,
"From this point forward, we must limit what we say" in the interest of keeping
the Iraqi military command confused about the movements and whereabouts of
allied forces.

"Their positions, movements and plans must be carefully safeguarded," Mr. Cheney
said.

Mr. Cheney's suspension of news briefings marked the most rigorous application
yet of his policy of restricting the flow of information on the tactics and
results of military operations. The Secretary and his aides have defended their
policy, which is far more restrictive than that used in Vietnam, as a military
necessity. Critics have accused them of using military security as an excuse to
limit unfavorable publicity that could lead to political opposition to the war.

Pentagon officials said later that correspondents in the field would still file
reports, but they would be subject to military censorship.

Mr. Cheney said the ground offensive was still in the very early stages and he
would not expect to have a comprehensive report from his field commanders for
some time, which he did not specify.

He added that he did not underestimate the abilities of the Iraqi military,
which he described as a "well-equipped and well-fortified opponent."

President Returns

Mr. Bush spoke shortly after returning by helicopter from Camp David, where he
had spent the day with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and had turned aside
a final plea from President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union to delay
the invasion for another day or two.

Bush Administration officials said on Friday that the accelerating destruction
of Kuwait's oilfields and the summary execution of Kuwaiti citizens had pushed
up the timetable for the invasion. These officials said that American
intelligence agencies had intercepted an order from Iraq's leadership to Iraqi
commanders in Kuwait instructing them to "torch" as many of Kuwait's 1,000 oil
wells before allied assault forces arrived.

As the President's helicopter approached from Camp David, his inner circle of
advisers gathered in the dark on the South Lawn. The group included the White
House chief of staff, John H. Sununu; Vice President Dan Quayle; Marlin
Fitzwater, the White House spokesman; the national security adviser, Brent
Scowcroft, and Mr. Scowcroft's deputy, Robert M. Gates.

The President made a dramatic entrance as his helicopter suddenly appeared out
of the starry sky and landed on the South Lawn with the illuminated Washington
Monunment in the background.

Beginning of Attack Confirmed

Mr. Bush, in his speech, confirmed the reports already coming from the Persian
Gulf -- that major combat operations were under way. This included what
officials from allied governments said were deep thrusts into Iraqi territory
near the southern city of Basra by United States airborne troops, a combined
special forces landing at Kuwait City, and a Saudi and United States Marine
thrust that had advanced 15 miles into Kuwait along the coastal road.

Mr. Bush said he ordered the start of ground operations after consulting with
his national security advisers and with heads of state from the coalition
countries that have joined the United States in the military effort to free
Kuwait.

The President said he had authorized Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the commander
of Persian Gulf forces, "to use all forces available, including ground forces,
to eject the Iraqi Army from Kuwait."

He characterized the allied mission as "right and just" and asked Americans to
say a prayer for United States troops risking their lives in the largest
military offensive mounted in decades.

'No Alternative,' U.S. Says

Before the ground assault began, the White House said President Bush had decided
that "coalition forces have no alternative but to continue to prosecute the
war."

In a brief written statement, the President said: "We regret that Saddam Hussein
took no action before the noon deadline to comply with the United Nations
resolutions. We remain determined to fulfill the U.N. resolutions. Military
action continues on schedule and according to plan."

Throughout the day, Mr. Bush gave no signal about when the ground campaign might
begin, but senior Administration officials said the authorization for the ground
offensive was effectively granted in the detailed orders, approved by the
President, and issued Jan. 16 by Mr. Cheney to General Schwarzkopf.

Mr. Bush, before returning to Washington from Camp David, Md., on Saturday
night, he kept in touch with world leaders and senior advisers at the White
House by telephone and took a long walk with Mr. Baker before the noon deadline
for Iraq's withdrawal from Kuwait.

Drama at the White House

At the White House, senior officials stayed behind closed doors, avoiding
reporters for the most part as the hours ticked off toward the deadline.
Demostrators across the street in Lafayette Park beat a "peace drum" while those
of a decidedly different view chanted "We're in -- let's win' and "No more
Vietnams."

The launching of ground operations was preceded by an intense final week of
diplomatic efforts initiated by President Gorbachev, who sent his personal
envoy, Yevgeny M. Primakov, to a Baghdad under allied bombardment to meet with
the Iraqi leadership. Mr. Primakov also met twice with Iraq's Foreign Minister,
Tariq Aziz, in Moscow to hammer out a best-efforts plan for Iraq's capitulation
in Kuwait.

The final product, accepted by Mr. Aziz during an early-morning news conference
today, was swept aside by the Bush Administration as falling short of allied
demands that Iraq withdraw unconditionally with no cease- fire and with no
promise to exempt it from war reparations for the destruction in Kuwait.

The Iraqi leadership underscored that it would concede no more than it had to
Moscow. A statement said, "We will seek to turn the ground war, which they
wanted, into a hell fire that will sear their scoundrels -- their cohorts will
tumble into the great crater of death."

Izzat Ibrahim, deputy chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council, was quoted
by the official Iraqi News Agency as calling Mr. Bush's demands "an aggressive
ultimatum to which we will pay no attention."

'Scorched-Earth Policy'

The White House statement, issued after the deadline by Mr. Fitzwater, said
United States Central Command officials in Saudi Arabia reported "they have
detected no military activity which would indicate any withdrawal of Saddam
Hussein from Kuwait."

"Iraq continues its scorched-earth policy in Kuwait, setting fire to oil
facilities," Mr. Fitzwater went on. "It's a continuing outrage that Saddam
Hussein is still intent upon destroying Kuwait and its people, still intent upon
destroying the environment of the gulf, and still intent upon inflicting the
most brutal kind of rule on his population, yet appears to have no intention of
complying with the U.N. resolutions."

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              396 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PUBLIC & PRIVATE;
Reservations Not Accepted

BYLINE: By Anna Quindlen

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 747 words


The group of veterans marched down the street, and as they came into sight the
crowd at the curb seemed to move forward to greet them, to hold them like a hug.
They were youngish men, and their camouflage clothes were as different from the
neat uniforms of the other groups as their war had been from other wars. Beside
me an old man waved a flag. "We're with you," he shouted, as though he were
putting all our cheers into words, and then he added, "We should have let you
finish what you started." And the smile froze on my face, and fell.

It was five years ago that those Vietnam veterans marched by on Memorial Day,
but I've thought about that scene more than once in the last 40 days. From the
beginning, it has been difficult to publicly oppose this war, to express
reservations or even to forgo the exuberant displays of national accord.

A basketball player at Seton Hall University who did not wear a flag patch on
his uniform was heckled so relentlessly by fans that he quit the team and the
school. The editor of The Kutztown (Pa.) Patriot was fired, and while the owners
said there were other reasons, the ax fell just after he ran an antiwar
editorial with the headline "How about a little PEACE!" -- the last word in
letters as big as your finger. What amazed him afterward, he said, were the
people who called him eager to talk geopolitics, as though they were all members
of a sub rosa self-help group: Hi.  My name is Joe, and I have reservations
about the war in the gulf.

Reservations are not accepted.  There were antiwar demonstrations. But mostly
there was the majority rallying around the President, and a silent minority,
constrained by the atmosphere of high-octane Amerimania, a prettified second
cousin of her "Love It Or Leave It" forebears.  Some of us were ambivalent, but
we don't do ambivalence well in America. We do courage of our convictions.  We
do might makes right. Ambivalence is French. Certainty is American.

Some people say dissent is a matter of time, that opposition to Vietnam took
years to build. But I believe it's a sign of the times instead. America had
become the Muhammed Ali of nations, battered by foreign competition, by a
faltering economy, by domestic problems as big as our national ambition. In the
last six months Americans saw themselves as the leaders of the world again,
assured of their inherent greatness and the essential evil of the enemy.

But the line between such convictions and jingoism can be very thin.  Everyone
talked about standing behind the soldiers even while deploring the policy.
"Support the troops -- bring them home alive," one protest sign read. But like
my neighbor at the parade, Letters to the Editor columns in dozens of newspapers
made clear that people believed the way to show support was to agree that the
troops were engaged in a necessary and a noble enterprise. If not, keep quiet.
The idea that our true greatness lies in our diversity and freedom of speech
was, if anything, a P.S.

This war has taken on a momentum of its own. The troops of August led to the
buildup of autumn, and that to the combat of Jan. 16. The cumulative effect was
epitomized at a rally in California several weeks ago: as though they were in
the bleachers, a bunch of boys were chanting, "We're Number One!"

When the Soviet Union stepped in as a dealmaker, our former dark star, our
one-time evil twin, it was hard to bear, especially when the negotiations
included Saddam Hussein's survival. His face has been plastered on dartboards
and ping-pong paddles, and his mustache has become an instant metaphor for evil.
The U.N. resolutions called for making him leave Kuwait. The grass-roots agenda,
forged over heady days of the United States leading the world to war, is to
destroy him. It is an agenda that lends itself to ultimatums, not negotiations.

"We should have let you finish what you started," I keep hearing that man
yelling. Some of us believed that our national agenda in the gulf war was murky
from the start. But it has grown ever clearer: we must win, and Saddam Hussein
must lose. Trouble is, it's not that kind of world, and this isn't that kind of
war. Saddam Hussein could lose big and still be a hero in some parts of the
region. We could run a devastating military campaign and still wind up hated and
reviled. But for some short time, the war in the Persian Gulf has made the world
a simpler place. Black and white. Good and bad. Win and lose.  But not for long.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              397 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

As in Vietnam, Troops Will Bring Truth Home

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 270 words


To the Editor:

Twenty-two years ago I led an infantry platoon in Vietnam. Often with as few as
12 men, we engaged the enemy repeatedly, usually at a distance of less than 100
feet. My men fought very well. We killed at least two dozen Vietcong and North
Vietnam Army soldiers without suffering one death ourselves. There was nothing
heroic or glorious about it. It was a degrading and humiliating experience. It
was also the most important event in our young lives. For 58,000 of us, it was
the terminal event.

It is therefore deeply disturbing to see the history of that war being rewritten
or forgotten while we make the same mistakes again. To blame the press or a
wimpy public that couldn't take seeing the war on television for our eventual
defeat in Vietnam is an insult to all of us. Wars are fought by soldiers, not
reporters or television audiences. We did our job as soldiers, which was to
engage the enemy. The press did its job, which was to seek the truth.

Hardly anybody I knew in Vietnam was in favor of the war. Remember how many
soldiers had a peace symbol drawn on their helmets with a ballpoint pen and how
many joined the antiwar movement when they got back. We saw the truth firsthand,
not on the television screen. Our presence in Vietnam had its foundations in
misconceptions that were reinforced by lies, not by the press, but by those who
wished the press silent.

If the conflict in the Persian Gulf goes to ground war, the lives of our
soldiers will be profoundly changed. They will bring the truth home with them,
just as we did.

NAT TRIPP
Passumpsic, Vt., Feb. 21, 1991

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              398 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

As in Vietnam, Troops Will Bring Truth Home;
Limits of Sanctions

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 355 words


To the Editor:

It seems to me that the "President's oratory, and the applause," which you find
"confusing" ("Why the Gulf War Is Not Vietnam," editorial, Feb. 2), are clearer
than your argument. For liberals, you state, one of the lessons of the Vietnam
War (which, as you point out, liberals considered immoral) was that America
should go to war only as a last resort. To one liberal who opposed the war in
Vietnam this seems a non sequitur. A war that is immoral should not be fought at
all, not even as a last resort.

The issue in the Persian Gulf is whether undoing Saddam Hussein's aggression
against Kuwait and containing the military threat he poses to the region and
beyond are moral and just goals, and if they are, whether these goals could have
been achieved without going to war.

The gulf war is not Vietnam, not only in the military sense in which President
Bush intended in his statement, but in the moral sense as well. For even those
who remain convinced that sanctions would have worked agree that countering the
threat posed by Saddam Hussein is a just goal. It is in this profound sense that
the war in the gulf is unlike the war in Vietnam, whose goals, in addition to
its means, many Americans believed to be unjust.

The real question is not whether or not sanctions might have worked, but whether
or not the international community would have permitted them to work. Anyone who
argues that sanctions would have worked assumes:

(1) That the Europeans in the coalition -- including the French, who tried to
cut a Munichlike deal with Saddam Hussein at Israel's expense -- would have
abided by the embargo.

(2) That the Arabs in the coalition would not have been peeled away by Arab
politics in months, if not weeks.

(3) That there would not have been mounting domestic demands to bring our forces
home -- first from those who most loudly claimed sanctions could be sustained as
long as needed.

Anyone naive enough to believe in these three assumptions should not be
entrusted with the fate of this nation.

HENRY SIEGMAN
Executive Director, American Jewish Congress
New York, Feb. 6, 1991

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              399 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

As in Vietnam, Troops Will Bring Truth Home;
No First Nuclear Use

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 264 words


To the Editor:

There could be a serious risk that the United States might be tempted to use
nuclear weapons against Iraqi military targets under extreme circumstances. The
most plausible scenario is one in which massive United States casualties have
occurred on the ground and the United States is unable to extricate its forces
without a humiliating surrender or extensive further casualties.

Most Americans support the use of force in the Persian Gulf, but this does not
extend to the use of weapons of mass destruction. The United States must firmly
and irreversibly adopt the policy of no nuclear use for any reason except in
response to a nuclear attack.

It is not just morality that precludes the use of nuclear weapons. Our own
interests in the future would be badly harmed by such use. As nuclear
proliferation proceeds at a frightening pace, it is more important than ever to
preserve the firebreak between conventional warfare and nuclear warfare. If the
United States crosses that divide in the gulf, it is all too possible that other
lesser powers will have both the capacity and the will to use nuclear weapons
against United States targets in the future.

The nuclear firebreak must remain intact. Both morality and the long-term
interests of the citizens of the United States lead to the same policy: no first
use, for any reason in any circumstances.

DANIEL LITTLE
Cambridge, Mass., Feb. 6, 1991

The writer, associate professor of philosophy at Colgate University, is a
visiting scholar, Center for International Affairs, Harvard University.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              400 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

As in Vietnam, Troops Will Bring Truth Home;
Political Censorship

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 242 words


To the Editor:

"Press and the Military: Old Suspicions" (news analysis, Feb. 4) contains a
piece of information that is either misleading or has been grossly
under-reported. Almost as an afterthought you state: "A number of news
organizations, excluded entirely from the pools, have brought suit against the
Government in New York, contending that the pool system, as now constituted,
illegally discriminates against them. Among those are The Village Voice,
Harper's, The Nation and Mother Jones."

Perhaps those examples are not typical of the organizations excluded, and to
avoid misunderstandings, you should have explained the Government's grounds for
excluding them.

The ugly specter of censorship that you raise would be of a far more serious
nature than the one being debated by the news media and the Pentagon. All four
of these publications are on the political left. Does this mean that the
Government is excluding oppositional voices from access to information about
events in the Persian Gulf? If it does, we have progressed from military
censorship (some degree of which may be unavoidable in time of war) to political
censorship. In that case, what are we defending in the gulf?

This may sound naive, but I simply refuse to believe that our political
consensus has already been eroded to the point where we simply accept political
censorship as a natural phenomenon.

MICHAEL E. GEISLER
Greensboro, N.C., Feb. 15, 1991

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              401 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Sense of Pride Outweighs Fears of War

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1376 words


IT remains unclear what the Persian Gulf war will do to the political geography
of the Middle East, but so far it has transformed the psyche of the United
States.

The sour, deeply divided nation of a few months ago, worried about economic
decay and political paralysis, has received a remarkable lift from the war.
Despite the presence of a sizable minority opposed to the fighting, there has
been a surge of patriotic rallies, flag-waving and professions of unity
unmatched by anything in this generation.

Americans have always been prone to turn wars into crusades and metaphors --
from the sense of mission and manifest destiny of the Spanish-American War to
the sense of virtue of World War II. In this war that tendency is, if anything,
being heightened by the lingering frustrations of Vietnam.

"What makes war interesting for Americans is that we don't fight war on our
soil, we don't have direct experience of it, so there's an openness about the
meanings we give to it," said Robert Dallek, a professor of history at the
University of California at Los Angeles. "War for us is like a tabula rasa, a
blank slate which we can use to turn into a moral crusade, and that's what's
happening now, particularly as a healing experience in relation to Vietnam."

A bloody ground war could radically change the nation's mood, of course, and
some say the pro-war feeling is more broad than deep -- more support for the
troops than the policies they are carrying out. In any case, support is not
uniform throughout society. Blacks, for example, support the war less than
whites.

"We talk about this as a war, but it's not even the length of a good World War I
battle yet," said Peter Maslowsky, a military historian at the University of
Nebraska. "The battle of Verdun went on for 10 months. I wouldn't make any
judgments just yet."

But polls, troop-support rallies and the degree to which the war has been turned
into a pop culture phenomenon all indicate broad support, which many Americans
see as a heartwarming resurgence of patriotism and others see as perverse.

There's an Operation Desert Shield magazine on the newsstands, with its cover
crowing, "America's Awesome Firepower, the Most Devastating War Machine Ever!" A
spokesman says the initial 500,000-copy press run, put out just as the war was
beginning, is selling briskly. Along with the Saddam Hussein golf balls, video
games and shooting-range targets, the yellow ribbons and the Scudbuster
T-shirts, it is emblematic of a change in the nation's mood. Life, a magazine
which as much as any other sees itself evoking the essence of America, has not
one but two issues on the stands, both labeled Life: In Time of War. In addition
to the monthly, with a cover closeup of a grizzled Army captain, is a new weekly
Life, with a cover photo of a blond-haired youngster in saddle shoes holding a
flag.

It is as if all the confusion and pain of recent decades have melted, leaving
the nation with its reassuring images from World War II intact.

"People want something to believe in," said Donna Lane, a 40-year-old Atlanta
woman who has begun making pins with patriotic images that she sells to
nonprofit organizations like the American Legion. "They want some part of their
life to have a meaning," she said. "The guys in the service are putting their
lives on the line for what the U.S. is supposed to mean -- freedom, liberty.
That's what we're over there defending."

Wars draw people together in other countries as well, but some say they do so to
a particular degree in the United States.

As an extraordinarily heterogeneous society, the United States is not unified
along lines of race, religion or culture. War is one thing with the power to
bond the nation into a unified whole. Also, throughout its history, America has
found ways to convince itself that it is fusing its deepest moral impulses with
its military ones.

Many analysts say the popular acceptance of this war reflects the
Administration's relentless portrayal of it as a moral struggle -- with Saddam
Hussein personifying evil -- instead of in terms of its geopolitical realities.

"We don't think of war as politics by other means," said David Tarr, a
University of Wisconsin political scientist. "It has to be a moral crusade with
good guys and bad guys."

To skeptics, that moral sense often is tragically misplaced. Many say the degree
of violence the nation tolerates at home, exemplified by soaring murder rates
and the world's highest incarceration rates, makes the United States more likely
than other countries to employ violence to achieve what it sees as moral aims.

Prof. Gerald Linderman of the University of Michigan, who studies the nation's
wars as they reflect society, said the American view of war is skewed by the
degree to which it fights wars elsewhere and then returns to an unscathed
homeland to construct a selective mythology about the conflict. Thus, for
instance, World War II is remembered in images of Normandy, Dwight Eisenhower,
prosperity and unity at home instead of Dresden or Auschwitz, Nagasaki or
Hiroshima.

"We have lost some sense of the true reality of war," said Professor Linderman.
"We make our calculations without ever having factored in the possibility that
our streets will be destroyed, our houses ruined, our children obliterated. It
allows us to talk very blithely about war. I've been astonished with the sort of
insouciance with which callers on radio talk shows talk about intensifying the
war. I think in this age of increasingly deadly long-range technology, sooner or
later that is going to place us in great peril." Just as Vietnam has clouded the
nation's image of itself at war, so have allusions to it dominated the reaction
to the Gulf War. After the ambiguity and humiliation of Vietnam, the gulf war
seems a model of clarity and success, a war portrayed as being fought with the
most efficient weapons and greatest resolve against the vilest of villains.
"It's Vietnam revisted as it should have been -- Vietnam: The Movie, Part II,
and this time it comes out right," said Professor Dallek.

Many believe that if the war ends in a low-cost triumph, it could affect the
American mood for years.

"We have national mood swings, and wars contribute enormously to them," said
Professor Tarr. "After World War II we could do anything. After Vietnam we could
do nothing. It's hard to say how this one will go down, but right now it looks
like the optimists are being fed what they want and the pessimists are eating
crow."

But many others do not expect the euphoria to last even if the war does speed to
a successful conclusion. Often alluded to is a book by the Yale University
historian Paul Kennedy, "The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers," which contends
that global behemoths throughout history have seen their energy sapped and their
decline accelerated when they concentrated too much of their resources on
military activity and spending and too little on the creation of wealth.

Others note that the end of this war will find the United States in a much
weaker economic position relative to the rest of the world than it was after
World War II, for example, when America had half the world's manufacturing
capacity. Certainly the problems of crime and drugs, decaying cities and
intractable deficits will not be solved by victory in the Persian Gulf.

History has shown that the moral fervor with which the United States enters wars
can ebb quickly. But for now, America has been getting some satisfactions from
the war that it was not getting in a time of peace.

"I think it's taken the monkey off our back that's been there since Korea and
Vietnam and Beirut and a few places in between," said Harry Kane, a Vietnam
veteran who is editor of Operation Desert Shield magazine, which is published by
a company that also puts out magazines for police officers and gun enthusiasts.

"There's been talk of us losing our economic leadership but this has reasserted
our preeminence of a
sort," he said. "VCR's may be made in Japan and Mercedes have their stamp of
origin, but what's going on in the Middle East is undeniably made in the U.S.A.
I think that's a source of pride we have not had since World War II."

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Offerings at a shop in New York City. (John Mantel/Sipa)(pg.
1); Philadelphians at a rally to show support for American military actions and
U.S. troops stationed in the Persian Gulf. (Sean Kardon/Sipa)(pg. 3)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              402 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Monument Maker

BYLINE: By Peter Tauber; Peter Tauber is the author of two books about the
Vietnam War years, "The Sunshine Soldiers" and "The Last Best Hope."

SECTION: Section 6; Page 49; Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4343 words


Maya Lin reluctantly faced the pale light of a Bowery dawn one morning last
October and stepped around the reclining derelict on her doorstep who by day
patrolled the sidewalk near her loft.

The artist she was wanted to climb back up four flights and get on with her
neglected sculpture. But the architect she was also -- who by the age of 30 had
created celebrated national memorials for the Vietnam War dead and the civil
rights movement -- had to catch a plane.

The trip -- to Charlotte, N.C., to oversee a large landscaping project -- had
already been postponed after a hurricane rampaged through the area. Now it was
Maya Lin's turn to uproot trees and rearrange the sodden earth. Having gained
national renown by her sobering and magisterial public monuments, with this
project she was closer to colossal whimsy. She would be transforming a median
strip in the traffic approach to the Charlotte Coliseum into an giant, droll,
topiary park. Along a football-field-long inclined greensward would be planted
10 enormous holly bushes in a sinuous wave form. They would seem to be rolling
downhill, one after another, following a path suggested by small grassy banks
and mounds.

After months of meetings, estimates, plans and revisions, this trip would
finally be the fun part of the commission: stomping around the site, hauling and
heaving and improvising changes -- a day spent half as artist, half as field
general, commanding a motorized battalion of construction workers, engineers and
earthmoving equipment.

Yet it was one thing to be a monument builder, lord of diesel armies,
reconfiguring the topography. It was another to be, amid the crush and thunder
of Canal Street truck traffic, a sleepy 95-pound artist trying to hail a cab.

Her reservations on the overbooked flight evanesced from the computer before her
last-minute arrival. As she waited for the final standby seat, carrying a small
school notebook spilling over with planning details, sketches and ideas, Maya
Ying Lin seemed herself something of a work in progress, now delayed.

Dressed in old jeans, worn sneakers and a brushed-cotton black jacket ("a thrift
shop unoriginal") so loose-fitting it kept sliding off her slender shoulders,
Maya Lin more resembled an architect's rendering than a celebrated renderer.
Amused by the ego-deflating state of her temporary limbo, she sighed, "Not quite
'The Fountainhead.' "

Architects call me a sculptor, and sculptors call me an architect," she told an
overflow audience at the Metropolitan Museum of Art last spring, with evident
delight. "I don't think either wants to claim me."

That dichotomy would quickly be apparent in the loft she shares with her
longtime companion, Peter Boynton, also a sculptor, and their two cats, Ranch
and Trout.

At one end of a corridor is a space that serves as her architectural office and
drafting studio, which she occupies with her assistant and a supporting cast of
machines. Its walls are affixed with preliminary sketches, alternatives and
variations; its tables covered with blueprints, plans, site photos and cardboard
scale models.

At the other end of the loft is a sparely furnished living area, with an
adjacent workshop big enough for two sculptors. Its walls and table tops were,
last fall, rapidly filling with assemblages of rarely combined materials -- like
birchwood furniture frames with Day-Glo plastic cushions -- in preparation for
Boynton's first one-man gallery exhibit. Lin's pieces, a series of compositions
in mottled beeswax striated with lead, were, like his, a study in unlikely
conjunctions. As were their creators: he is tall, blond and rawboned, partial to
motorcycles, but in his work precise and delicate; she is slight ("I'm 5-feet-3,
but people always think I'm smaller"), dark, self-restrained in manner, but in
her presentation unhesitatingly direct, deft, forcefully articulate and in her
work startlingly powerful.

In her two best-known pieces, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington and
the Civil Rights Memorial in Montgomery, Ala., she has devised places of
pilgrimage, where merely to touch seems to heal long-broken hearts, reconciling
armies of veterans, assuaging historic wounds. By a serene, commanding admixture
of insights and modesty she has rendered stones into compelling American shrines
-- threnodies for America's two most divisive modern agonies: a war fought while
she was in grade school and a movement begun before she was born.

MARCHING DOWN THE LONG CHARLOTTE HILLSIDE, Maya Lin leads a troop of general
contractors and site managers, accompanied by her partner in this project, Henry
Arnold, a landscape architect from Princeton, N.J. She quizzes Arnold on
practical landscaping, on problems of drainage and maintenance.

She and Arnold met in 1981, during the building of the Vietnam memorial. Her
plans required lowering the ground level of Constitution Gardens, that part of
the Mall between the Washington Monument and Lincoln Memorial, which he had
designed five years before. "So I asked that he be brought on board," she says.
A tall, lean, soft-spoken man, Arnold watches as she tells the contractors where
she thinks they have made mistakes in laying out some grades specified by her
plans. Indicating an uneven arc of bricks, she frowns, "It looks more hexagonal
than a curve."

The site manager responds, "I don't know how we can do much better."

"Make a wooden stencil," she suggests.

"We did," he counters, producing a curved board. Insisting that she's being a
perfectionist, he offers to bet that what she sees as "lumpy glitches," or "flat
spots and bumps," are only optical illusions. To prove it, he fits the template
against the emplaced bricks, occasionally looking to Arnold for support. Henry
Arnold just shakes his head as though to indicate that she knows what she wants,
and what she sees; and what she sees isn't what she wants.

No matter how the general contractor tries, the flatness of that failed curve is
undisputable. Finally he heaves the board away in dismay. An entire line of
bricks will have to be reset.

For three hours, in 90-degree heat, Maya Lin hikes up and down the hill, working
out new placements for her topiary bushes, where dilemmas of plumbing, access,
drainage and root growth require revisions. She is surrounded by 10 burly
laborers -- bricklayers, landscapers, drillers -- and a half-dozen backhoes,
haulers and other vehicles. A worker chips at a strip of concrete with a
hammer-drill powered by a deafening Honda EW171 portable engine. Huddled around
her to hear, these beefy men seem like a football team heeding their
fragile-but-valuable quarterback. And they treat her with the same respect: she
might yet take them to the Super Bowl.

Depending on her audience, she may explain her notion in terms of "a formal
French scheme" or "Indian burial mounds" or even "like Robert Smithson's Spiral
Jetty works." But always with enthusiasm: "It's meant to be surreal, absolutely
fun -- a stage set the public can be part of."

When dedicated this spring, it may confront local sports fans with one of two
questions: If it succeeds, why do other American sports complexes look like
abandoned cement works? If it turns out to be a turkey, why would anyone invite
a minuscule 31-year-old woman of Chinese descent who is terrified of driving to
do the auto approach to a redneck sweat-palace?

As she emerges from their midst, the workers seem re-energized; all the more as
they watch a fan of the hometown National Basketball Association Hornets
approach from the box office for her autograph. "I've been to the wall," he
tells her, nodding silently as she signs.

Moments like that, she admits, both "gratify and unnerve" her. For with the
Vietnam memorial she created something that, while fulfilling her intentions to
forge its own personal relationship with every visitor, became larger than its
creator. As proud as she is of her effort's success, she does not want "to
intrude on their private experience." Her name cannot be found on the wall, only
on a separate low stone set into the ground several feet behind the memorial.

AFTER THE WALL, MAYA Lin resolved not to accept any more memorial commissions.
But in 1987 the Southern Poverty Law Center called her out of her young
retirement. "We phoned every Lin in the New York phone books," recalls Morris
Dees, the group's executive director. He wanted to build a monument to the
people whose lives made the era of civil rights possible. Montgomery, scene of
the 1955-56 bus boycott that launched the modern era of civil rights protests
and also the national career of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., was the
essential location.

Her initial reaction was disbelief: "That there hadn't been a civil rights
memorial -- to the movement itself -- it surprised me."

In contrast to the Vietnam memorial, where she deliberately avoided any study of
the war's political history to keep from reiterating its polemics, Maya Lin read
everything she could about the civil rights movement.

"I read through a lot of the history," she says, "watched the tapes of 'Eyes on
the Prize.' I chased down every single little fact. The one that really shocked
me was Samuel Younge Jr.'s death. I should have remembered that about the time I
was entering grade school someone was killed for refusing to use a
'coloreds-only' restroom. I don't think it was ever taught. That's what alarmed
me, how quickly this part of our history has been forgotten." Her monument is
"about the reality of racism, seeing how an era fought to bring down legal
racism."

She has likened the challenge of such a project to conjuring "a physical act of
poetry." When she read Martin Luther King's speech at the 1963 march on
Washington and came to the lines "With this faith we will be able to hew out of
the mountain of despair a stone of hope," she knew this work, like the Vietnam
wall, must be a monument of dark granite. Yet when she read the next lines --
"We are not satisfied, we will not be satisfied until justice rolls down like
waters and righteousness like a mighty stream" -- she also knew that the lyric
in stone would require a music of water.

Over a gently arced concave black wall inscribed with those words, a glassy
curtain of water flows onto a table-rock bearing the names and dates of the
great events and martyrs of the civil rights era, from 1954 until the death of
Dr. King in 1968.

On a recent Sunday in Montgomery, where these names repose in the figurative
shadow of a Capitol that still flies the Confederate Stars and Bars, a black
teen-age girl showed her Hispanic boyfriend around the memorial. "You mean you
never looked on this thing?" she asked. Then she led him by the hand to the
water table. "Come over here for some education," she said.

Around the circular rock with them were schoolchildren from Atlanta. Some were
splashing, some reverently tracing the submerged words with small fingers.
Behind those children, adults stood silently mouthing the names and dates of
events preserved on the stone.

"For me, these projects require the kind of art that can communicate with you
almost immediately and not be referential," Maya Lin says of her work. "The
second you start intellectualizing, it's lost. What I really question is
allegory. This represents this because it says so in the guidebook. It's the
difference between telling people what to think and enabling them -- allowing
them -- to think."

ON VETERANS DAY 1990, as thousands gathered for a ceremony at the wall, Jan
Scruggs, the veteran who shepherded the Vietnam memorial project into being nine
years earlier, reflected on working with Maya Lin: "Well, she's a genius, and I
have always found it difficult to work with geniuses. She has an artistic
temperament, and she really stood by her guns to make sure that this memorial
design was not tampered with. And it was very important that she did that,
because throughout the entire controversy that surrounded the memorial, she
really believed in this design; she really knew it was going to work." Lin's
winning entry had been the judges' unanimous choice over 1,420 others, and their
conviction was persuasive. But more than that, Scruggs says, "The strength of
her own convictions carried us through quite a few conflicts."

For a while, there was more political energy devoted to halting her design than
there had been in launching the project. "A political situation arose, whereby
we were denied a construction permit by Interior Secretary James Watt," Scruggs
says. "There were some very powerful people in Washington who were trying to
stop this memorial from being built, saying 'Why are all the others white and
this is black?' They called it 'a scar, a black gash of shame and sorrow.' "
(Only when retired Brig. Gen. George Price, one of the Army's highest-ranking
black officers, thundered his personal anger did the memorial's critics stop
referring to black as a "color of shame.")

For Maya Lin, the experience on the Vietnam memorial wall was "a baptism by fire
-- the battle lasted all summer." The forces arrayed against her design ranged
from the Texas financier H. Ross Perot and the conservative crusader Phyllis
Schlafly (who called her plan "a tribute to Jane Fonda") to Senator Jeremiah A.
Denton Jr., a former Vietnam prisoner of war, and Tom Wolfe, then in his "From
Bauhaus to Our House" architecture-bashing mode.

"The whole controversy surrounding the Vietnam memorial," Maya Lin recalls, "was
'artist wants her way, artist who didn't go to this war, who's female, who was
too young to have served, wants her way.' " What they didn't understand, she
says, is "you have to let go of it; it's not just for us. That's what makes it
public. It never was just for us."

Of all the participants in the Vietnam memorial battles, perhaps the oddest was
Frederick E. Hart, the sculptor of the suddenly competing alternative, "The
Three Servicemen Statue," an outsize depiction of three Ramboesque soldiers.
Although himself a former antiwar protestor, he created a statue that glorified
the fighting man, complete with modern weaponry. He soon took up an active pen,
both attacking Maya Lin's design and assailing nonrepresentational art itself. A
compromise was reached that provided for both pieces. (Hart's commission from
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund was more than 10 times Maya Lin's $20,000
prize fee from the same fund.)

On this recent Veterans Day, less than a dozen visitors gathered near Hart's
sculpture. Nearby, a solemn, reverential crowd, 5,000 to 7,000 strong, filed
slowly down the gentle grade before the black granite walls: survivors, friends
and relatives, tourists, descending into the smoothly rolling ground past the
roll call of the lost, wrapped in the slow cadences of muffled drums as a lone
bagpiper played. It always baffled and haunted Maya Lin that critics of her work
termed it austere, attacking the abstract aspects of her designs as though they
were antihuman, the minimalist as if that meant cold-blooded. In her
installations, humans are the necessary missing element, unique emotional
engagement her specific aim.

FOR AN ARTIST WHOSE public works have reached such extraordinary levels of
national attention, she has actually had remarkably little critical review. Her
memorials have been the subject of political debate in the guise of esthetic
analysis. But after the Vietnam memorial was completed, its political foes fell
silent. And those few art critics who expressed initial reservations about its
scheme joined the chorus of praise.

The work she is now so anxious to pursue, her own studio sculpture, despite
having had almost no public exposure, has the advantage of her reputation to
draw upon. Priced at $6,000 to $12,000 each, her sculptures are slow to be made
-- one or two a year -- and quick to sell. Nearly all are hanging works, of
radically juxtaposed organic and earth substances, predominantly lead and
beeswax. In one, a rectangular wafer of beeswax ("It's 5 feet 3 inches tall and
95 pounds, the same height and weight as me") is striped with veins of extruded
lead. In another, a lead-leaf papoose brims with pebbles of green-tinted
automobile glass. She favors these dissonant materials, the stuff of honey hives
and plumbing, for their tactile qualities and malleability.

In her personal life, too, unlikely cohabitations have had their own reward. At
Yale, she began a partnership on a project with Peter Boynton, with whom she has
lived ever since. "When we started going out, we decided to do an art and
architecture collaboration," she says. "We argued for two weeks and almost
didn't build it, because we were so different." It was to be a tree house in
Windham, Vt., a structure that snaked through the forest floor and rose up 40
feet through the trees. "We wanted to build 'an ascent into a collision,' a
piece about how two people collaborate. But we started having these 'art
arguments.' Peter was very expressionistic. We finally just looked at each other
glaringly one day. And Peter said, 'O.K., what's more beautiful, the human
figure or a pencil?' And I looked at him and I said, 'A pencil!' He said,
'That's it! We're not doing this and I'm not going out with you!' And I said,
'Wait a second' and tried to explain why I thought abstractions can be more
beautiful than reality."

"Before I touch pencil to paper I think it's very important to not find a form
-- to define what a piece is to be with words, with thought." The purpose of the
Vietnam wall, Maya Lin says, was "to help the veterans coming back, to help
their families, to talk to people 100 years from now who will know nothing about
that war and nobody on that wall. To me, it's a very simple notion: you cannot
ever forget that war is not just a victory or loss. It's really about individual
lives.

"I played very dumb for the first nine months of the Vietnam project. I played
very quiet and naive. I knew nothing about the war, its history and politics.
But although one of my strong choices was not to read anything on that war, I
also didn't tell them I had spent three months researching, coming to grips with
the whole definition of a memorial in general, just so I could get specific."

Her idea for the Vietnam memorial came out of a senior-year workshop at Yale on
funereal architecture. "We did designs, from a gateway to a cemetery to a
memorial for World War III," she says. "We saw this poster about the Vietnam
memorial and thought it would be a great way to end the class."

She had been most struck by the World War I memorials of Europe: "For the first
time, they focused on human lives lost, focused on the loss of individual life.
Before the 20th century, your average foot soldier didn't count. Yet you're
asking all these people to go out to war.

"I stripped the question down to: 'How are all these people going to overcome
the pain of losing something? How do you really overcome death?' And that
brought me to the names. It would absolutely not help them to put up something
that was falsely heroic; they had gone through a very traumatic time. If you
just keep pretending that nothing had happened there, if you didn't really
accept that death or time or trouble, then you'd never get over it . . . never
get over it.

"The only way you can work with history and the only way you can overcome
anything is to accept it very, very honestly.

"One of the veterans, I remember, asked me, 'Well, what are the people going to
do when they first see this piece?' I think he wanted me to say, 'They're gonna
love it.' And I said something like, 'Well, I think they're going to be really
moved by it.' What I didn't tell him is that they are probably going to cry and
cry and cry. You have to, to overcome death, it's a catharsis."

Making a quick sketch of the wall, she points to the foreground, where the
visitors stand, and says, "We are here. And they" -- the dead -- "are here" --
indicating a space beneath the surface of the mirrored walls, the area "behind"
the stone.

And though the exquisitely right touch -- the precise angle of the stones, the
height and depth of the letters, the ragged-edged asymmetry of the lines, the
fusing together of the dates of the first and last casualties -- may seem
inevitable and fitting choices, it is not enough to have artistic insight,
delicate taste or poetic perfect pitch. Each detail had to be defined and
defended at every stage.

Yet, paradoxically, to have let the work's elements reflect the facts too
faithfully might well have produced a truly volatile political statement. In her
configuration, at the vertex of the walls, the end of the Vietnam War, 1975,
sits on the left-side panel, joined to the panel on the right, dated 1959,
reckoned as the commencement of the American involvement. The catalogue of names
proceeds on the right, but concludes on the left, thus forming an endless loop.
Literalists argued that the list of the dead should run in strict chronological
order, left to right. But had it, the entire edifice would seem a hideous bar
graph of a 16-year slaughter, from entry through escalation to disengagement.

Her winning entry was a series of pastel sketches that took only two weeks to
complete, as Maya Lin says, "after months of study." But it didn't "all come
together until I physically walked around the Mall and Constitution Gardens.
Then I knew. I'm super site-specific."

SOMETIMES THE MOST important lesson at a site is understanding what not to do.
To create a peace chapel for Juniata College in Huntingdon, Pa., she realized
she could not improve upon the original: a 360-degree hilltop panorama of town
and valley. So she simply cleared a sitting space for open-air meditation.

In other milieus, her works are solicited to ratify how changing times may have
changed the context of a place. Last year, Yale asked her for something to
celebrate 20 years of women as undergraduates.

"I'm a true-blue Yalie," she declares. "When President Benno Schmidt called me
up, I realized that for seven of those 20 years I was at Yale" -- first as an
undergraduate and then, after half a year at Harvard's Graduate School of
Design, scurrying back to New Haven to finish her graduate degree there.

"I never noticed that there was any feeling of Yale as a bastion of male
learning, but the mark is decidedly male," she says, pointing out that virtually
all the statues, all the plaques, all the benches, all the images are of men.
"The site I've chosen, with its back to Sterling Library, is pretty much the
heart of the college. It's the one large open gathering area, the quad, really
the only open place at Yale where students can congregate and hang out and read
books and just be part of the campus."

She plans a very large, cantilevered, elliptical table -- which she informally
refers to as "the women's table." Made of green granite, it will be low, 36
inches high, oval (remininscent in shape of a Modigliani face), on a blue stone
base. As in the civil rights memorial, the design incorporates water, coming
from off-center ("I never do anything centered") and pooling underneath. "We
hope to have it built by fall of next year, to have it in construction over the
summer, not to interrupt classes."

In a sense, this design will bring her full circle, not only to where she
studied and first entered the national eye, but to her family roots. She was
practically born on a campus, in Athens, Ohio, where her parents were both
professors at Ohio University. Her father, who died in 1989, was dean of fine
arts and her mother still teaches English and Oriental literature there.

Although she is of Chinese heritage, her work, spare and minimalist, seems to
her "more Japanese than Chinese, really." She attributes her sensibility mostly
to the influence of her parents and the house she was raised in, "a glass-walled
house in the woods."

Her parents came to the United States from China in 1948. Her father had been an
academic administrator in China, and a ceramist; he owned a collection of
porcelain, with pieces from every dynasty. Her mother was "smuggled out of
Shanghai just as the Communists were bombing it, with only a hundred dollar bill
pinned to her coat lining." Her older brother, Tan Lin, is a poet at Columbia
University. The Lin family name (rendered in pictograms as two trees) means
"forest." Her middle name, Ying (pronounced ING), means "precious stone."
"Maya," she explains with a shrug, is Hindu, a "devil-goddess who deceives souls
on their way to heaven. She's a goddess of illusion. Whatever she says doesn't
exist."

IN THE HOT CHARLOTTE afternoon, Maya Lin visits the holly bushes that will soon
be transplanted to her arena site. For a while, it had seemed as though topiary,
though something of a local obsession in Charlotte, could not be located in the
size she required, certainly not at any commercial nurseries. But scouring
Charlotte, the project's landscape consultant, John Greene, found a house whose
circular driveway was attended by 10 mammoth holly bushes, which the owner was
willing to sell.

Their installation scheduled, she goes to the Charlotte house to inspect their
condition and measure them for assignment to designated spots. She has given
each a nickname. "This one's Lumpy and this is Friar Tuck." A few are named
after well-rounded figures in public life.

Returning to the Coliseum, she makes a final inspection tour of the scarred
ground, trailed by a crew of heavy-laden workers. In the afternoon sun's
lengthening shadows, the muddy processional resembles a frieze of a weary
Vietnam patrol.

Her public duties done, Maya Lin heads home to the private landscape of her
sculpture studio.

Waiting for her plane, she considers with some delight the irony of this
project. However much it may succeed as a site of civic fun, people may ask,
"Sure I like it, but is it really art?"

To Maya Lin, it is also a relief: to do something on so grand a scale for which
no one first had to die.

NAME: Maya Lin

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Architects call me a sculptor, and sculptors call me an
architect," says Maya Lin. At left, she is dwarfed by hollies for the Charlotte
Coliseum. (pg. 49); The Civil Rights Memorial in Montgomery, Ala., left and top
left, is a hands-on place. Maya Lin in her studio (pg. 50), above, works on
plans to commemorate 20 years of women as undergraduates at Yale University.
(pg. 51)(Photographs by Adam Stoltman for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              403 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Ground War and the American Economy;
Boost but No Cure For the Recession

BYLINE: By LOUIS UCHITELLE

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1100 words


If the ground war ends in an allied victory in the Persian Gulf by late March,
with relatively few casualties, the American economy will almost certainly
receive a boost. But many economists doubt that peace by springtime would be
sufficient in itself to end the recession.

The two great benefits that are likely to follow an early victory are a rise in
consumer confidence and a drop in oil prices to the prewar level of $18 a barrel
or less. More confident consumers, in turn, would spend more. And lower oil
prices would give them more to spend, by reducing outlays for energy.

"These positive elements will offset some of the negatives, said Robert Gordon,
a Northwestern University economist. "But I don't see a very rapid recovery
because there are so many other negatives unrelated to the war."

Economic Problems

For Mr. Gordon and other economists, the negatives include months of rising
unemployment and stagnant personal income, a sharp drop in industrial production
since November, a dormant construction industry, a banking sector in crisis and
hundreds of state and city governments forced into cutbacks and layoffs because
of budget deficits. Until last year, spending by these governments had been a
source of economic growth for the nation.

The Bush Administration and Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve
Board, have primarily blamed the recession on Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and the
damage it did to consumer confidence, as oil prices rose and the likelihood of
war made Americans nervous. While Government officials count on a quick victory
to reverse the recession, those who measure consumer confidence have their
doubts.

Limited Euphoria

"If the war ends soon, there may conceivably be some sort of euphoria that will
give the economy a lift, but the ending of the war is not going to jump us out
of the recession," said Fabian Linden, director of a monthly survey of consumer
confidence sponsored by the Conference Board, a business organization. "The
realities of the job market are the consumer's main focus now."

Among those who responded to the Conference Board's January survey of nearly
5,000 households, 36 percent said they expected job opportunities to worsen over
the coming months, while only 9 percent expected job prospects to improve. Those
recession-level percentages are not expected to change in the board's February
survey, which is scheduled to be released late this week. In normal economic
times, job optimists outnumber pessimists four to one, Mr. Linden said.

But if an early victory is no cure-all for the economy, a prolonged ground war,
lasting through the end of the year, may not have much impact either. As Herbert
Stein, a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, puts it:
"Objectively, this war is not an important factor in the economy, and it is hard
for me to explain how it is linked to consumer confidence. Unless the war took a
turn for the worse, which no one foresees except Saddam Hussein, I don't see the
war becoming a major quantitative influence on the economy."

Not a Stimulant

One reason is that the Persian Gulf war, unlike the Korean and Vietnam wars, is
not costing enough to be either a stimulant or a drain on the economy. Outlays
for those wars, mostly for weapons production and supplies, represented 8 to 15
percent of the gross national product, the total value of newly produced goods
and services. The outlays for the gulf war are far less.

Peter Garber, a Brown University economist who teaches a course on war and the
economy, estimated the potential cost of the Persian Gulf war at a maximum of
roughly $35 billion a month for the United States. That would mean an outlay of
about $100 billion through March, or 1.8 percent of G.N.P. Only if the war
dragged on through December would spending approach 7 percent of G.N.P. and
perhaps begin to act as an economic stimulant, mostly through increased weapons
production.

So far, most of the gulf war spending is for food, fuel and other supplies
purchased abroad, often with money supplied by Saudi Arabia, Japan, Germany and
other allies -- an outlay that bypasses the United States economy. Weapons
production in the United States has not been affected; the gulf war is being
fought from the inventory of weaponry built up during the Carter and Reagan
Administrations.

Military contractors confirm this assessment. A spokesman for the Raytheon
Company, maker of the Patriot missile, said, for example, that the Pentagon had
asked the company to speed up production of Patriots ordered before the gulf
crisis began in August but had not placed new orders. Similar reports come from
the General Dynamics Corporation, manufacturer of the Abrams tank and various
warplanes, and the Grumman Corporation, also a warplane maker.

Still, weapons production might make a contribution to economic growth in the
months and years after the gulf war ends, Peter L. Bernstein, an economic
consultant, said.

"We seem to be using up a huge amount of stuff," Mr. Bernstein said, "and I
would think we would not only want to replace what we have used, but add more,
because it would appear that we have demonstrated in the gulf a great military
capability, and we want to prepare to use it again."

Military Spending

Military spending acts as a stimulant mostly through the creation of jobs at
weapons companies and their suppliers. The jobholders, in turn, spend their new
incomes on a great variety of services and products, adding to the prosperity of
other sectors. The problem is that military contractors, seeking to cut costs,
have laid off tens of thousands of workers over the last two years, and many
would not be rehired, even if the Pentagon placed new purchase orders.

Peter Connolly, a spokesman for General Dynamics, said, for example, that if the
Defense Department increased its cruise missile orders by 20 percent, "that
would not have a significant impact on employment."

The American economy might also benefit in the postwar months if the United
States emerged in control of a plentiful supply of inexpensive Middle East oil.
Confidence in such a supply might stimulate not only consumer spending but also
industrial production. For the consumer, lower energy costs free some income for
spending on cars, appliances and other products. For the manufacturer, lower
energy costs restore profit margins, giving a company leeway to draw customers
by discounting.

"We get a boost from both the demand and the supply side," said Alan Blinder, a
Princeton University economist.

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Charts: "Markets Since the Iraqi Invasion" show stock and dollar
activity since the Iraqi invasion. (Source: Datastream)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              404 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: THE PRESS;
News from Gulf Is Good, and Cheney's Press Curbs Are Loosened

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 763 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 24


The Pentagon's highly restrictive news policy announced by the Secretary of
Defense last night was loosened today when allied field commanders came forward
with glowing reports of early success in the war zone.

But many American news executives contended that the curbs were the latest, and
possibly most troubling, example of Defense Secretary Dick Cheney's efforts to
control the flow of information from Washington.

More than two hours after the ground assault began, Mr. Cheney summoned
reporters to the Pentagon on Saturday night to announce that to protect the
troops, regular briefings in Washington and in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, would be
suspended until further notice.

"Even the most innocent-sounding information," he declared, "could be used
directly against the men and women whose lives are on the line carrying out
these operations."

The policy changed this morning when Pentagon officials said the Secretary gave
permission for the American commander in the gulf, General H. Norman
Schwarzkopf, to deliver what was an upbeat briefing to reporters in Riyadh.

"Good news defeats a blackout," said Jonathan P. Wolman, Washington bureau chief
of The Associated Press. "The military apparently has a good story to tell, and
they are abandoning their blackout to let it be told."

Howell Raines, Washington editor of The New York Times, said the Pentagon,
motivated by political concerns, was preventing the press from providing a more
complete picture of the war.

"The Administration wants to use the legitimate theme of security, in some
cases, to install a kind of blanket news management that we've never had in this
century," he said. "No one argues with legitimate security needs. There's a
kernel of truth in Secretary Cheney's argument." But he said that Mr. Cheney had
gone too far, noting that it was not until late tonight that the first
photograph of a wounded American soldier was released.

When the restrictions on coverage began, groups of reporters escorted to the war
zone by military officers found that transmission of their dispatches, already
subject to review by the officers, was being delayed.

General Schwarzkopf's briefing, though it lacked detail, seemed to have had the
effect of signaling to other officers in Riyadh and Washington that they could
at least speak anonymously to reporters. As the day wore on, news organizations
began to receive dispatches from pool reporters in the field, and the networks
began to get war footage.

Still, many editors and news executives expressed frustration with what they
regarded as heavy-handed restrictions on reporting the ground assault in the
name of troop security. General Schwarzkopf, for example, refused in his
briefing to disclose an estimate of allied casualties, as is standard practice,
saying only that they were "remarkably light."

Fred S. Hoffman, a Pentagon spokesman for five years in the Reagan
Administration and who, before that, covered the military for 24 years for The
Associated Press, said Mr. Cheney's restrictions were misguided. Even during
Vietnam, he said, there were never such limitations on coverage.

"I think it was handled clumsily," he said. "It would have been more logical if
they had simply said, 'The information is early and raw, and we have to sort it
out, and we'll have it for you when we have it.' "

Peter Schmeisser, a journalist and historian who is writing a book about
Government control of the news during wartime, argued that Pentagon officials
believe they can get away with restricting information because the public
supports the Administration.

"I think Cheney is trying to condition the American people and the American
press," he said. "He is trying to get the electorate used to there not being
information during combat. That is unprecedented." Mr. Schmeisser added that he
has found that "when people cite security concerns, historically, 80 or 90
percent of the time, those concerns are used to keep embarrassing things from
coming out."

Paul K. McMasters, chairman of a committee of the Society of Professional
Journalists that monitors freedom-of-information issues, said even the loosening
of restrictions today will not mend the rift that has developed between the
Pentagon and the press.

"Sometimes the restrictions have more to do with political insecurity than with
military security," said Mr. McMasters, who is deputy editorial director of USA
Today. "So far in this war, the American public has been inundated with
information, but the vast majority of the information has been
Government-issue."

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              405 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: THE COMMANDER;
The General Tries Not to Seem Too Confident

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 561 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Feb. 24


His words were cautious, warning that "the war isn't over yet," but his manner
wasn't. Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf seemed barely able to contain himself with
delight.

At a hurriedly called 10-minute briefing today in Riyadh, the commander of the
American-led coalition let a little smile play over his face as he spoke of
"remarkably light" casualties, said his troops were doing "a great job" and
claimed "dramatic success."

A big, bluff man who looks a little like a taller, more muscular brother of the
comedian Jonathan Winters, General Schwarzkopf fretted for weeks about this
moment. He lost sleep nightly as he wondered when to recommend a ground attack
to President Bush, then when to go after Mr. Bush gave him the authority to
attack when he judged the moment propitious.

"I agonize, I agonize," the 56-year-old West Pointer told a small group of
reporters three weeks ago. "I don't want my troops to die. I don't want my
troops to be maimed."

Eisenhower Recalled

It is an emotion that has been shared by many generals. Lee was swept by nausea
as he pondered what to do at Gettysburg. Eisenhower, worrying about the weather
and a hundred other details before D-day, looked "worn and tired" to an aide. He
wrote in his memoirs of taking a mile-long trip to his headquarters along muddy
English lanes, a trip that was "anything but cheerful," with the rain "traveling
in horizontal streaks." But he decided, he recorded laconically, that "the
consequences of the delay justified great risk, and I quickly announced the
decision to go ahead."

On Saturday, as the deadline for the Iraqis to begin pulling out of Kuwait came
and went, General Schwarzkopf was in his headquarters, studying last-minute
reports. An aide said he had been "a little jumpy, but very confident, giving
off those vibes of victory that he generates."

In professional terms, at least, this was the biggest weekend in Norman
Schwarzkopf's life since August 1965, when he spent 10 days at the Duc Co
special forces camp near Pleiku in the Vietnamese highlands. Then a major
assigned as an adviser to South Vietnamese forces, he found himself surrounded
by thousands of Vietcong and North Vietnamese troops, advised by Chinese
Communist officers.

Emotions Never Forgotten

Two battalions of elite South Vietnamese airborne troopers held out at the
isolated post, a few miles from the Cambodian border, despite the constant
pounding of enemy mortar and heavy machine-gun fire and despite being low on
food and water. He has never forgotten, he says, the emotions of those harrowing
days.

By the time a relief column broke through, General Schwarzkopf told an old
acquaintance from Vietnam the other day, he and the handful of other American
advisers and the Vietnamese defenders were down to meager rations of rice and
fish sauce. Having moved up in a hurry, he recalled, he had no clean clothes
with him and had been fighting in one uniform for six or seven days.

"I smelled; I stank; it was awful," the general recalled.

He still has a picture of himself in that uniform, helping to support a wounded
Vietnamese trooper. It was taken, he said, by a young Associated Press reporter
named Peter Arnett -- now the Cable News Network correspondent in Baghdad,
watching Norman Schwarzkopf's conduct of combat from the other side of the
battle lines.

NAME: H. Norman Schwarzkopf

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf at briefing yesterday in Riyadh.
(Reuters); The soldiers of a Kuwaiti armored column paused to pray in the desert
yesterday after crossing into their homeland as part of the allied
ground-assault forces. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              406 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 26, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The Troops;
New G.I.'s Shake Off Vietnam Ghost

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 898 words

DATELINE: IN IRAQ, Feb. 25


When the 101st Airborne Division flew into battle at dawn on Sunday, the ghost
of Vietnam hovered alongside their helicopters.

Time after time as the air assault division counted out the last days before it
attacked deep behind Iraqi lines, senior officers and noncoms who had fought in
that flawed conflict brought up Vietnam in conversations as a memory they sought
to expunge. For the younger soldiers of the new professional Army, Vietnam was a
childhood memory they feared but could barely understand.

"This is a chance to put the Vietnam stigma behind me," said First Sgt. Don
Leftwich, who served as a Marine rifleman in Vietnam. "And my troops will never
have to put up with it."

That war in the jungles of Indochina was one marked by drugs, racial division
and infighting among the troops. There was indiscipline, tales of "fragging" --
killing -- disliked officers with hand grenades rolled into their tents. There
were also protests at home, political uncertainty, the shame of My Lai and
ultimately ignominious withdrawal.

In contrast, the Persian Gulf war is one where wholesome-looking young men and
women treasure sacks full of mail sent to "any soldier" and write back to their
correspondents at elementary schools, arbor societies and church groups.

'Ethics, Always' as a Value

It is also a war in which high-technology firepower stretched in an awesome
array across the desert is being unleashed against Saddam Hussein by
business-like officers who briskly use words like "lethality" and "violence."

Maj. Gen. J. H. Binford Peay 3d, the gray-haired, soft-spoken division commander
of the 101st, distributes inspirational diagrams to his troops, stressing
discipline, leadership and the unit's rich history and lists of values,
including "ethics, always."

"Of course if I did this in Vietnam, particularly my second tour, I would have
been laughed out of town," General Peay, a Virginia Military Institute graduate,
said with a small smile.

Among the keys to the differences that will be tested as the new Army goes into
battle, officers and soldiers here say, are a more educated, dedicated
professional corps of senior sergeants -- the backbone of the Army -- the fact
that the troops are volunteers rather than reluctant draftees, and the vocal
support they are receiving from home.

When Charles A. Robinson was a young squad leader in Vietnam, he never even knew
the name of his company's first sergeant, let alone saw him.

'We Care for the Soldiers'

Now the sergeant major of the Second Brigade -- the ranking noncommissioned
officer -- he is looked up to as one of the new breed of professional sergeants
trained to see to what the Army calls standards.

"In Vietnam, you never saw the senior sergeants," he said. "That's what will
make this war different. We live with the soldiers. We carry out the standards.
We care for the soldiers. Simply said, but there's a lot to it."

Sergeant Major Robinson, who said without embarrassment that he was in the
infantry because of "patriotism," spoke of the differences on a dusty afternoon
along with three other senior sergeants gathered in the tent. Their Vietnam-era
experiences were similar, and all praised the quality of the new soldiers.

"By and large, these guys are terrific," Sergeant Major Robinson said. "All our
guys are high school graduates. They all want to be here to do the job. They're
doing what they chose to do, and that is the main difference. Back in '66 in
Vietnam, it was a different attitude."

Lieut. Col. Harlan Lawson, an artillery battery commander who served in Vietnam,
said: "The biggest difference is these guys are interested in the big picture.
They listen to the radio; they want to discuss politics. I don't hear the
griping you'd hear in Vietnam."

Capt. Scott Ross, of the Flying Tigers Attack Helicopter Battalion assigned to
the 101st Airborne, is the son of a military family. "My dad told me stories
about Vietnam, how he'd landed in San Francisco and been spit on," he said.
"It's always been my fear that the American people wouldn't support us. But now,
school kids write us and everything. I'm pen pals with a second-grader from
Georgia. Some of their questions are neat."

900 Women in the 101st

Among the 17,000 soldiers in the 101st Airborne are nearly 900 women, some of
whom like First Lieut. Cynthia Dubots will be flying troops into combat on giant
Chinook helicopters and evacuating the wounded.

"I cannot believe I'm here involved in a war," said Lieutenant Dubots, a
helicopter platoon commander who earned her commission through R.O.T.C. at
Cornell -- where students shunned the program in the 60's and armed black
students once took over the Student Union building -- and wears paratrooper and
airborne assault qualification badges along with her pilot's wings.

"I'm scared to death about flying across that border, so is everybody," she
said. "We've all talked about it. I know when everybody gets in the cockpit,
they're going to have that scared feeling in their gut. But I'm just as
qualified as anyone else."

Tucked away among the 101st "Screaming Eagles" is a field-grade officer who
confided only on the strictest of secrecy that he had demonstrated against the
Vietnam War at the 1968 Democratic Convention in Chicago.

"Those were different times," he said. "And I'm a different person."

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Table: "Ground Combat Units: A Glossary" shows the Army's troop
organization, and the usual rank of commander at each level. (Source: Defense
Department)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              407 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 26, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words



War in the Gulf A12-17

Iraq ordered its army to withdraw from Kuwait, the Baghdad radio said, but the
Bush Administration parried the offer, saying the war would continue until
Saddam Hussein committed to the conditions laid down by the White House on
Friday. Page A1

Saddam Hussein sent a message to President Gorbachev stating that Iraq will
withdraw its forces unconditionally from Kuwait and that the withdrawal orders
have been issued, the Soviet Union said. A12

Allied forces reported successes on all fronts, even though Iraqi resistance
toughened as the Republican Guard swung into action. Allied forces reportedly
controlled more than 50 percent of Kuwait. A1

An Iraqi missile struck a barracks housing about 100 American troops, killing 27
and wounding 98, the American military command said. It was the most devastating
Iraqi attack of the war. A1

Thousands more Iraqis surrendered to allied forces, raising the number of
prisoners to more than 25,000, officials said. The prisoners were described as
bewildered, hungry, war-weary and demoralized. A14 A huge convoy of American
forces stretched from the border of Saudi Arabia deep into Iraq. With more than
100,000 soldiers, the convoy was the single largest American troop movement
since World War II. A1

American soldiers fight beside the ghosts of Vietnam A14

Marine roll up the Kuwaiti coast into a surreal landscape A16

Military analysis: The allied assault has thwarted Iraq's basic military
strategy by quickly punching through the first tier of defense in Kuwait and by
sweeping around the main fortifications to drive deep into Iraq. A15 Allied
planes and missiles continue to pound Baghdad A12

Republican Guard holds the key to Hussein's fate A16

Kuwaitis in exile prepared to return, but their joy over what they see as their
country's impending liberation was tempered by new reports of human rights
abuses and destruction within Kuwait City. A16

The families of the troops are proud of the successes but remain apprehensive.
In Ft. Campbell, Ky., home of 101st Airborne Division, which has surged 50 miles
into Iraq, they are coping with mixed emotions. A17

Bush praises black for their role in the military A17

Poll shows Americans strongly support the ground war A17

International A3-11

The Warsaw Pact agreed to dissolve its military alliance by March 31. The future
of its political alliance will not be decided until June, but all traces of the
Soviet-dominated alliance are expected to disappear soon. A1

Even as Warsaw Pact fades, NATO is given renewed vigor A11

Bulgaria's former Communist chief, Todor Zhivkov, went on trial on charges of
misappropriating state funds and handing out apartments and other perks to
relatives and friends in the Communist elite. A8

Political violence in Albania has left five people dead A11 The case against the
Birmingham Six does not include enough evidence to support their murder
convictions, British prosecutors said. The six men have served more than 16
years for the 1974 bombings of two pubs. A3

A plan to trim Mexico's foreign debt in return for commitments to protect
wildlife has been accepted by the Government. The $4 million agreement is one of
the largest private "debt for nature" exchanges. A3

South Africa promises to address educational disparities A6

Thai military says it will form a provisional government soon A6

Changsha Journal: In China's orphanages, signs of feudalism A4

National A18-24

The fire in a Philadelphia office tower may have caused irreparable damage, but
the 38-story building does not appear to be in danger of collapsing, as had
initially been feared, fire and safety officials said. A18

Fire prompts calls for sprinklers in every high-rise building A18

Five years of drought in California have finally begun to shake the state's
pysche. Californians, who always believed rain would eventually come, are
suddenly having to cope with sharp limits on water use. A20

California's Hispanic population grew nearly 70 percent in the last decade, the
Census Bureau said, confirming statistically what has been apparent throughout
the state's economy, social structure and politics. A21

The use of an 1871 civil rights statute intended as a weapon against the Ku Klux
Klan to obtain court orders barring protesters from blocking entrances to
abortion clinics will be reviewed by the Supreme Court. A21

Judge dismisses lawsuit on hiring at Harvard Law School A18

Report urges delay in restarting Savannah River reactors A24

Regional B1-5

A boarding school in the South Bronx -- of sorts -- is being created by a group
of students and teachers from Bronx Regional High School, who are turning a
crack house into a dormitory for homeless students. B1

Shooting outside high school in Manhattan injures two B2

The plan to give condoms to students on request was endorsed by Mayor Dinkins.
The Board of Education is scheduled to vote tomorrow on Chancellor Joseph
Fernandez's controversial proposal. B1

City Comptroller wants more cuts to balance the budget B4

CUNY trustees vote to adopt new standards for freshmen B3

A World War II-era voters' agency, the State Division for Servicemen'sVoting,
has been attacked by Governor Cuomo as the sort of unnecessary, pork-barrel
spending that New York can no longer afford. B1

Unions say there is little hope of saving The Daily News B2

U.S. says it will evict tenants of rent-regulated apartments B3

The public defenders in New Jersey have fought the death penalty for nearly a
decade. They have won 26 of 27 appeals for death-row inmates but in the process
have put strains on their lives and their emotions. B1

Defense lawyer at the Warmus trial challenges key witness B2

Mother tells of the abuse that led to her son's death B2

New York lawyer who vanished returns and gives up B3

Business Digest D1

Science Times

'Smart' weapons appear to open a new military era C1

Alzheimer's researchers close in on causes C1

Garbage problem may be politics rather than nature C1

Arts/Entertainment

Blues legend's posthumous success C11

Twain manuscript ends mysteries C11

Samuel Ramey in recital C11

Fashion Page B6-7

Obituaries D22-23

John Daly, host of "What's My Line?"

Paul Harvey Aron, economist

Sports

Baseball: Viola has bone chips B9

Dodgers optimistic about Hershiser B10

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A22

Support the families, too

Thailand marches in reverse

Vote yes for condoms

The price of not raising tolls

Letters A22

A. M. Rosenthal: Lessons of the war A23

Russell Banks: Red, white, blue, yellow A23

Stephen Sestanovich: Soviet liberals get smart A23

Billie H. Vincent: Flying, in the face of fear A23

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              408 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 26, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Invention That Shaped the Gulf War: the Laser-Guided Bomb

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2156 words


FOR the first time in history, precision-guided bombs and missiles have played a
decisive role in war, paving the way for the invasion of Kuwait and Iraq. With
their help, the United States and its allies critically weakened the
fourth-largest army in the world while suffering surprisingly light casualties
during the month of the air war.

Having established absolute air supremacy from the outset of the war, the allies
have been able to hammer Iraq's command centers, supply lines, bunkers, tanks
and troops almost at will. Precision weapons like laser-guided bombs have
greatly enhanced the effectiveness of the attacks.

Even small, armored targets like tanks and personnel carriers, previously almost
impossible to destroy with bombs, have now fallen victim to the new bombs'
accuracy.  The same accuracy has substantially reduced the accidental damage
that would otherwise have befallen civilian buildings.

An allied military spokesman reported last week that of the many thousands of
precision-guided bombs and missiles launched at Iraqi military targets, fewer
than one-tenth of 1 percent had gone astray and fallen in civilian areas.

Mass attacks using precision-guided weapons against small, precisely defined
targets seem to herald a new era in warfare, in which marksmanship counts more
than saturation bombing.

The new abilities of precision-guided bombs were sharply underscored by a recent
incident. One week ago, an American military spokesman disclosed that an F-111
bomber returning from an assault on Iraqi tanks had destroyed an enemy
helicopter in flight. Lacking guns or missiles, the bomber pilot had attacked
with the only weapon at his disposal, a laser-guided bomb intended for use only
against ground targets. In any earlier war, a bomb attack against a swiftly
moving target would have been virtually hopeless, but this time the bomb flew
unerringly to its mark, blowing the helicopter to fragments.

Efforts to develop precision-guided bombs are at least as old as World War II,
when Germany experimented with the Fritz-X, a gliding bomb directed to its
target by radio signals from a bomber flying overhead. But such early efforts
had little practical effect on warfare. When the first precision-guided bombs
appeared in Vietnam nearly two decades ago, many missed even the stationary
targets at which they were aimed.

Even as recently as the American raid on Libya in 1986, many precision bombs and
weapons appear to have missed their targets, partly, experts believe, because
attack methods had not been perfected.

But a new generation of powerful, relatively cheap miniature computers and
guidance systems has rendered allied bombs and missiles in use against Iraq
capable of achieving almost incredible accuracy. This technical revolution,
military experts say, has profoundly changed the face of war.

Precision-guided bombs and missiles are not infallible. They can be thrown off
course by pilot error and by clouds that obscure their vision devices. In
addition, the bombs may slip out of the "basket" of the radar beam reflected
from the target if the pilot swerves too sharply to avoid ground fire and
missiles.

"Smart" weapons went astray both in the raid on Libya and in last year's
American incursion in Panama. So many have been used against Iraq that if even a
small percentage missed their targets, there would have been considerable
civilian damage.

But whatever the failures, the overall success of precision-guided weapons
against Iraq has been decisive by all present indications.

A Place in History

Many historic battles are associated with the weapons that dominated them: the
long bow at Agincourt, the machine gun at the Somme and the tank at Cambrai in
World War I, for example. The gulf war is likely to be remembered as the one in
which smart weapons came into their own, devastating a large and well-equipped
army before land battle was even joined.

The names of some of the weapons introduced in this war, like the Patriot
missile, have become household words. The smart bombs and missiles that have
devastated Iraq's military buildings and weapons are far less well known. A star
among these weapons is the "Paveway" conversion kit, which can be fitted to any
"iron bomb," an unguided bomb filled with conventional explosives. The kit
instantly converts the bomb into a precision-guided weapon capable of scoring a
perfect hit.

Neither the Air Force nor other military organizations have disclosed the
proportion of hits to misses scored by any of the advanced weapons used in the
gulf. But scores of pilots returning from missions have told reporters that
official Pentagon claims of Iraqi tanks and other targets destroyed or damaged
have been so conservative as to be misleading.

"When this is over and everyone gets a chance to take stock, the world is going
to be stunned to learn just how badly the Iraqis have been mauled by
precision-guided munitions," an F-117A Stealth bomber pilot said.

Cheap and Plentiful

A major factor in this success, experts say, has been the low cost and plentiful
supply of some of the new weapons, which have allowed their widespread use even
against relatively minor targets.

According to an industry expert, an entire 2,000-pound laser-guided bomb,
including the Paveway guidance conversion kit, costs only $20,000, just a
fraction of the value of its targets. This represents a dramatic reduction since
1988, when the Paveway kit alone was listed at $40,000.

Many military manufacturers are reluctant to discuss their achievements in
weapons technology because corporate images can be tarnished by association with
war. But the Pentagon as well as bomber pilots and other military users have
begun to disclose details of weapon systems that until recently had been secret,
and it appears that some of the new weapons have worked far better than critics
had predicted.

The guidance of precision- weapons is based on various "feedback" systems, in
which a computer orders course corrections, the magnitude of which are in
inverse proportion to the size of measured errors in course.

In the case of the Paveway kit, which Texas Instruments began developing in
1967, the light-sensing nose attached to the bomb looks for reflected laser
radiation coming from the target. Optics in the nose divide its field of view
into quadrants, and sensors measure the relative intensity of laser light
falling on each quadrant; if all four quadrants detect identical amounts of
laser radiation from the target, the missile is on course; otherwise, course
correction is required, and an onboard computer sends appropriate signals to the
bomb's control fins.

Heat-Detecting Sensor

One of the principal airborne devices used to assist attacks with
Paveway-equipped bombs is the forward-looking, infrared radar, or FLIR, which is
fitted to the noses of many of the American fighters and attack aircraft in the
gulf region.

The heart of the FLIR is a special camera with a sensor chilled to minus 320
degrees Fahrenheit. The very low temperature of this device enables it to detect
the faint infrared radiation given off by warmer objects, including tanks and
warm human beings.

The FLIR converts this infrared signal to a visible image displayed by a
computer console in the pilot's cockpit. The FLIR camera is mounted on a
gyroscopically controlled gimbal platform, so that no matter how violently the
airplane maneuvers, the FLIR camera remains aimed at its target.

The FLIR also contains a laser "designator" linked to a cross-hair sight on the
pilot's computer display. To send a 2,000-pound bomb hurtling through the
ventilation shaft of a hardened bunker, a pilot has only to head his airplane in
approximately the right direction, release his bomb, fix the FLIR cross-hairs on
the target, and order his laser designator to remain locked on the target.

The pilot may launch his bomb in a dive, in level flight, or by lofting it while
climbing steeply at high speed, thereby extending the bomb's range. In some
types of attack, the pilot may immediately leave the area, while the pilot of
another aircraft locks his laser on the target to guide the bomb.

When the bomb is released, it unfolds from its tail vanes a set of stubby wings
that permit it to glide a considerable distance, depending on the height, speed
and angle of climb at which it was dropped. The release also activates a thermal
battery to provide power for the bomb's laser detector and computer. After the
bomb leaves the aircraft, an internal generator mixes chemicals that produce a
flow of hot gas, which is used to drive the pistons that move the bomb's
guidance fins in response to computer commands.

Videotape Shows Accuracy

Complex though the system is, its general accuracy is attested by videotaped
FLIR images automatically recorded each time a Paveway-equipped bomb is dropped.
The first "shot" fired in the war was a 2,000-pound GBU-24 Paveway-guided bomb
dropped by a radar-evading F-117A bomber through the roof of Baghdad's main
communication center.  GBU stands for guided bomb unit.

Another of the precision-guided weapons that saw its first combat on the opening
night of the war was the TLAM-C Tomahawk cruise missile. More than 200 of them,
each costing $1.35 million, were fired at Iraqi targetsin the first week of the
war from United States battleships, cruisers, destroyers and submarines.
Americans saw televised sequences from Baghdad showing Tomahawks roaring down
streets in search of their targets. Military spokesmen claimed that their
accuracy was high, although Iraq said that it recovered a score of unexploded
cruise missiles that had simply crashed.

When a Tomahawk is launched, it travels most of the way to its target using
navigational aids also used by aircraft: first, by inertial guidance (by which
position is determined from an aircraft's acceleration and changes in
direction), and then by terrain contour matching, a technique in which the
readings of a radar altimeter are continuously compared with land elevations on
a digitized map derived from satellite images.

But as the Tomahawk approaches its destination, a nose camera takes over, and an
onboard computer compares the image seen by the camera with a digitized image of
the target stored in the computer memory.

Once the missile sees a match, it homes on the target. Military officials assert
the system is so accurate that at the end of a long trip (up to 1,500 miles) a
Tomahawk can still guide itself through both goal posts at the ends of a
football field.

The guidance system used by the Tomahawk and similar missiles may signal a
change in land warfare that will eventually have far-reaching effects on the
relative advantage of tanks and other armored vehicles over infantry soldiers.

Variations of the system are under development for use in a new generation of
antitank weapons that Army and Marine Corps planners believe will have profound
effects on land warfare.

American ground troops in the gulf now rely on antitank weapons that many
experts regard as inadequate. These are the unguided Light Antitank Weapon,
whose warhead is considered too small for use against modern tanks, and two
guided-missile weapons, the Dragon and the TOW (tube-launched, optically
sighted, wire-guided) missile.

Ground troops are also supported by other precision-guided weapons, including
Maverick and Hellfire missiles launched from airplanes and helicopters. It is
too early to gauge the success of these weapons.

"Frankly," a bomber pilot recently told a reporter visiting a base in Saudi
Arabia, "I would not have believed 10 years ago that we could hit the targets we
are routinely destroying today. War has changed completely, for better or worse.
The side with the smartest gadgets will always win."

A Precision Weapon at a Low Price

A conversion kit makes any unguided bomb into a precision-guided weapon. A laser
detector, computer guidance system and gas-driven pistons for guidance fins are
housed in the nose. Stubby wings unfold from the tail vanes.
(Source: Forecast International)

Presicion-Guided Weapon in Action

United States laser-guided bombs have miniature computers that order course
corrections as the bombs seek out cones of laser light reflected off targets.

A fighter-bomber releases a bomb, which extends its wings and begins to glide
toward the target. The plane then uses its forward-looking infrared radar (FLIR)
both to view the target and to direct a laser designator beam that locks onto
the target. The bomb's light-sensing nose divides its field of view into
quadrants and measures the relative intensity of laser light reflected from the
target. If all four quadrants get identical amounts, the bomb is on course. If
not, the bomb's computer sends signals to its fins to correct the course.
(Source: Interavia Data; Forecast International)

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Diagram (pg. C8)


                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              409 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 26, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Since Lincoln, Wartime Rights Erode

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 291 words


To the Editor:

The Supreme Court has frequently had to rule on democracy in wartime, Tom
Wicker's subject in "Lincoln and the Gulf" (column, Feb. 13).

In the Civil War, Lincoln's decision to suspend the writ of habeas corpus was
found to exceed his constitutional powers. The Court, freeing Lambdin Milligan
from his military captors, declared: "The Constitution of the United States is a
law for rulers and people, equally in war and in peace, and covers with the
shield of its protection all classes of men, at all times, and under all
circumstances."

In World War I, Congress passed the Espionage Act, which criminalized subversive
advocacy. In sustaining conspiracy convictions, Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes
spoke for a unanimous Court enunciating the "clear and present danger" test:
"When a nation is at war many things that might be said in time of peace are
such a hindrance to its effort that their utterance will not be endured so long
as men fight and that no Court could regard them as protected by any
constitutional right."

In World War II, the Supreme Court sustained a conviction for violating a
military order excluding people of Japanese ancestry from designated West Coast
areas. The Equal Protection Clause notwithstanding, the Court reasoned:
"Hardships are part of war, and war is an aggregation of hardships."

In the Vietnam War, David O'Brien burned his draft card as a symbolic
expression. Chief Justice Earl Warren dismissed the claim that this antiwar
message was constitutionally protected speech.

The 1866 Milligan warning proved prophetic: Should "the calamities of war again
befall us, the dangers to human liberty are frightful to contemplate."

ROGER BRANDWEIN
New York, Feb. 14, 1991

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              410 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 26, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Red, White, Blue, Yellow

BYLINE: By Russell Banks; Russell Banks is author, most recently, of
"Affliction."

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 573 words

DATELINE: PRINCETON, N.J.


Of the two signs Americans are using to show one another their relation to the
gulf war -- the yellow ribbon and the Star-Spangled Banner -- I confess that I'm
cheered more by the former than the latter. The yellow ribbons make me love and
respect my fellow citizens; the flags make me fear them.

From Day 1 through Day 12 or so, we saw mainly yellow ribbons -- tied to
mailboxes, trees, lamp posts, hats and lapels -- but no flags or, at least in my
area of New Jersey, no more than usual. There was Old Glory waving alongside the
red Marine Corps and black "Remember the M.I.A.'s" banners at the Gulf station
on Route 1, which is run by a Vietnam vet who seems to hire only Vietnam vets;
and the huge flag at the self-storage outfit in South Brunswick, which is mainly
an attention-getting device for a business one would otherwise pass without
noticing.

The ribbons were the new thing. And early on in the gulf crisis, I decided I
liked them, even though they kept alive for another season the terrible
country-western love song that first brought them into public life, back when
the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini was Satan and Jimmy Carter was President, and
instead of soldiers in the gulf we had hostages.

Today, as then, yellow ribbons have signified our desire to bring home Americans
who were being held against their wills in foreign lands (which, since Vietnam,
is how I have regarded enlisted men and women anyhow). We would keep dinner in
the stove, sheets on their beds, until our kids were brought home again. The
yellow ribbons expressed loyalty to our military on an individual basis, one
young man or woman at a time, and not loyalty to the whole, the coalition
forces, as the Pentagon calls this armada. And certainly not loyalty to
something as abstract and out of our control as Republican foreign policy in the
gulf.

But then, somewhere around Day 12, I started seeing Star-Spangled Banners all
over town. Suddenly, every merchant on Nassau Street in Princeton had a flag out
front, and even my generally apolitical neighbors, mostly academics and
scientists, had flags fluttering above their two-car garage doors. It was
Veterans Day, July Fourth and Presidents Day all rolled into one. Now, on Day
40, with the ground war proceeding, we can expect to see even more flags.

This has made me nervous. Flags signify a wholly different relation to the war
than the yellow ribbons do. This is Us vs. Them. The flags express a Super Bowl
mentality -- identification with a team (in our case, the visiting team) instead
of with the individual players. From hoping that the Republicans or God or Jimmy
Carter or Jesse Jackson -- anyone -- would soon bring our sons and daughters
home alive, we'd gone to declaring our collective desire to kick collective
butt.

The saddest, most disheartening symbolism I've seen lately is the joining of the
two emblems -- the mailbox with both flag and big yellow bow attached, the pole
with Old Glory above and ribbons swirling below, the tiny paper flag against a
swatch of yellow acetate pinned to a lapel.

What's being symbolized here is a profound conflict between two irreconcilable,
painfully opposed desires -- to protect our children and to destroy the Iraqi
military. For us to affirm that contradiction openly, publicly, as if it did not
exist, we must go into deep denial. And when that happens, the symbol no longer
stands for reality; it has replaced it.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              411 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: KUWAIT CITY;
JOYOUS KUWAITIS HUG ALLIED TROOPS

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 657 words

DATELINE: KUWAIT CITY, Feb. 26


Kuwaitis who cowered under Iraqi occupation for nearly seven months raced into
the streets of their once prosperous capital today to embrace the first allied
soldiers to enter the coastal city.

Kuwaiti resistance leaders waved their weapons and fired into a sky darkened by
fires from oilfields set ablaze by Iraqi troops. Some Kuwaitis hugged and kissed
American soldiers. Others waved Kuwaiti flags.

The leaders, who said they were in control of the capital for the first time
since Iraqi forces swept into the country on Aug. 2, said fleeing Iraqis had
taken thousands of Kuwaiti captives with them but left behind many tanks and
loaded weapons.

Some remaining pockets of Iraqis were reportedly still in the city late today.
[Kuwaiti troops entered the capital early Wednesday, apparently the first
Kuwaiti members of the multinational force to enter Kuwait City after Iraqi
troops fled, Reuters reported from Nicosia, Cyprus.]

United States and Saudi Special Forces commandos probed the streets at the
vanguard of the allied force of thousands poised to enter the city. Some of the
American commandos wore Arab headdresses with their uniforms, partly to avoid
becoming sniper targets and partly as protection from the sun. They also carried
small, easily concealed automatic weapons.

Escorted by the resistance leaders, the Special Forces soldiers went first to
the Saudi Embassy and then to the American diplomatic compound, where they found
the United States seal hanging on the outside wall and the gates chained shut.

They decided against immediately entering the compound for fear of mines and
booby traps.

One American soldier, who refused to give his name, carried a United States flag
to the gates of the compound. He said it had been given to him during the Tet
offensive in Vietnam in 1968 by a marine who died in his arms.

On the streets was materiel abandoned by the Iraqi occupiers: tanks, armored
vehicles, weapons and helmets. They rested alongside burned-out cars and other
debris.

One Iraqi anti-aircraft battery was abandoned, fully loaded.

Although much of the city appeared to have largely escaped the effects of allied
bombing, the city's luxury hotels and comfortable neighborhoods -- symbols of
the nation's oil wealth -- were ravaged by the Iraqis, as were military barracks
and royal palaces.

A hole from a rocket attack mars the city's main landmark, an obelisk-like
structure on the waterfront.

Pullout Began Monday

Resistance officials said the Iraqi troops began their withdrawal Monday night.

"We were starting to think that no one was ever going to believe us," that the
Iraqis had left, one fighter said.

The leaders said that before the Iraqi forces left they rounded up hostages from
schools and mosques. The hostages reportedly included relatives of Kuwaiti
military personnel and members of prominent families.

The guerrilla leaders said some Iraqis may still be in one sector of the city
and others hidden in schools. They reported taking an undetermined number of
prisoners to a local jail.

On the city outskirts were several thousand Kuwaiti, Saudi and Omani troops with
tanks and personnel carriers. Also outside the city, Iraqi prisoners were being
transported to the rear in dozens of buses.

There was little working electricity in the city, which before the Iraqi
invasion had a population of 450,000. Only a few places had generators.

The Kuwaitis set up their headquarters in a residential building, and have the
ability to broadcast to the population, as well as to distribute food and water
from their stockpiles to those in need.

Sunset brought the apparent sound of allied artillery fire in the north, with no
return volley from the Iraqis. Occasional small-arms fire could be heard.

About a dozen Saudi Special Forces men went to their country's embassy. They
found the ambassador's house ransacked, with cabinets and drawers ripped open.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Jaber Al-Sabah, left, deputy commander in chief of Kuwaiti
forces, raising his country's flag yesterday near Kuwait City. Iraqi troops were
in full retreat across most of Kuwait, the American command said. (Sky TV via
Agence France-Presse) (pg. A19)

Map of Kuwait and Iraq showing allied and Iraqi troop movement

1. French troops took the Al Salman air base, the first of three Iraqi air bases
captured.

2. The U.S. 24th mechanized infantry division captured 50 Iraqi T-72 tanks at
the Euphrates.

3. Two U.S. Army divisions destroyed a Republican Guard division.

4. The British Fourth and Seventh brigades swung east into Kuwait and defeated a
division of Iraq's armored reserve.

5. Egyptian troops, backed up by Syrian units, fought an Iraqi corps.

6. The U.S. First and Second Marine Divisions, a U.S. Army armor brigade and
Arab troops encircled Kuwait City, which Iraqi forces mostly evacuated. (pg. A1)
(From pool reports and allied officials)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              412 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CBS Details How It Got to Kuwait City

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 286 words


CBS was able to move the first news crew into Kuwait City through a combination
of careful planning and technical expertise, a CBS News spokesman said
yesterday.

In the months before the war began, CBS put together plans to mount a portable
satellite transmitter inside a truck and send a reporting team by itself behind
the battle lines, Tom Goodman, the CBS News spokesman, said yesterday. The
equipment had all been tested in simulated operations long before the war
started, he said.

The equipment included a special six-foot satellite dish that could be folded up
inside a truck and a portable generator to provide power, Mr. Goodman said.

CBS had two crews in Kuwait yesterday, both of which set out on their own,
unaccompanied by any military units. They were able to drive to different
locations, unload their equipment, unfold their satellite transmitters and send
out live television signals that went up 22,000 miles to a satellite and
directly to CBS News headquarters in New York.

The crew inside Kuwait City was headed by David Green, CBS's most experienced
combat photographer, who had previously worked in such battle areas as Vietnam,
Beirut and Northern Ireland. He made the decisions, Mr. Goodman said, about when
it was safe to move into the city.

The correspondent with Mr. Green's crew, Bob McKeown, had interviews yesterday
with Kuwaiti citizens as well as with two marines who helped retake the American
Embassy. The rest of the crew consisted of a sound man and a technician to
operate the satellite equipment.

The second CBS crew, which reported from western Kuwait, included the
correspondent Richard Threlkeld, a producer, a camera man, a sound woman and a
technician.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              413 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Theorizing on War's Future as a Real One Erupts

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 987 words



The Transformation of War
By Martin van Creveld
254 pages. The Free Press. $22.95.

While pondering the banner headlines from the battlefront in the Persian Gulf,
it makes sense to read about the fundamental nature of war -- past, present and
future. Although some of its theories self-destruct under the thunder of cannon,
there's still a good deal of historical wisdom in "The Transformation of War" by
Martin van Creveld.

A truism emerges from this challenging book and from the sands of Arabia: To
those doing the fighting and dying, conventional warfare is always
unconventional.

The author, who teaches history at Hebrew University in Jerusalem, is much
better at interpreting the past than the present desert war or, perhaps, the
next one. Since completing his book last spring -- a few months before Iraq's
takeover of Kuwait and the buildup of American and allied forces in the Middle
East -- several of his predictions have been demolished by events.

Knowing what he and we know today, it's hard to imagine that Mr.  Van Creveld
would not have qualified these remarks:

"As the second millennium A.D. is coming to an end, the state's attempt to
monopolize violence in its own hands is faltering. Brought face to face with the
threat of terrorism, the largest and mightiest empires that the world has known
have suddenly begun falling into each other's arms. Should present trends
continue, then the kind of war that is based on the division between government,
army and people seems to be on its way out. The rise of low-intensity conflict
may, unless it can be quickly contained, end up destroying the state. Over the
long run, the place of the state will be taken by war-making organizations of a
different type."


With Vietnam-era heavy bombers, aircraft carriers, airborne and armored
divisions, and many thousands of soldiers from the United States and other
nations engaged in battle, this is hardly low-intensity conflict or a different
type of war-making.

Again, the author's scenario collides with the present conflict's worldwide
dimensions when he says:

"In the future, war will not be waged by armies but by groups whom we today call
terrorists, guerrillas, bandits and robbers, but who will undoubtedly hit on
more formal titles to describe themselves. Their organizations are likely to be
constructed on charismatic lines rather than institutional ones, and to be
motivated less by 'professionalism' than by fanatical, ideologically based
loyalties."

Nevertheless, Mr. Van Creveld's book does offer provocative ideas about the
changing face of war.

In the age of nuclear weapons, he contests the long-accepted axiom of Karl von
Clausewitz, in "On War," that war is not merely a political act but also a
political instrument, a continuation of political relations by other means. In
this respect, the author follows the views of Andrei D. Sakharov, the Soviet
scientist and humanitarian, who wrote a quarter of a century ago that
thermonuclear war cannot be considered a continuation of politics by other means
but, rather, a means of universal suicide.


One of Mr. Van Creveld's main points is that Clausewitz did not take into
account that modern war has accepted laws of its own. After Auschwitz, he
writes, to think of carrying on war without certain civilizing rules "is not
merely a monstrosity but an impossibility." Contrary to Clausewitz, he says
there are laws governing prisoners, noncombatants and, by convention, the use of
certain horrible weapons such as debilitating gas.

Mr. van Creveld concedes that war-making still follows many of Clausewitz's
iron-fisted Prussian principles -- and these are studied and practiced by
military leaders everywhere. He writes that Clausewitz warned against
introducing "moderation" in war and cites these harsh statements by Clausewitz:
"In dangerous things such as war, errors made out of kindness are the worst."
Again: "Let us hear no more about generals who conquer without bloodshed." From
biblical wars by small tribes to civil wars to world wars by great nations, wars
have been fought and won without mercy and without distinction between soldiers
and civilians.

In disputing Clausewitz's assumption of perennial war as an instrument of
political policy, Mr. van Creveld gives mankind the benefit of cautious doubt.
In a postscript called "The Shape of Things to Come," he writes:

"If no nuclear holocaust takes place, then conventional war appears to be in the
final stages of abolishing itself; if one does take place, then it will already
have abolished itself. This dilemma does not mean that perpetual peace is on its
way, much less that organized violence is coming to an end. As war between
states exits through one side of history's revolving door, low-intensity
conflict among different organizations will enter through the other. Present-day
low-intensity conflict is overwhelmingly confined to the so-called developing
world."

The author is willing to go out on a limb and say that as traditional war fades
away, a new convention will take its place: "The coming convention's function
will be the same as it has always been: namely, to define just who is allowed to
kill whom, for what ends, under what circumstances, and by what means."
Unfortunately, the author does not provide the details of this proposal to
regulate the civilities of war, if such there be.

In "The Transformation of War," Mr. Creveld is particularly helpful in reminding
the reader about the history of superweapons -- from longbows to guided bombs --
and of warfare's inevitable cruelties. He believes the demise of conventional
war will cause strategy in its "traditional, Clausewitzian sense" to disappear.
So, he says, will "the most powerful of today's advanced weapons."

These observations were obviously made in the euphoria after the end of the cold
war. And then came the Persian Gulf war.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Martin van Creveld (Adi Levy/The Free Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              414 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: THE MOOD - NEW YORK;
Not All Anger Is Toward Iraq

BYLINE: By JERRY GRAY

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 585 words


A street corner mural that once warned residents and visitors to New York's East
Village to avoid drugs now implores passers-by to shun war.

Someone's response has been to splatter black paint on the red nose of the
doleful clown that shares the space with the message, "Stop clowning around and
bring our troops back."

Talk of the Persian Gulf war stirs angry feelings here.

Just where that anger is directed is as varied as the people in this
neighborhood of blue-collar bars, trendy cafes, gentrified apartment buildings
and a permanent colony of homeless people.

"It's all very imperialistic," said Craig Poindexter, a 29-year-old waiter at
the Life Cafe. "The primitive nationalism and the rally-round-the-flag mentality
disgusts me the most."

Jennifer Lewis, a patron at the Life Cafe, said she worries about the general
response to the war.

"What troubles me about the mood of the country is that if you are opposed to
the war, you are unpatriotic," said Ms. Lewis, an investment banker.

"People like to think they are winning," said David Bennett, an artist and Ms.
Lewis's lunchtime companion. "After accepting the loss in Vietnam, it gives us
the chance 20 years later to put a bright banner on our flag."

Two blocks away, Victor Alvarez spent his lunch hour in the Vazac Hall tavern,
watching the Cable News Network and debating the merits of the war with anyone
who would listen.

"That guy Saddam is not to be trusted," said Mr. Alvarez, a carpenter. "I say
let's go into Iraq and finish them."

Tompkins Square Park, home to scores of homeless people living in makeshift
tents, looms like an island in the neighborhood's sea of businesses and
apartment buildings.

"It's a shame, the President ain't doing nothing," said a homeless man living in
the park who would only identify himself as James.

Trying to Keep Warm

An open fire provided some warmth against a light snowfall, and he fed the blaze
with slats of wood salvaged from a pile of rubble outside a nearby apartment
building undergoing renovation.

"He's getting our people killed for no reason," James said. "He can stop that
war."

There are no flags flying, no yellow ribbons or red, white and blue bunting in
this neighborhood. The mural of the sad-eyed clown is one of the few outward
signs of the mood here, although the war dominates many conversations, residents
said.

"The war is over oil, and it ain't worth it," said Robert Rodriguez as he and
two friends, Gill Dilberc and Aileen Rodriguez, both 20, stood beneath a
storefront awning to escape the snow.

"We can pay for everything else, but we can't pay for oil," said the 22-year-old
Mr. Rodriguez, who is unrelated to Ms. Rodriguez.

Mr. Dilberc and Mr. Rodriguez both said they were unemployed but had given no
thought to joining the military, even before the outbreak of war. But both said
they would go into battle if necessary.

When Guns Are Quiet. . .

There was also talk of what an end to the war will bring. "The best deal you can
get is being defeated by the Americans," said Sam Hawkins, who designs recording
studios.

Mr. Bennett said he feels the new mood of patriotism will be short-lived. "It's
a compensation for the lack of economic and social progress," he said. "I think
we're in trouble here, and the war's a distraction."

Mr. Alvarez said he is more concerned that the United States not be left
"holding the bag."

"The world always passes the buck to the United States," he said. "Let's share
the buck this time."

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: An antiwar mural replaced an anti-drug mural on a wall in the
East Village of Manhattan. (Don Hogan Charles/The New York Times); Robert
Rodriguez: Unemployed, New York - "The war is over oil, and it ain't worth it.";
David Bennett: Artist, New York - "I think we're in trouble here and the war's a
distraction." (Photographs by Don Hogan Charles/Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              415 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: THE MOOD - DENVER;
Old West Idea In a New Era

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 492 words

DATELINE: DENVER, Feb. 26


At the mention of Saddam Hussein, the bearded man in a cowboy hat and boots
ground his cigarette in an ashtray.

"Chase him to Baghdad," Arley Hagen, a construction worker in a coffee shop in
the Rocky Mountain foothills, said with more than a hint of gleefulness. "I'm so
glad to see we're not pussyfooting around."

With victory seemingly at hand, many Westerners were talking today about a new
era for the nation, reminiscent of an earlier one, when the good guys swatted
down the bad guys.

"He's a schoolboy bully," said Lanny Anderson, a 48-year-old corporate pilot,
referring to Mr. Hussein. "We'll just have to deal with him that way."

Won't Settle for Less

Moments earlier, President Bush had told the nation that allied forces would
fight to clear-cut victory. In La Cantina restaurant, about 35 miles southwest
of Denver, the patrons would settle for nothing less.

"They're a different breed of cat over there," said Jerry Davis, a car salesman
who was discussing war policy with friends over biscuits and gravy. "They don't
have the same kind of values that we do. That's why we're always going to have
problems in that region of the world."

On Denver radio programs, callers hailed America as a superpower once more,
while calling for the defeat of politicians who had urged caution about entering
the war. The words to a jingle on one FM station, played to the tune of "The
Beer Barrel Polka," was "Roll Over, Baghdad."

Many stores erected photographs of Mr. Hussein with bull's-eye rings drawn
around his face. In many small towns, local stores have made signs proclaiming
the names of local men and women serving in the gulf.

"After Vietnam, I never thought I'd see the day when Americans were so unified
in support of military action," said Mr. Hagen. "It's just remarkable."

The Critics Are Quiet

If people were critical of United States policy, most of them were keeping
quiet.

Marilyn Roth, a freelance writer, says she usually counts herself in the antiwar
camp -- but not this time.

"The President's right," she said. "We can't trust Sadaam Hussein."

Before breakfast, Mrs. Roth and friends had attended an early church service,
where they prayed for people on both sides of the war.

If there was any hesitancy about continuing to fight, some people said, it
rested in the assumption that allied good fortune -- with relatively light
losses -- might not hold out.

"The only thing left in Hussein's bag of tricks is poison gas," said Glover
Campbell, a retired Du Pont executive. "If we push him to the end, will he use
that? It's a frightening thought."

Gloria Burrola, a waitress at the Sunrise Cafe in Denver who wore a button of
the American flag, said she would not rest easy until "our heroes" are safely at
home.

She looked forward to a parade for the troops, and the celebrations in being an
American. "People have taken America for granted for a long time," she said.
"Not anymore."

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              416 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
Yellow Fever

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 731 words


A busy ski slope in Vermont recently allowed discounts on lift tickets to anyone
wearing a yellow ribbon in support of the troops.  All over the country, the
ribbons themselves are reported to be hot items in the shops. In one community I
visited, each downtown telephone pole was looped with yellow. Across America,
these days, yellow ribbons are everywhere -- not just round the old oak tree but
on front porches, pickup trucks, store fronts, church doors.

This epidemic of yellow fever seems to me more than a display of the nation's
undoubted patriotism, more even than a heartfelt wish for its young men and
women to come home safely. It's more nearly a celebration -- not a celebration
of war as war, but of the gulf war as what many Americans seem to consider a
sort of national rejuvenation.

"After the ambiguity and humiliation of Vietnam," Prof. Gerald Linderman of the
University of Michigan told Peter Applebome of The New York Times, "the gulf war
seems a model of clarity and success, a war portrayed as being fought with the
most efficient weapons and greatest resolve against the vilest of villains."

This is the more remarkable because before the war began on Jan. 16, much of the
nation seemed unsure of its necessity; a close vote in the Senate dramatized the
issue. Once combat started, however, the doubts of all but a small minority
seemed to have been instantly resolved.

Instead of the long national agony over the "morality" of the war in Vietnam,
Americans saw themselves this time in their chosen role -- waging a crusade for
the right, against a devil figure who tortured captured U.S. pilots and blighted
the Persian Gulf with oil. Instead of stalemate and defeat in the jungle,
television brought them an American technological triumph of smart bombs,
Patriot missiles and magnificent flying machines. Instead of ever-lengthening
rows of body bags arriving from Indochina, casualties in the gulf were light and
largely unseen.

Above all, this war, from its first day, was victorious; predictions of fanatic
Iraqi resistance and hard fighting did not come true; and, as now appears, it
was a war quickly finished, too quickly for battlefield attrition or home-front
second thoughts -- "a splendid little war" indeed.

The gulf victory seems therefore to have restored Americans' pride in their
military strength and their national righteousness -- missing since Vietnam --
and much of their inherent belief in their fitness and ability to lead the
world. If this represents not just a renewal of damaged national confidence, but
a resurgent sense that "We're Number One," and of right ought to be, it's not
only misplaced; it courts new and greater disappointments.

For one thing, the gulf war will not lead to the vaunted new world order.
Already fissures are showing, as they were bound to, in the needed U.S.-Soviet
cooperation. Middle East politics -- for instance, the Israeli-Palestinian
question -- probably are more, not less, complicated. A "pax Americana" in that
or any region cannot long be asserted, even if the U.S. could pay for the forces
to maintain it.

For another thing, the U.S. is not really Number One in anything but military
might, which is not always usable or effective and absorbs funds vitally needed
for better things. Japan and Western Europe are challenging economic powers.
U.S. industrial capacity is sharply down; the U.S. competitive spirit needs hard
work and sacrifice, not renewed arrogance or complacency.

For still a third thing, the gulf war has solved none of the domestic problems
that existed before it began. It has not ended a recession that may or may not
be brief, or improved an education system so deficient that it is providing the
nation a second-rate work force that's sure to get worse.  The war has not
furnished medical care for the millions who don't have and can't afford it, or
rebuilt an infrastructure of collapsing bridges and colliding air traffic.

Victory in the gulf has not reduced crime and drug problems so severe that the
U.S. imprisons more of its citizens per capita than any other country. It has
not rebuilt crumbling cities, or dealt with the nation's corrosive race problem,
or paid for the multibillion savings-and-loan collapse, or insured the safety of
the banking system.

And all of that will be with us still, when the yellow ribbons come down.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              417 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: Black G.I.'s;
Powell to Study Complaints By Harlem Unit in Gulf War

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 457 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 27


Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, will
investigate allegations by members of a Harlem National Guard unit that they
were placed into a combat situation in the Persian Gulf without proper training
and not treated with respect by regular army forces, Representative Charles B.
Rangel says.

"When you're fat and 40 and they throw you into combat, it isn't fair," said Mr.
Rangel, whose New York district includes the headqurters of the National Guard's
369th Transport Battalion, also known as the Harlem Hell Fighters.

"These guys are as old as I am -- well, stretching it some," said the
59-year-old Congressman, who is a Korean War veteran with a Bronze Star and a
Purple Heart.

'Three Strikes Against Us'

Members of the Guard unit, whose average age is 43 and half of whom are Vietnam
veterans, complained shortly before the gulf ground war began that their unit
had been broken up, stripped of equipment and moved to the front without proper
training.

"We have three strikes against us," said Specialist Ruben O. McCann, a Bronx
postal worker who is a member of the unit and a Vietnam veteran. "We are the
Guard, we are from New York and we are black."

The battalion was sent to Saudi Arabia on Nov. 8 and attached to a regular army
battalion that the Harlem guardsmen complain does not respect their age or
experience. In civilian life many of the men are police officers, firefighters
or Transit Authority workers with some status.

In the gulf, one complained, they were treated as "outcasts," the battalion
split up and reassigned and its vehicles taken away, and in some cases
cannabalized for spare parts.

Black Caucus Meeting

Representative Rangel said that while he was aware that it is "a part of army
life" to complain, any allegation that involves "life and safety" is important
enough to warrant an inquiry.

He said that members of the Congressional Black Caucus had met with General
Powell in New York this week and that the general "personally is behind the
inquiry."

An Army spokesman in Riyadh said National Guard units are deployed "wherever
they must go to perform their unit mission" and the transport specialists were
needed in the gulf.

In Washington, a Pentagon spokesman dealing with National Guard and other
Reserve matters, Maj. Doug Hart, said he was unaware of the specifics of the
complaints, but once Guard units are deployed, they routinely become part of the
regular Army and "can be detached as needed."

"They should have been prepared," he said. "Whose fault it is that they weren't
I don't know." In all, 53,000 Army guardsmen are in the gulf as part of a total
of 142,000 Army reserves called up and deployed as part of the gulf war.

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              418 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The Overview;
Allies Destroy Iraqis' Main Force; Kuwait Is Retaken After 7 Months

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1800 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Thursday, Feb. 28


Hours before President Bush announced the conditional suspension of offensive
military operations in the Persian Gulf, allied armored units trapped Iraq's
vaunted Republican Guard and cut it to pieces in a ferocious tank battle that
began Wednesday and raged until early this morning, American officials said.

At midday Wednesday, United States marines captured the Kuwait International
Airport after a smaller but nonetheless intense two-day fight, and later
marines, Kuwaiti and other Arab troops rode in triumph down the broad boulevards
of Kuwait City, past scenes of devastation and desolation. That essentially
completed the expulsion of President Saddam Hussein's forces from Kuwait, which
they had overrun in a surprise assault last Aug. 2.

Casualties among coalition forces were light and Iraqi losses heavy, the allied
command said.

But the honking horns, waving flags and scenes of jubilation as the capital was
taken by the allies scarcely concealed the agony generated by tales of torture,
kidnapping, rape and pillage over the final days of occupation. As many as
40,000 Kuwaitis were said to have been taken hostage by the Iraqis as they fled
north on Tuesday.

Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, commander of the American-led coalition that has
trounced Iraq in a lightning-fast ground war reminiscent of the World War II
blitzkrieg, said the Iraqi leader had been stripped of the offensive weapons
that made his army one of the most fearsome in the Middle East.

'Not Enough Left'

"There's not enough left for him to be a regional threat," the general said in a
detailed briefing on the campaign Wednesday night, adding pointedly, "unless
someone chooses to rearm them in the future." [Excerpts, page A8.]

At a briefing, General Schwarzkopf was asked what he thought of his opponent.

"As far as Saddam Hussein being a great military strategist," the general
replied to loud laughter, "he is neither a strategist, nor is he schooled in the
operational arts, nor is he a tactician, nor is he a general, nor is he a
soldier. Other than that, he's a great military man, I want you to know that."

Details of the tank battle, the largest since World War II, were incomplete, but
Pentagon officials said it pitted more than 800 American tanks and armored
vehicles against 250 to 300 tanks of a Guard division, manned by some of Iraq's
best soldiers. Overall, Americans from the VII Corps and the 24th Infantry
Division (Mechanized) which General Schwarzkopf once commanded, engaged three
guard infantry and armored divisions 50 miles west of Basra, the officials said.

According to the officials, the Iraqis lost more than 200 tanks.

A Classic Tank Battle

Senior officers here described it as a classic armored struggle, with tanks
dodging and maneuvering in the rain and then in the desert darkness, Apache
attack helicopters firing anti-tank missiles and the allied armor eventually
outflanking the Guards and then attacking from the rear.

The Iraqis offered "determined resistance," one officer said, trying a
counterattack as well as a fighting retreat toward Basra. But although he
emphasized that "the war is not over," and commanders on the scene said the
war's climactic battle could last until Saturday, General Schwarzkopf left no
doubt the Iraqis had been caught in a giant snare of his own devising.

"The gate is closed," he declared. "There is no way out."

A burly, 56-year-old West Pointer, General Schwarzkopf told how a giant wheeling
movement to the west, involving British, French and American divisions, had
reached north to the Euphrates River and established a 75-mile-long allied
barrier, composed of two entire corps, west of Basra in southeastern Iraq. With
the Euphrates bridges blown and the roads leading north from Basra under
constant aerial bombardment, there was no place for the Guard units to flee with
their artillery, tanks and other armored vehicles.

Toll on Iraqi Forces

Of the 4,230 tanks with which the United States believes Mr. Hussein began the
war, the general said, 3,008 had been knocked out through Tuesday and 700 more
were destroyed in Wednesday's fighting. He said that 29 Iraqi divisions,
amounting to 300,000 men, had been put out of action.

"There was a lot more purpose to this war than getting Iraq out of Kuwait,"
General Schwarzkopf said in the frankest acknowledgment by an American official
that President Bush and his coalition partners had sought all along the
destruction of Iraq's offensive fighting capacity, so as to discourage Mr.
Hussein from trying conquest again if he remains in power.

But the general ridiculed suggestions, widespread in the last 36 hours, that the
allies might press on to Baghdad. When the American 101st Airborne and 24th
Mechanized Infantry Divisions reached the Euphrates Monday, he said, they were
only 150 miles from the Iraqi capital, with no Iraqi forces between them and
Baghdad to stop them if they had really wanted to attack.

Report on Casualties

Giving an accounting for the first time of American casualties in the ground war
that began before dawn Sunday, General Schwarzkopf said 28 Americans had been
killed, 89 had been wounded and 5 were missing. For the entire campaign,
beginning with the first air strikes six weeks ago, and including the losses in
the missile attack on a barracks near here this week, the totals were 79 dead,
213 wounded and 44 missing in action, he said.

The totals were expected to rise later, but they already included two officers
and five enlisted men from the 82d Airborne Division, killed while serving with
a French light armored division on the far left of the front. They died and 25
others were wounded by explosions from mines or booby traps while searching a
fort and airfield at As Salman in the Iraqi desert.

A total of 13 Britons have died, including nine who were killed by "friendly
fire" from an American A-10 Warthog anti-tank plane that inadvertently attacked
two British armored scout cars. In addition, national spokemen said, two
Frenchmen and 13 from Arab countries have died in the war so far.

General Schwarzkopf said that in addition to more than 50,000 prisoners of war,
Iraq had lost many troops killed in action. He gave no numbers, but several of
his subordinates said that the total would be in the tens of thousands.
Considering that more than half a million American servicemen and women were
involved in the campaign, the general said, the extremely low level of United
States casualties was "almost miraculous."

Deceiving the Iraqis

Explaining the grand allied strategy, he said he had initially placed all his
land forces directly opposite President Hussein's complex defensive lines in
southern Kuwait, and had made the presence of Marine amphibious forces in the
gulf widely known, to encourage the notion that his main thrust would come
either from the sea or on land straight into southern Kuwait.

When the Iraqi air force had been eliminated, and Mr. Hussein had been
essentially blinded from an intelligence standpoint, General Schwarzkopf said,
he shifted almost all the United States Army units plus the British and French
armored units far to the west. In what he called an unprecedented logistical
achievement, all this was done along one main highway, the Tapline Road, and it
was done while building up vast logistical bases containing 60 days' supplies in
the desert.

He compared the move to a "Hail Mary" play in football, in which the quarterback
throws the ball as far as possible and all the receivers run downfield in the
hope that they can manage to catch it in the scramble.

A bold strike was needed, he said, because the Iraqis outnumbered the allies 3
to 2 overall and 2 to 1 in fighting forces, when the offense classically needs a
3-to-1 superiority over the defense.

Reports of Atrocities

The pace of the advance was accelerated when reports of atrocities in Kuwait
poured in, the general said. He commented, "They're not part of the same human
race, the people who did that, as the rest of us are."

When the ground war started, there was no amphibious attack, but the threat kept
Iraqi divisions pinned down, as had Gen. George S. Patton Jr.'s shadow army --
an invention of Allied counterintelligence -- at the time of the D-day landing.
A Saudi-led group went up the coast, the two Marine divisions breached the line
next to them and raced north, and Egyptians and Syrians also drove north in
western Kuwait. All fought hard, the general said, and eventully reached Kuwait
City, but theirs was not the main offensive show.

That took place in the west, General Schwarzkopf said, largely confirming
accounts tht had been pieced together by correspondents over the last two days
despite the vestiges of an official news blackout.

With the French armored division and part of the 82d Airborne on the left and
the British First Armored Division on the right, first attacking Iraqi units and
then screening the main force, he said, the 24th Mechanized Infantry made a dash
for the Euphrates at Nasiriya. The 101st Airborne leap-frogged forward to the
river, setting up fire and supply bases as it went.

Capture of Airfield

An Iraqi military communique said today that allied paratroopers had landed at
an air base near Nasiriya, which is 175 miles south of Baghdad on the Euphrates.
American sources said that an airport near the city had been taken by
helicopter-borne assault troops from the 101st Airborne Division.

One division of the Guard, the Tawalkana, was defeated on Tuesday by elements of
the VII Corps, which has been assigned to destroy the Guard units, officials in
Riyadh, the Saudi capital, said. They said the division was hit by the Third
Armored Division and the First Infantry Division (Mechanized), a storied outfit
seeing its first combat since Vietnam.

Then the VII Corps, which includes four divisions -- two armored, one mechanized
infantry and one armored cavalry -- turned to the east, as did the XVIII
Airborne Corps, including the French division and the paratroopers.

At his briefing on Wednesday night, General Schwarzkopf said the allied forces
would fight any Iraqi unit that continued to resist, and he made a point of
saying that bombing would also continue, including strikes on Baghdad and other
northern cities.

"The war is not over," the commander said. "You've got to remember that people
are still dying out there. And those people who are dying are my troops. I'll do
whatever I can do to defend them and keep them safe."

In Kuwait City, Marine officers said all organized resistance had ended.

Mr. Hussein, an officer in Dhahran said, was "well on the way to the father of
all defeats in what he called the mother of all battles."

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf as he discussed allied successes at
a news briefing yesterday in Saudi Arabia. (Associated Press) (pg. A1); As an
oil well burned in the background yesterday, a Marine artillery unit took aim
during fighting with Iraqi units near Kuwait International Airport. (Pool photo
via Associated Press)

Map: Map of Kuwait showing locations of Allied and Iraqi forces. (pg. A1)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              419 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF;
Schwarzkopf's Minefield

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 235 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 27


Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, who seemed testy today when asked if the threat from
Iraqi mines was exaggerated, himself crossed a minefield in the Vietnam War, to
rescue a wounded private whose leg was blown off by a mine.

General Schwarzkopf's Vietnam experience, recounted in the current issue of The
New Republic, occurred on May 28, 1970, while he was a lieutenant colonel
commanding the First Battalion of the Sixth Infantry Brigade.

The battalion's Bravo Company commander and a lieutenant had been badly wounded
in a minefield in South Vietnam's Batangan Peninsula and a medical evacuation
helicopter had been called for.

Colonel Schwarzkopf, airborne in his Huey helicopter, reached thestranded unit
first and turned over his Huey to get the wounded out. He stayed behind.

The rest of the patrol, on the edge of panic, was still frozen in the middle of
the minefield. He tried to talk them back to safety.

But a young soldier a dozen yards from Colonel Schwarzkopf stepped on another
mine, leaving his right leg flapping to one side as he thrashed in agony.

Colonel Schwarzkopf, slightly wounded by the blast, inched across the minefield
to reach the wounded man, the article said. A misstep by another man triggered
another mine before the private could be pulled out. Three soldiers were killed;
another was maimed.

Colonel Schwarzkopf was awarded his third Silver Star for the rescue.

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              420 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WAR IN THE GULF: The President;
BUSH HALTS OFFENSIVE COMBAT; KUWAIT FREED, IRAQIS CRUSHED

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2224 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Thursday, Feb. 28


Declaring that "Kuwait is liberated" and Iraq's army defeated, President Bush
ordered allied forces on Wednesday night to suspend offensive military
operations against President Saddam Hussein's isolated and battered army.

Mr. Bush said the suspension, which began at midnight Eastern time, would
continue as long as Iraq did not attack allied forces or launch missile attacks
on any other country. In an address from the Oval Office that was televised
around the world at 9 P.M. Eastern time, he called on Mr. Hussein to send his
commanders to meet with allied officers in the war zone within 48 hours to
settle the military terms of a permanent cease-fire.

For such a cease-fire to be approved, he said, Iraq must comply with all 12
United Nations resolutions concerning Kuwait, including measures calling for
Iraq to void its annexation of the territory and agree in principle to pay
reparations to Kuwait and other countries. Iraq must also free all prisoners of
war and detained Kuwaiti citizens, and give the allies the location of all land
and sea mines that Iraq had laid in the region, Mr. Bush said.

No Official Word From Iraq

Administration officials said they had received no authoritative response from
the Iraqi Government. At the United Nations, Soviet diplomats said Iraq had
submitted a letter signaling its willingness to comply with all 12 resolutions
adopted by the Security Council. But the letter did not say whether Baghdad was
willing to comply with the rest of Mr. Bush's demands, including the freeing of
Kuwaiti civilians seized in recent days. [Text of the letter, page A10.]

Pentagon officials said this morning there were no reports of renewed Iraqi
attacks on allied positions.

Speaking in a solemn voice, President Bush said: "This war is now behind us.
Ahead of us is the difficult task of securing a potentially historic peace."
[Transcript of his remarks, page A12.]

He seemed to invite the citizens of Iraq to overthrow the man who had defied the
assembled military and political power of the international alliance. "Coalition
forces fought this war only as a last resort," Mr. Bush said, "and look foward
to the day when Iraq is led by people prepared to live in peace with their
neighbors."

Unusually Low Casualties

Mr. Bush, who had staked his Presidency on being able to resolve a crisis that
had shattered the post-cold war calm and led to the largest single American
military offensive since World War II, declared an end to the war in his third
nationally televised speech from the Oval Office since Iraq invaded Kuwait on
Aug. 2.

To arrive at the point where he was able to declare victory last night, Mr. Bush
had to command what military experts said was one of the largest combat
operations ever conducted with such low casualties, counter political opposition
at home and navigate the shoals of diplomacy complicated by last-minute Soviet
peace ventures that plainly irritated the President and his war council.

"At midnight tonight, Eastern standard time, exactly 100 hours since ground
operations commenced and six weeks since the start of Operation Desert Storm,
all United States and coalition forces will suspend offensive combat
operations," Mr. Bush said.

Mr. Bush did not say when he would start bringing American troops home. Marlin
Fitzwater, his spokesman, said late Wednesday night that there was no specific
timetable, but added: "We'll measure it in days, not weeks. Clearly, the
President wants to start the withdrawal as soon as possible."

Within hours after Mr. Bush spoke, the United States, Iraq and the Soviet Union
each tried to gain control of the public relations of peace with messages
directed at their domestic political audiences.

Baghdad Radio defiantly proclaimed Iraq's triumph over "the forces of evil" and
Soviet diplomats at the United Nations said that it was Iraq's promises to heed
the United Nations resolutions, delivered through Moscow's intercession, that
had prompted Mr. Bush to give his speech.

Senior White House officials insisted that Mr. Bush knew nothing of the reported
letter of agreement from Iraq when he went on television Wednesday night. Mr.
Fitzwater said the speech was motivated in part by a desire to assure the
families of military personnel that they would soon be coming home.

The President, who had brushed aside Iraq's last attempt to win a cease-fire on
favorable terms earlier in the day, said: "Iraq's Army is defeated. Our military
objectives are met. Kuwait is once more in the hands of Kuwaitis in control of
their own destiny.

"The Kuwaiti flag once again flies above the capital of a free and sovereign
nation, and the American flag flies above our embassy," Mr. Bush said.

Baker to Go to Mideast

After seven months of holding together a disparate international coalition and
rallying American public opinion with the promise that he would not allow the
Persian Gulf crisis to become another Vietnam, Mr. Bush said he was sending
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d to the Middle East to "look beyond victory
and war" and to "meet the challenging of securing the peace."

Mr. Bush's speech capped a six-week allied military offensive against Iraq in
which fewer than 100 Americans were killed, according to the latest report today
from the Pentagon, and whose swiftness astonished even the President's war
council.

He spoke only a few hours after his commander in the Persian Gulf, Gen. H.
Norman Schwarzkopf, described the last major battle of the war, between allied
armored divisions and Iraq's Republican Guard, the last remants of what had been
Mr. Hussein's huge military machine, near the southern Iraqi city of Basra.

A Balancing Position

Mr. Bush's speech, scheduled less than three hours before it was delivered,
seemed to represent a balancing of the American position, that Iraq should not
get off too easily, with mounting international pressures to stop the assaults
on an obviously defeated army.

Reflecting those pressures, Mr. Bush said: "In the future, as before, we will
consult with our coalition partners. We've already done a good deal of thinking
and planning for the postwar period."

He said: "There can be and will be no solely American answer to all these
challenges, but we can assist and support the countries of the region and be a
catalyst for peace."

With Mr. Hussein still in power in Baghdad, the declaration of victory left
major political and diplomatic issues ahead, including the question of a postwar
role for Iraq in the region, the durability of Mr. Hussein himself and the
inevitable pressure on the United States to take a leading role in resolving the
so-far intractable Middle East problems to which the Administration is now
turning its attention, including the Israeli-Palestinian dispute.

Jubilation in Washington

Mr. Bush's speech produced jubilation in Washington. Residents streamed to the
gates of the White House, waving small American flags, and drivers honked their
horns as they passed by along Pennsylvania Avenue.

Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority leader, said, "All Americans rejoice at
the news that our servicemen and women may soon be returning home." He added,
"Our hearts go out to the families who have suffered the loss of loved ones in
this effort."

The Speaker of the House, Thomas S. Foley, said: "The majority in Congress voted
to give the President the authority, and he has taken that authority and I think
conducted this operation brilliantly. And we can all be deeply grateful that the
casualties have been so low and the victory has come so fast."

Mr. Bush's declaration of victory was the climactic moment in a crisis that
began in the early hours of Aug. 2, when a huge Iraqi armored column swept into
sparsely-defended Kuwait. It followed the breakdown of negotiations over Mr.
Hussein's demands for territorial concessions and financial payments in return
for his eight-year war against Iran.

Rallied Coalition, Choked Iraq

Startling the world with the swiftness of his response, Mr. Bush began sending
American soldiers to the Middle East six days later, a deployment that quickly
surpassed even that of Vietnam. He rallied a coalition that revived the moribund
Security Council, with the crucial help of the Soviet Union, and began choking
Baghdad with a series of economic sanctions enforced by allied naval power.

As diplomacy faltered and sanctions failed to drive Iraq out of Kuwait, Mr. Bush
doubled the American force in October, until there were more than a half-million
allied forces in Saudi Arabia. In late November, the allies gave Mr. Hussein a
final ultimatum: Get out of Kuwait by Jan. 15 or face war.

An offer for direct talks with Baghdad floundered in diplomatic brinksmanship
and Mr. Bush sent allied warplanes into combat on Jan. 16. For six weeks, they
poured an unequalled rain of explosives onto Iraqi communications networks and
military positions until, judging that Iraq's forces were ripe for the kill, Mr.
Bush unleashed the ground offensive last Saturday night.

Before Mr. Bush spoke, it had been a day for optimistic predictions of victory,
tough talk against Iraq and the back-and-forth struggle of diplomacy and
semantics between Washington and Baghdad. Defense Secretary Dick Cheney,
speaking to the American Legion yesterday afternoon, said, "It looks like what's
happened is that the mother of all battles has turned into the mother of all
retreats."

'He Was Pretty Serious'

In his office Wednesday night, Marlin Fitzwater, Mr. Bush's spokesman, said the
President had not been strongly encouraged by a 2:30 P.M. briefing from his
military advisers. "He was pretty serious and concerned," Mr. Fitzwater said.
"He had just rejected the Iraqi offer complying with three of the resolutions.
That didn't seem like such a good sign in spite of the fact of what was
happening on the battlefield. But as it became more and more clear that the
fighting was over and that the military objectives were met, the President's
spirits improved considerably."

The President asked his military advisers when he could tell the American people
that the shooting had stopped and that the troops were going to come home. "I'd
like to do it tonight," Mr. Fitzwater quoted Mr. Bush as saying.

The President decided to speak on Wednesday night because he was assured by his
advisors, Mr. Fitzwater said, "that the military backbone of Iraq was broken."

"As a fighting force, it was over for them," Mr. Fitzwater said. "The President
wanted to tell the American people at the earliest possible moment and to tell
the families that their children, husbands and wives were out of harm's way. His
advisers talked about tommorrow, and he said, 'What about tonight?' "

Arranging 'a Solid Peace'

Gen. Colin L. Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, replied, "I
think we can do that," Mr. Fitzwater said.

"The message here was we've won the war and we've now got to go through the
arrangements for a solid peace," he said.

As usual, Mr. Bush had consultations with his allies, speaking to President
Francois Mitterrand of France in the morning and Prime Minister Brian Mulroney
of Canada, who has emerged as perhaps his closest confidant among foreign
leaders, in the evening. He also spoke with the British Prime Minister, John
Major.

Mr. Baker and Brent Scowcroft, the President's national security adviser, called
other allies to tell them of the President's decision and Mr. Baker had an
extensive discussion with Foreign Minister Douglas Hurd of Britain.

Mr. Fitzwater said the allies had been solidly behind the President for not
accepting the Iraqis' last attempt at winning a cease-fire and had not been
under pressure to call an end to the fighting.

No Calls to Gorbachev

Notably absent from Mr. Bush's round of calls was President Mikhail S.
Gorbachev, who had made a failed attempt at mediating peace before the ground
war began.

Wednesday began with a message to the United Nations from Baghdad in which
Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz of Iraq said his Government, which had promised to
heed the United Nations resolution requiring its withdrawal from Kuwait, now
"agrees to abide" by two other resolutions. One would nullify Iraq's annexation
of the occupied sheikdom, and the other would require Baghdad to pay war
reparations.

Mr. Aziz also said Iraq would release all prisoners of war "within a very short
time." But he conditioned these promises on a cease-fire enforced by the United
Nations and on the lifting of all economic sanctions imposed on Baghdad after
the invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2.

The alliance held out for Iraq's unconditional acceptance of all 12 United
Nations resolutions, the continuation of sanctions beyond the war, and the
surrender of all Iraqi tanks and other weapons. Official statements had made it
clear that the coalition had political and military aims beyond driving the
Iraqis out of Kuwait.

Mr. Cheney said, "Even after we've achieved our military objectives, even after
we've destroyed his offensive military capability and expelled his forces from
Kuwait, liberated Kuwait, the world will still be vitally interested in the
future course of events with respect to the kinds of activities and policies
pursued by the Government in Baghdad."

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush in the Oval Office after announcing suspension of
offensive military operations against Iraq. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)
(pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              421 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Dance;
A Legendary Antiwar Ballet of 1932

BYLINE: By ANNA KISSELGOFF

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 683 words


The Joffrey Ballet is back in New York. This was hardly an idea that could be
taken for granted nearly a year ago, when an internal crisis threatened to tear
the company apart or destroy it altogether.

Yet on Tuesday night, there was the Joffrey, with Gerald Arpino, still at the
helm as artistic director, and his dancers, totally committed in the superb
performance that opened the company's 35th anniversary season at the New York
State Theater.

This engagement, which runs through March 17, marks the first time since 1986
that the troupe has appeared at Lincoln Center, and while it can be argued that
some of the repertory looks best in the more intimate setting of the Joffrey's
regular home at the City Center, a large stage and a large house can add glamour
and sweep to certain works as well.

This was blazingly true of one of the fierce displays of energy and sleek
virtuosity with which Mr. Arpino, as a choreographer, likes to show off the
troupe as an ensemble. In "Suite Saint-Saens," Valerie Madonia, leggy and
confident, stood out among the tosses, lifts, fish dives and romantic
encounters. The rest of the cast, half-dragonfly, half-projectile, whizzed
around her -- and musically, at that.

There were three revivals. One was George Balanchine's "Tarantella," a staple of
the New York City Ballet's repertory but now danced for the first time since
1978 by the Joffrey, and danced very well, if slightly differently, by Tina
LeBlanc and Joseph Schnell. What a brilliant technician Miss LeBlanc is and how
stylishly she inflected the choreography with her plush plies and aptly earthy
manner, matched by Mr. Schnell, leaping a bit low but always electric.

Mr. Arpino's 1962 "Sea Shadow," a duet full of fantasy and the equivalent of
escape literature in the best sense, was seen at the State Theater for the first
time. And so was one of the masterpieces of 20th-century dance, the legendary
1932 antiwar ballet by Kurt Jooss, "The Green Table."

The Joffrey presented the first American production of the ballet in 1967,
during the Vietnam war, and this revival, the first since 1983, occurs, of
course, during the Persian Gulf war. Jooss himself created this work on the eve
of Hitler's rise to power and was obliged to flee the Nazis the next year.
Although Jooss's core image in the ballet was the medieval dance of death, he
was also influenced by pacifist writings after World War I in Germany.

Thus, the sharpness of the opening and closing scenes around the green table of
the title. Old men palaver in both episodes: in the interim, young men die. With
their masks, tailcoats and curtsies to Frederic Cohen's tea-dance music (played
on two pianos, under Allan Lewis's direction, by Stanley Babin and Douglas
Schultz), these diplomats are etched in all their false niceties.

Jooss was the most theatrical of German dance Expressionists, and emotion is
distilled in every gesture of the work. Tyler Walters, dressed as Mars, has the
right cheekbones for the role of Death -- and a fine lingering phrasing to make
the point of his character's implacability.

Except for Beatriz Rodriguez, who was astonishingly fierce as the resistance
fighter, this cast was new. Carl Corry, as the sneaky looting profiteer, had a
refreshing catlike pounce and lightness; among war's victims, Miss LeBlanc was
poignantly helpless and Tom Mossbrucker the epitome of shining youth as the
standard bearer. Metaphor is everything here, and when Death "beckoned,"
Charlene Gehm, as the crushed old woman, literally could not exceed his grasp.

In "Sea Shadow," Mr. Mossbrucker, curled up on the beach of Ming Cho Lee's
wonderfully evocative seascape, was magnificent as the acrobatic youth who swam
away with Miss Madonia's modern nymph. With Mr. Babin playing the slow movement
of Ravel's Piano Concerto in G, Mr. Arpino unfolds his neo-romantic tale of love
between a mortal and a supernatural with contemporary naturalness. Miss Madonia
has none of the fragility of others seen in the same role and triumphs through
sensuousness, a seductress of breathtaking allure.

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tyler Walters in the Joffrey Ballet's production of Kurt Jooss's
"Green Table." (Herbert Migdoll/The Joffrey Ballet)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              422 of 422 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Homecoming, Without Honors

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 285 words


With victory in the Persian Gulf, the nation is already looking forward to a
boisterous welcome-home party. If all goes according to expectations, there will
be bands, balloons, flags galore and miles of yellow ribbon testifying that this
war, as President Bush so often promised, will not end like Vietnam.

Sadly, the tributes and public accolades will resound everywhere but Dover Air
Force Base in Delaware, where the precious few Americans killed in the service
of their country first touch U.S. soil. The Pentagon has decided, this time, to
dispense with the traditional ceremonies after the coffins are lowered from
military transports; cameras will not be permitted to record the scene for
posterity.

The decision was taken out of respect for the privacy of surviving families, one
official said. Yet relatives of those now serving in the Persian Gulf have
repeatedly petitioned the Government to allow public ceremonies. They may wonder
just whose feelings are being spared.

During a news conference following the invasion of Panama, President Bush was
deeply embarrassed when pictures of coffins arriving at Dover Air Force Base
were broadcast live, on a split screen, while Mr. Bush could be seen laughing
with reporters. The President later protested to the networks about the
juxtaposition, and would no doubt like to insure he is not caught unawares
again.

For the overwhelming majority of American soldiers and their families,
homecoming from the Persian Gulf war will be a joyous occasion; the celebrating
may go on till dawn, perhaps even a lifetime. But the ghosts of Vietnam will not
rest until Presidents and the nation have the courage to confront the dead.



LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
